91

Resolution11 adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Noting with appreciation the efforts of the High
Commissioner in carrying out his duties, including the
special humanitarian tasks undertaken by him,

B

Commending accessions to the Convention relating
to the Status of Refuf.!ees of 1951, 46 the Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees of 1967 47 and other
relevant instruments,

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1166 (XII) of 26 November 1957 and 2956 B (XXVII) of 12 December 1972
in connexion with the Emergency Fund of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Noting the recommendation of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme, as
mentioned in paragraph 80 ( k) of the addendum to
the report of the United Nations High Commissioner,••
Authorizes the United Nations High CommissioJ,
for Refugees to allocate from the Emergency Fund,
under the general directives of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's ~rogr_amrm:, up_ to
$2 million annually for emergency s1tua_t1ons, 1t bemg
understood that the amount made available for one
single emergency shall, as heretofore, not exceed
$500,000 in any one year.
2311th plenary meeting
JO December 1974

1. Expresses its deep satisfaction at the efficie_nt
manner in which the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff continue to accomplish their humanitarian tasks;

3272 (XXIX). Elaboration of a draft Convention
on Territorial Asylum

Noting with satisfaction the positive trends in ~fr.ica
that open the possibility for the voluntary repatriation
of large numbers of refugees from Te11ritories emerging
from colonial rule,
Recognizing the importance of permanent sol~ti_ons
to refugee problems, including voluntary repatnat1on,
and of the role played by the High Comi:nissione~ in
co-operation with other members of !he Umted Nations
system and non-governmental agencies,
Noting the generous attitude adopted by Governments in supporting and contributing towards the
activities of the High Commissioner,

2. Requests the High Commissioner to continue his
activities on behalf of those of concern to his Office
and takes note, in this connexion, of the decision of
the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's
Programme inviting the High Commissioner, within
the framework of programme budgeting, to report to
the Executive Committee on his special humanitarian
tasks in the same manner as he reports on other activities financed from trust funds under his regular
programme;48
3. Requests the High Commissioner to take appropriate measures, in agreement with the Gov~r~ments
concerned, to facilitate the voluntary repatnabon of
refugees from Territories emerging from colonia~ -rule
and in co-ordination with other competent bodies of
the 'united Nations, their rehabilitation in their countries of origin;
4. Further requests the High Commissioner to continue his efforts, in co-operation with Governments,
United Nations bodies and voluntary agencies, to
promote permanent and speedy solutions through voluntary repatriation and assist:mce in rehabilitation, where
necessary, through integration in countries of asylum
or resettlement in other countries;
5. Urges Governments to intensify their support for
the High Commissioner's humanitarian tasks by:
(a) Facilitating the accomplishment of his tasks in
the field of international protection;
(b) Co-operating in the promotion of permanent
solutions to the problems faced by his Office;

( c) Providing the necessary financial means to attain
the objectives of his programmes.
2311th plenary meeting
10 December 1974
4G

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545, p. 137.

41 Jbid., vol. 606, No. 8791, p. 267.
411 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 12 A (A/9612/Add.l), para. 38.

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the question of
territorial asylum, 50
Reaffirming the importance it attaches to the international protection of refugees ·as a principal function
of the United Nations High CommissionerforRefugees,
Noting the view of the Executive Committee of the
High Commissioner's Programme51 that a conference
of plenipotentiaries on territorial asylum should be
called as soon as possible,
Further noting the recommendation of the Executive
Committee51 that the conference should be preceded
by a meeting of a group of governmental ex~rts to
review the present text of the draft Convention on
Territorial Asylum, 52
I. Decides to consider at its thirtieth session the
question of holding a conference of plenipotentiaries on
territorial asylum;
2. Further decides to establi~h a Group of Experts
on the Draft Convention on Territorial Asylum, composed of representatives of not more than twenty-seven
States, designated by the President of the General Assembly after consultation with the different regional
groups, on the basis of equitable geographical distribution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to convene the Group of Experts,
not later than M~y 1975 and for a maximum of ten
working days, to review the present text of the draft
Convention on Territorial Asylum;
4. Decides that the costs of convening the Group
of Experts be met from th~ volunt~ry fun~s which ~re
at the disposal of the Umted Nations High Comnussioner for Refugees;
49/bid., Supplement No. 12A (A/9612/Add.t).
oo Ibid., Supplement No. 12C (A/9612/ Add.3).
5t Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/9612/Add.1), para. S2 (f).
02 Ibid., Supplement No. 12C (A/9612/Add.3), annex.

92

Gellft'lll Anembly-Twenty-ninth Seaaion

5. Requests that the report of the Group of Experts be submitted to the General Assembly at its
thirtieth session and requests the Secretary-General to
submit a proposal as to when such a conference could
be convened, together with an assessment of the costs
involved.
23/ 1th plenary meeting
10 December 1974
3273 (X."XJX), National experience in achieving
far-reaching social and eeonomic changes for
the purpose of social progre88

The General Assembly,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions
1581 A (L) of 21 May 1971 and 1667 (LII) of
l June 1972, in which the Council attached great importance to appropriate fundamental structural socioeconomic changes in countries for the purpose of
achieving social progress and development and, to this
end, considered it appropriate to study' the experience
of various countries of the world in this field,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1746 (LIV) of 16 May 1973, in which the
Council pointed out that the strengthening of national
independence and the achievement of the ultimate goals
of social progress depend fundamentally on internal
basic social changes, for purposes of strengthening
national independence, achieving the d~mocratization
of society and improving social and economic structures, and on the reaffirmation of the principle of the
inadmissibility of external interference in any form,
including interference by transnational corporations,
Noting the report of the Secretary-General113 prepared on the basis of replies by Governments to his
questionnaire on national experience in achieving farreaching social and economic changes for the purpose
of social progress,
Convinced that peaceful coexistence and friendly cooperation among States should promote conditions for
economic and social progress,
Taking into consideration the importance of the implementation. of the principles, aims and methods of
achieving social progress recommended in the Declaration on Social Progress and Development,114
Recalling that the Declaration on Social Progress
and Development recommends that countries should
promote democratically based social and structural reforms and changes,
Sharing the concern of many countrks over the insufficient rates of their economic and social deveiopment,
1. Reaffirms that each State has the sovereign right
to adopt the economic and social system which it
regards appropriate for its own development;
2. Stresses the importance of internal democratic
social and economic changes designed to safeguard
national independence and to ensure a speedy improvement of the well-being of the population;
3. Reaffirms the importance of the right of every
State to exercise its permanent sovereignty over all its
riches, natural resources and economic activities for
the purpose of achieving economic and sociai progress;
li3 E/CN.5/478 and Add.I and Add.I/Corr.I ar.d 2, Add.2
and Add.2/Corr.l, Add.3 and Add.3/Corr.1, Add.4.
54 Resolution 2542 (XXIV).

4. Further reaffirms the right of every State to carry
out social and economic changes for the purpose of
social progress, including nationalization, as well as
the right to take all appropriate mc;asures in connexion
with the activities of transnational corporations which
it considers detrimental to the achievement of economic and social progress;
5. Recommends that measures should be taken at
all levels to ensure more active participation by the
entire population in the preparation and execution of
economic and social development policies and programmes designed to achieve social and economic
progress, taking into account the experience of all countries in this field;
6. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Development Programme to hold, within the
programme of advisory services, interregional and regionaI seminars to study the national experience of
developing and developed countries in carrying out farreaching social and economic changes for the purpose
of. social progress without prejudicing the operational
programmes prepared for the developing countries;
1. Recommends that the regional commissions
should consider this problem at their sessions;
8. Endorses the action taken by the Economic apd
Social Council requesting the Commission for Social
Development to continue the study of national experience in carrying out far-reaching social and economic changes for the purpose of social progress;116
9. kequests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on national experience in achieving
far-reaching social" and economic changes for the purpose of social progress to the General Assembly at its
thirtieth session and to give appropriate attention to this
question in his reports on the world social situation;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session the item entitled "National experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic
changes for the purpose of social progress".

2311th plenary meeting
JO December 1974
3274 (XXIX). Question of the establishment, in
accordance with the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, of a body to which
persons clalming the benefit of the Convention may apply

The General Assembly,
Considering the Convention on the Reduction of
Statelessness of 28 August 1961 56 and, in particular,
its articles 11 and 20 requiring the establishment of
a body to which a person claiming the benefit of the
Convention may apply for the examination of his claim
and for assistance in presenting it to the appropriate
authority,
Noting that the Convention will come into force on
13 December 1975,
Having considered the note and the explanatory
memorandum of the Secretary-General,117
55 Economic and Social Council resolution 1746 (LIV) of
16 May 1973.
5HA/CONF.9/l.5, 1961.
57 Official Records of the Genua/ Assemhly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 99, document A/969 I.
