United Nations

A/RES/57/146

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 21 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/57/L.43/Rev.1 and Add.1)]

57/146. Special assistance for the economic recovery and
reconstruction of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on special assistance for the economic
recovery and reconstruction of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Recalling also all resolutions of the Security Council and the statements by its
President regarding the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Recalling further the Ceasefire Agreement signed in Lusaka 1 and the Kampala
disengagement plan, 2 the obligations of all signatories to those agreements and the
obligations deriving from all relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 1304 (2000) of 16 June 2000,
Reaffirming the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and all States in the region,
Alarmed at the plight of the civilian population throughout the country, and
calling for its protection,
Gravely concerned at the deteriorating humanitarian, economic and social
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular in eastern Congo,
and at the effect of the continued fighting on the inhabitants of the country,
especially women and children,
Deeply concerned at the human immunodeficiency virus/acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) pandemic, in particular among women
and girls, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Expressing its deep concern at the dire consequences of the conflict for the
humanitarian and human rights situations and at the findings contained in the reports
on the illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo 3 in this regard,

_______________
1

S/1999/815, annex.
See S/2000/330 and Corr.1, paras. 21–28.
3
See S/2001/357, S/2001/1072 and S/2002/1146.
2

02 54785

A/RES/57/146

Gravely concerned at the negative impact of war on the promotion of
sustainable development in the Great Lakes Region,
Deeply concerned at the continued extensive destruction of life and property,
as well as the severe damage to infrastructure and the environment suffered by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Bearing in mind the fact that the Democratic Republic of the Congo hosts
thousands of refugees from neighbouring countries, which places a great burden on
its limited resources, and expressing the hope that conditions will be created that
will facilitate a safe and voluntary return of refugees,
Recalling that the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a least developed
country with severe economic and social problems arising from its weak economic
infrastructure and aggravated by the ongoing conflict,
Bearing in mind the close interrelationship between ensuring peace and
security and the ability of the country to meet the humanitarian needs of its people
and take effective steps towards the rapid revitalization of the economy, and
reaffirming the urgent need to assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of its damaged economy and in its efforts to restore
basic services and the infrastructure of the country,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 4

2.
Welcomes the signature by the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Republic of Rwanda of the Peace Agreement in Pretoria on 30 July 2002 5 and the
signature by the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic of Uganda of
the Luanda Agreement on 6 September 2002, and also welcomes the efforts of the
Governments of South Africa and Angola, and of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, in facilitating the adoption of these agreements;
3.
Urges all parties concerned in the region to cease military activities and
to cease any support for armed groups;
4.
Welcomes the decision taken by all foreign parties fully to withdraw their
troops from the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
progress made in the implementation of those processes, stresses the importance of
the withdrawals being completed in a transparent, orderly and verified manner, and
calls upon the signatories to these agreements to implement them fully;
5.
Urges all parties concerned in the region to cease any recruitment,
training and use of child soldiers, welcomes the initial steps taken by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to demobilize and reintegrate
child soldiers, and urges the Government and all parties to continue their efforts in
this regard;
6.
Welcomes the commitment of the Congolese parties to achieve an
inclusive agreement on the political transition, stresses the importance of such an
agreement to the wider peace process, and calls upon all Congolese parties to
cooperate actively with a view to the speedy conclusion of such an agreement which
is needed for improved humanitarian access;

_______________
4
5

2

A/57/377.
S/2002/914, annex.

A/RES/57/146

7.
Stresses that a successful conclusion to the peace process and the
resumption of economic activity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
inextricably linked, and underlines the need for further international economic
assistance in this regard;
8.
Expresses its deep concern at the worsening humanitarian situation
throughout the country and the very high number of internally displaced persons in
the eastern part and, in particular, in the Ituri region, and urges all parties to avoid
further population displacement and to facilitate the safe and voluntary return of
refugees and internally displaced persons to their places of origin;
9.
Also expresses its deep concern especially at the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the Ituri region, calls upon all Congolese parties on the
ground to cooperate fully within the Ituri Pacification Commission with a view to
reaching an agreement promptly, and calls upon all States in the region to bring their
influence to bear on the Congolese parties so that this agreement can be reached as
soon as possible;
10. Welcomes the adoption of new coordination mechanisms aimed at
ensuring a coherent and effective response to the multifaceted humanitarian crisis in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
11. Urges compliance with international human rights law, and urges all
parties to respect international humanitarian law, in particular the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 6 and the additional Protocols thereto, of 1977; 7
12. Urges all parties to respect fully international humanitarian law so as to
ensure the safe and unhindered access of humanitarian personnel to all affected
populations throughout the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the safety of United Nations and humanitarian personnel;
13. Calls for the reopening of the Kisangani-Kindu rail and river link in
order to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance, as well as access for
humanitarian personnel;
14. Calls upon the international community to increase its support for
humanitarian relief activities within the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
15. Invites Governments to continue to provide support to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo;
16.

Requests the Secretary-General:

(a) To continue to consult urgently with regional leaders, in coordination
with the Interim President of the African Union, on ways to bring about a peaceful
and durable solution to the conflict, in accordance with the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement 1 and relevant Security Council resolutions;
(b) To continue to consult with regional leaders, in coordination with the
Interim President of the African Union, in order to convene, when appropriate, an
international conference on peace, security and development in Central Africa and
in the Great Lakes region, under the auspices of the United Nations and the African
Union, to address the problems of the region in a comprehensive manner;

_______________
6
7

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.

3

A/RES/57/146

(c) To keep under review the economic situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo with a view to promoting participation in and support for a programme
of financial and material assistance to the country to enable it to meet its urgent
needs in terms of economic recovery and reconstruction;
(d) To submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth session a report on
the actions taken pursuant to the present resolution.
75th plenary meeting
16 December 2002

4
