S/PV.8557

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8557th meeting

Thursday, 20 June 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-18556 (E)
*1918556*

S/PV.8557

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: Today I will devote my regular
briefing on the situation in the Middle East to presenting,
on behalf of the Secretary-General, the tenth report on
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which
covers the period from 25 March to 10 June 2019.
Let me reiterate that developments during this
reporting period cannot be divorced from the broader
context of Israel’s continued military occupation of
Palestinian territory and settlement activity; Hamas’
continuing hold over Gaza and its militant activity;
the persistent threat of war; unilateral actions that
undermine peace efforts; and severe challenges to the
fiscal viability of the Palestinian Authority. All those
developments collectively erode the prospects of a twoState solution.
From the outset, I would like to also highlight
that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
continues to face significant financial challenges. It is
now operating on the basis of a projected shortfall of
$211 million of its $1.2 billion budget for the year and
is facing serious cash-flow issues. That could impact
operations, including UNRWA’s ability to maintain
food assistance to over 1 million Palestine refugees in
Gaza. I note that UNRWA’s annual pledging conference
will take place on 25 June here in New York. I call upon
Member States to continue their support.
Paragraph 2 of resolution 2334 (2016) calls on
Israel to
2/21

20/06/2019

“immediately and completely cease all settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, [and to] fully respect all
of its legal obligations in this regard”.
No steps were taken to that effect during the
reporting period.
During the reporting period Israeli authorities
advanced, approved or tendered nearly 6,000 housing
units in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. That constitutes the largest settlement
advancement in two years and includes plans for
approximately 4,450 units in Area C settlements,
of which at least 200 have reached the final stage
of approval.
Those plans include 700 units in Efrat and 600
units in Ma’ale Adumim — two large settlements in
strategic locations that hamper the possibility for a
contiguous Palestinian State and north-south, east-west
connectivity. Another of the plans would retroactively
regularize, under Israeli law, the illegal outpost of
Haresha by incorporating it into the existing Talmon
settlement. Tenders were also announced for some 950
housing units in Area C settlements, and for 550 units
in East Jerusalem. Approximately 20 per cent of all
the plans advanced or tendered are in settlements in
outlying locations deep inside the West Bank.
In addition, on 3 June, Israel’s National
Infrastructure Committee rejected a series of
objections against a controversial plan to construct a
cable car between West Jerusalem and the Old City and
submitted the plan for Government approval. The plan
has raised concerns among Palestinian residents of East
Jerusalem and Israeli non-governmental organizations
that it seeks to deepen Israel’s control over the area.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures by Israeli authorities also continued during
the reporting period. Citing the absence of Israeli-issued
building permits, 92 Palestinian-owned structures were
demolished or seized, resulting in the displacement
of some 104 people. As the Middle East Quartet
highlighted in its 2016 report (S/2016/595, annex),
those permits are nearly impossible for Palestinians to
obtain. Demolitions in East Jerusalem also peaked in
April, reaching 58 — more than any other single month
since the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) started monitoring in 2009.
19-18556

20/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The situation in the Wadi Yasul area, in the Silwan
neighbourhood of East Jerusalem, is also of concern.
Eleven people, including seven children and two
women, were displaced on 30 April, after their homes
were demolished. Some 50 legal cases concerning other
homes and structures in that area are pending in Israeli
courts. Punitive demolitions also continued during the
reporting period, with the authorities demolishing four
homes belonging to families of Palestinian perpetrators
of various attacks. As a result, three families comprising
13 people, including six children, were displaced.
In addition, the Israeli army continues to conduct
military training exercises in areas designated by the
army as firing zones in the Jordan Valley and the West
Bank. As a result, approximately 184 Palestinians,
80 per cent of whom are women and children, from
the Tell Al-Khashaba, Lifjim and Humsa Al-Baqai’a
communities were forced to temporarily evacuate their
homes on 11 occasions, including during Ramadan.
On 22 May, the Israeli High Court of Justice rejected
a petition against the recurrent displacements of
those communities.
Paragraph 6 of resolution 2334 (2016) calls for
“immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence
against civilians, including all acts of terror, as
well as all acts of provocation and destruction”.
However, the reporting period saw a very dangerous
escalation of violence in Gaza and continued violence
in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
I reported to the Council last month (see S/PV.8532)
that over the course of 48 hours, on 4 and 5 May,
Gaza saw the worst escalation since 2014, with Hamas
and Palestinian Islamic Jihad launching more than
700 projectiles towards Israel: several houses, two
kindergartens, a school and a hospital were directly hit
by rockets fired from Gaza. Four Israelis were killed
and 200 were injured during those incidents.
Meanwhile, in Gaza, the Israel Defence Forces
(IDF) stated that, in retaliation, it had hit more than
300 militant targets. Twenty-one residential buildings
were hit by air strikes, one of which was a residential
building in northern Gaza. Twenty-seven Palestinians,
including two children were killed and 150 injured.
On 30 March, 50,000 Palestinians demonstrated,
largely peacefully, marking the anniversary of the Great
March of Return, and, although violence at the Gaza
perimeter fence declined during the reporting period,

S/PV. 8557

nine people, including three children, were killed by
Israeli fire during the demonstrations.
Incendiary kites, balloons and other devices also
continued to be launched from Gaza, starting fires in
southern Israel. At least 70 fires were reported, resulting
in the burning of over 30 hectares of land during
the reporting period. The period also saw continued
violence in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. Four Palestinians, including one child,
were killed by the Israeli security forces during
demonstrations, clashes and various security operations.
Meanwhile, two Israelis were injured by a Palestinian
in a stabbing attack.
On 27 March, a 17-year-old Palestinian medic was
shot by the Israeli security forces near the Dheisheh
refugee camp in Bethlehem, dying of his wounds later.
On 24 April, following the arrest, tying and blindfolding
of a 15-year-old Palestinian boy on allegations of
stone-throwing, soldiers shot him twice in the lower
body as he attempted to escape while still blindfolded.
On 31 May, in a stabbing attack, a Palestinian
severely injured an Israeli civilian and a child in the
Old City of Jerusalem. The perpetrator was shot dead
by the Israeli security forces. Later the same day, a
16-year-old boy was killed and a 21-year-old man was
injured by the Israeli security forces as they attempted
to cross the separation barrier between West Bank and
Jerusalem near Bethlehem.
The situation at the holy sites also remained
tense during the reporting period. For the first time
in decades, Israel’s Jerusalem Day commemoration
coincided with the final days of Ramadan. Israeli
authorities announced that Jews would not be allowed
to visit the compound towards the end of Ramadan,
in keeping with previous practice, but later declared
that limited visits would be permitted based on the
circumstances on the ground. Against that backdrop,
on 2 June clashes erupted between Israeli police forces
and Palestinians inside the compound.
Settler-related violence also continued during the
reporting period. According to OCHA, one Palestinian
was killed, 32 were injured and 41 incidents of damage
to property by settlers were reported. On 17 May, on
two separate occasions, Israelis were filmed torching
Palestinian lands in Nablus, and the Israeli security
forces later confirmed that one of the perpetrators
was an off-duty soldier, who has since been suspended
pending a police investigation. In the same period,

19-185563/21

S/PV.8557

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/06/2019

OCHA reported that seven Israelis were injured and
22 incidents of damage to property by Palestinians
were reported.

Minister to allow hunger-striking Palestinian prisoners
to die, while many boasted about the damage Israel was
causing in strikes in Gaza in response to rocket attacks.

During the reporting period, there were some
developments regarding ongoing cases before Israeli
authorities pertaining to the perpetrators of various
acts of violence. On 14 May, the Israeli minor accused
of killing Aisha Al-Rabi, the Palestinian mother of
eight, in 2018, was released on bail to house arrest
with electronic monitoring. Prosecutors also reached a
plea bargain with the Israeli suspected of conspiring
to carry out the 2015 arson attack that killed the
Dawabsheh family. According to the deal, the suspect,
who was a minor at the time of the attack, will plead
guilty to conspiracy to commit arson out of racist
motives, as well as for other hate crimes. His trial
over the remaining charge of membership in a terrorist
organization will proceed.

Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterates calls by the
Middle East Quartet for affirmative steps to be taken
immediately to reverse negative trends on the ground
that are imperilling the two-State solution. Some
positive developments were witnessed during the
reporting period, most notably with regard to addressing
the critical humanitarian and socioeconomic needs in
Gaza, but they were significantly overshadowed by the
negative trends.

Meanwhile, on 15 May, the Israeli Military Police
Criminal Investigation Division closed its investigation
into the killing of a double amputee at the Gaza fence
demonstrations in December 2017. It concluded that
there was no evidence that the man was killed by direct
Israeli army fire.
Several Palestinians were prosecuted for
involvement in attacks on Israelis, including one indicted
for planning under Hamas’ instructions a suicide car
bombing on Israel’s election day, and two other men for
planning a shooting attack at Tel Aviv’s beach.
Paragraph 7 of resolution 2334 (2016) calls upon
the parties “to refrain from provocative actions,
incitement and inflammatory rhetoric”. Unfortunately,
such actions continued during the reporting period. On
15 May, a senior Hamas official addressed a rally in
Gaza and warned Israelis that the “day of your slaughter,
extermination and annihilation is near”. He called for
them to leave and search for a place “in Europe, or in
hell, or in the sea”. The official Hamas television channel
also repeatedly continued to glorify perpetrators of
terror attacks against Israelis, and broadcast songs with
graphic lyrics encouraging viewers to blow up Jews.
Fatah’s official social media pages also continued to
glorify perpetrators of terrorist attacks.
Israeli officials continued to make highly
provocative statements as well. An outgoing member
of the Knesset confronted families of Palestinian
prisoners and threatened to “eliminate them [and] bury
them with pigs”. Another politician called on the Prime
4/21

The international community has continued its
efforts to address the dire situation in Gaza. The Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians met in Brussels on 30 April
and reiterated its support for the implementation
of a package of urgent humanitarian and economic
interventions in Gaza by the United Nations.
On 7 May, the State of Qatar announced its
continued provision of financial assistance to the
Palestinian people, including a pledge of $480 million,
of which $180 million is intended for humanitarian
assistance to Gaza, some of it to be implemented
by the United Nations; $250 million as loans for the
Palestinian Government; and $50 million as grants for
projects in the West Bank. That commitment has made
a very positive impact on the efforts to de-escalate
the situation in Gaza. However, what remains is the
necessity to find a sustainable and comprehensive
solution that addresses the dire economic and
humanitarian conditions and establishes the conditions
for lasting peace. In that regard, the United Nations
currently has funding to extend the fuel programme
that will provide electricity to Gaza until the end of the
year. In parallel to that effort, we are actively working
on more sustainable solutions in the energy sector.
The United Nations is also advancing on the
creation of dignified jobs for Gaza’s men and women.
The ongoing temporary employment programmes,
which the United Nations Development Programme
and UNRWA started with Swiss and Qatari funds, are
already making a critical difference to people’s lives.
So far, more than 7,500 people have been employed in
temporary jobs, with at least 2,500 more likely to follow.
The programme, we hope, can be expanded soon.
Nevertheless, as I said, negative trends continue
to overshadow positive developments. In Gaza, despite
19-18556

20/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the intensified efforts, the humanitarian, security
and political situation remains deeply worrisome, as
the Egyptian brokered intra-Palestinian agreement in
October 2017 on the return of the Palestinian Authority
to Gaza remains unimplemented. The situation was
also worsened by the temporary closures of the Erez
and Kerem Shalom crossings and a series of reductions
in the fishing zone introduced by Israel as tensions
continued to fluctuate. Seized fishing vessels have yet
to be returned to their owners by the IDF.
The reporting period also saw serious movement
and access constraints being placed on national staff
from United Nations agencies and international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in Gaza.
Some 250 personnel, including 149 United Nations
staff and 103 NGO staff, are prohibited from obtaining
Israeli-issued permits for travel from Gaza to the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, for a period of 12
months. Those numbers reflect a significant increase
from 2017, when only 40 United Nations staff faced
similar prohibitions.
The reporting period also saw no resolution of
the Palestinian Authority’s financial crisis, following
Israel’s decision to withhold part of the clearance
revenues of the Palestinian Authority. That was followed
by the Palestinian leadership’s refusal to accept any
transfers from Israel less than the full amounts owed
to it. The fiscal crisis and related austerity measures
are severely impacting the Palestinian economy, with
the outlook for the private sector remaining very bleak.
Paragraph 5 of resolution 2334 (2016) calls on
Member States
“to distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between
the territory of the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967”.
We are not aware of any such steps taken during the
reporting period. Paragraph 8 of the resolution also
calls upon
“all parties to continue [inter alia] to exert collective
efforts to launch credible negotiations”.
No credible efforts
direction either.

have

been

made

in

that

In conclusion, I would like to share some broad
observations concerning the implementation of the
resolution 2334 (2016) during the reporting period.
The expansion of Israeli settlements has no legal effect

S/PV. 8557

and constitutes a flagrant violation of international
law, as stated in resolution 2334 (2016). It must cease
immediately and completely. Settlement expansion in
occupied East Jerusalem, which further undermines the
viability of the two-State solution with Jerusalem as the
future capital of both Israel and Palestine, is particularly
concerning. During the Israeli election campaign,
statements were made by some politicians expressing
support for the unilateral annexation of all or parts of
the West Bank. Such a prospect would be devastating
to the potential of reviving negotiations, regional peace
and the very essence of the two-State solution.
The persistent threat of demolitions and the
displacement of Palestinians in Area C, East Jerusalem
and Hebron’s H2 area are also of concern. Only 13 per
cent of East Jerusalem is designated for new Palestinian
residential construction, an estimated one-third of
housing units in East Jerusalem are built without a
permit, and an estimated 13,000 demolition orders
issued against Palestinian-owned structures in Area
C since 1988 are still outstanding. The demolitions
and displacement in Area C and East Jerusalem affect
women and girls in particular. Women have to shoulder
additional daily responsibilities to ensure their own
survival and that of their families in unfamiliar
circumstances. A 2018 report by UN-Women on
Palestine has shown that the burden of family
responsibility, coupled with the anguish and trauma of
sudden loss, takes a huge toll on the women’s health and
well-being.
Israel has declared some 18 per cent of the West
Bank as firing zones for military training, while
civilian presence is prohibited by military order
during training exercises. There are 38 Palestinian
herding communities and a population of over 6,200
people located within these areas who are impacted
by a range of measures, including evacuations. There
are also 11 Israeli outposts located either partially or
completely in the designated firing zones, which have
not been subjected to similar evacuations. The practice
of evacuating Palestinian communities located in these
areas should also cease.
The situation in Gaza continues to be perilous, with
the persistent threat of another major escalation and
the continued suffering of the population. It is tragic
and unacceptable that people continue to be killed
and injured unnecessarily during demonstrations by
indiscriminate rocket attacks or other hostile acts. The
launching of rockets and mortars towards Israeli civilian

19-185565/21

S/PV.8557

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

populations is prohibited by international humanitarian
law, and Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad must
cease this practice immediately. Consistent with
international human rights standards, Israeli security
forces have the responsibility to exercise restraint and
should use lethal force against demonstrators only
when strictly unavoidable in order to protect life.
I unequivocally condemn all attacks on Palestinian
and Israeli civilians and call on all to refrain from
violence and on leaders to clearly condemn such acts
when they occur, as called for by resolution 2334
(2016). All perpetrators must be held accountable for
their crimes.
The situation of the Palestinian population and
human rights defenders in the H2 area of Hebron
following the withdrawal of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron remains worrying. United Nations
staff and the diplomatic community have been harassed
and intimidated since the departure of the Temporary
International Presence. Humanitarian actors and
human rights defenders must be allowed to carry out
their activities freely and safely and to ensure that any
attacks are thoroughly, impartially and independently
investigated and the perpetrators held accountable.
I am deeply concerned about developments
relating to the clearance of revenues of the Palestinian
Authority. The Palestinian Government is facing a
very serious financial crisis that, unless resolved, risks
triggering a series of dangerous developments that
will be difficult to mitigate and contain, including the
potential collapse of the Authority and the undermining
of 25 years of international investment in supporting
the two-State solution and the Oslo process. I echo the
call of Palestinian Prime Minister Mohammad Shtayeh
on Israel to restore the revenue transfers in full and
call on both sides to engage in a constructive manner
to ensure compliance with the Protocol on Economic
Relations between the Government of the State of Israel
and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
I remain deeply concerned by the deteriorating
humanitarian and economic situation in Gaza. Funding
received to date has enabled the temporary increase in
energy supply. However, sustainable solutions for the
energy crisis must be advanced without delay. At the
same time, while acknowledging its legitimate security
concerns, Israel must continue to ease restrictions on
the movement of goods and people to and from Gaza,
with the goal of ultimately lifting them. It is crucial
6/21

20/06/2019

to ensure that calm is sustained in order to gradually
introduce longer-term projects that will support
Gaza’s development.
I reiterate my call on all Palestinian factions to
actively engage with Egypt on reconciliation. Despite
the challenges, it is critical that these efforts continue.
The United Nations remains steadfast in its support of
Egypt’s efforts in that regard, and I call on all factions
to take concrete steps to ensure the reunification of
Gaza and the West Bank under a single, democratic and
legitimate national Palestinian Government. Gaza is
and must remain an integral part of a future Palestinian
State as part of the two-State solution.
Finally, I take note of the upcoming workshop
convened by the United States and the Kingdom
of Bahrain to discuss the potential for economic
investments and initiatives that would be made possible
by a future Palestinian-Israeli peace agreement and a
solution to the final-status issues. Humanitarian and
economic support for the population is crucial to creating
an environment conducive to viable negotiations.
However, I must emphasize that the conflict cannot be
resolved through economic measures alone. Such steps
can only be complementary to a legitimate political
process that ends the occupation and addresses all
final-status issues in accordance with relevant United
Nations resolutions.
In closing, let me reiterate that I remain deeply
concerned by the state of our collective efforts
and the weakening of the international consensus
on achieving an end to the occupation and the
realization of a negotiated two-State solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on the 1967 lines,
international law, relevant United Nations resolutions
and previous agreements.
In the absence of any progress to resolve all
final-status issues, creating conditions for the parties
to return to meaningful bilateral negotiations remains
critical. Yet we must be clear. On its own, no amount
of humanitarian or economic support will resolve the
conflict. It requires political solutions. In Gaza, our
efforts consist in continuing to try and de-escalate
the situation and provide a semblance of hope to the
population, but Gaza’s future will rest on the ability of
leaders to summon the political will to devise concrete
and sustainable solutions to the crisis. At the same
time, the West Bank continues to simmer as it faces
a range of challenges that threaten to upend decades
19-18556

20/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of Palestinian and international efforts to support a
Palestinian State.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing and tireless efforts on
this portfolio.
As Special Coordinator Mladenov mentioned, the
United States, in partnership with Bahrain, will be
hosting the Peace to Prosperity economic workshop
in Manama next week. The workshop is a pivotal
opportunity to convene Government, civil society and
business leaders to share ideas, discuss strategies and
galvanize support for potential economic investments
and initiatives that could be made possible by a peace
agreement. The workshop will facilitate discussions
on an ambitious, achievable vision and framework
for a prosperous future for Palestinians, including
enhancements to economic governance, development
of human capital and facilitation of rapid private-sector
growth. We have been very clear that our full plan will
address all final-status issues. The economic plan is a
complement to the political plan.
We understand that only through a solution to the
final-status issues will the economic vision be possible.
Sustainable Palestinian economic growth is not
achievable in the current environment. The economic
vision is a road map that includes a detailed portfolio
of real projects and capacity-building programmes
that have the potential to unleash sustainable, private
sector-driven growth if and when there is peace.
We want to underscore that this is why it is so
important that everyone keep an open mind. The Council
meets here month after month. Many in this Chamber
use the same talking points to describe situations
that have not changed. What actions have positively
changed the reality on the ground? The United States
encourages all to keep an open mind, read through these
ideas and then make suggestions. All of us here today
care deeply and want to see peace between the Israelis
and Palestinians. We hope everyone here will remain
constructively engaged with us moving forward.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the

S/PV. 8557

Middle East Peace Process, for his very detailed and
informative briefing and for his quarterly report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
We are extremely concerned about the deteriorating
security situation in Gaza. The clashes last week once
again highlight the fragility of the ceasefire.
After the flare-up in early May and as Gaza remains
in a critical situation, we must do everything we can
to prevent an escalation that could turn into a new
conflict. We therefore call on the parties to exercise the
utmost restraint. In that regard, I would like once again
to commend the de-escalation efforts of Egypt and the
Special Coordinator.
These developments are taking place in the context
of a serious humanitarian and political crisis in Gaza.
The humanitarian situation is dire. In that context, I
reiterate France’s full support for the work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and we call on all
donors to maintain their level of financial commitment
this year at the Organization’s donor conference to
be held on 25 June. For its part, France has already
announced a doubling of its contribution to UNRWA
in 2019. Ultimately, there will be no solution in Gaza
without the lifting of the blockade accompanied by
credible security guarantees for Israel.
Politically, Palestinian unity is now more important
than ever. There is therefore an urgent need to relaunch
the intra-Palestinian reconciliation process. As we
know, there will be no lasting stability in Gaza without
a political solution, including the full return of the
Palestinian Authority. Ultimately, the future of Gaza
cannot be separated from the objective of establishing
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security. There will be no Palestinian State
without Gaza and no lasting political solution in the
region without a Palestinian State.
That brings me back to the intensification of
the settlement policy in the West Bank, which is
undermining the foundations and the viability of the
two-State solution. Since the beginning of the year,
more than 4,500 new housing units have been approved
in the West Bank. France is also concerned about the
announcement on 30 May by the Israeli authorities
of tenders for the construction of settlements in East
Jerusalem, including more than 800 housing units.
With more than 600,000 settlers, including 200,000 in
Jerusalem, we are close to the point of no return. The

19-185567/21

S/PV.8557

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

various initiatives to implement Israeli law in the West
Bank are part of a de facto annexation policy. We take
those developments all the more seriously as they have
been accompanied by worrying statements about the
annexation of all or part of the occupied territories.
In that regard, I would like to recall that, in
accordance with international law and Council
resolutions, beginning with resolution 242 (1967),
France does not recognize any Israeli sovereignty over
any of the occupied territories. And in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, we consider it illegal
to acquire territory by force, be it in Jerusalem, the
West Bank or the Golan Heights.
If those trends were to continue, it would mean
the Palestinians abandoning their national aspirations,
which require the establishment of a State, and the
Israelis renouncing the democratic nature of the State
of Israel. In addition, it is crucial to put an end to
hate speech and incitement to violence, which, as the
Special Coordinator just recalled, continue and which
France condemns.
In that context, it is now more necessary than ever
to reaffirm the parameters for the two-State solution
agreed by the international community. In the absence
of any political perspective, there may be a temptation
to break away from the agreed framework, based on
international law and the resolutions of the Council,
and to replace it with unilateral decisions. We must all
fully appreciate the danger of that temptation.
We noted the holding of an economic workshop
in Manama on 25 and 26 June, at the initiative of the
United States and Bahrain. As we said, France stands
ready to support any effort, including economic, as long
as it is in line with the approach that we have defined
together: the establishment of a viable and independent
Palestinian State, genuine conditions for Palestine’s
economic recovery and, beyond that, the construction
of a stronger and more integrated regional economy. But
economic peace cannot replace the pursuit of a genuine
political settlement, based on the two-State solution
and on all the internationally agreed parameters, which
are themselves anchored in international law and the
resolutions of the Council. Any attempt to deviate from
those collectively defined parameters would be doomed
to failure. There is no viable or realistic alternative. The
solution to this conflict is above all a political one.
France, which is a friend of both the Israelis and the
Palestinians, has only one objective: the implementation,
8/21

20/06/2019

through negotiations, of the two-State solution and the
establishment of fair and lasting peace on the basis of
parameters agreed by the international community. We
will assess any initiatives taken on that basis.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): It is always emotionally
difficult to talk about the Palestinian question, for it
makes South Africans relive their difficult past. I
would like to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing on
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine.
We are all aware of the expression that the
Roman Emperor Nero was reputed to have fiddled
while Rome burned. If the Council, and indeed the
international community, continue to deal with the
question of Palestine in the manner in which we are
currently doing so, history will no doubt judge us as
the abominable Nero. We are fiddling while the reality
of an independent, safe, secure and self-sufficient
Palestinian State is slowly dwindling. Compounding
the effects of the illegal Israeli occupation, earlier this
week the Governor of the Palestine Monetary Authority,
Mr. Azzam Shawwa, highlighted the dire financial
constraints on the Palestinian Authority, which makes
it very difficult to deliver basic services to its people.
On 22 November 1967, the Security Council
adopted resolution 242 (1967), which called on all
parties to end territorial claims and respect sovereignty
and for Israel to withdraw from the occupied territories.
In 2019, 52 years later, that has still not happened.
Two generations later, it has not happened. In reality,
Israel has illegally expanded its occupation with no
consequences whatsoever from the Council.
From 1967 to January of last year, 250 settlements
were constructed in the West Bank, housing 611,000
people, or 10 per cent of Israel’s population, and moved
12 per cent of the Palestinian population from their
land. Since then, over the past 18 months that figure
has sharply increased, as the Council has heard.
Those historical injustices against Palestine and its
people must be addressed. The Council must uphold its
responsibilities mandated by the Charter of the United
Nations and act. It is long overdue for the Security
Council to reassume its responsibility and act decisively
to assist Israel and Palestine in finding a lasting peace
in the Middle East.
Over the years, established legal frameworks have
been agreed upon, including the Madrid principles,
19-18556

20/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map
and resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly. It is now time to put those guidelines
into action.
We have taken note of the Bahrain meeting, which
will be convened by the United States sometime
this year.
A vital aspect of ensuring lasting peace, security
and stability in the Middle East is for the parties to talk
to each other directly and negotiate directly towards
finding a credible path to peace that is acceptable to
Israelis and Palestinians alike. Those direct discussions
must include all final-status issues, particularly with
regard to borders, the status of Jerusalem and the
return of Palestinian refugees. Eroding those core
issues through detrimental unilateral action severely
undermines previous peacemaking efforts and
damages the prospects for durable peace for Israelis
and Palestinians alike. The Security Council and its
partners in peace must exert every effort to bring all
sides to the negotiating table in order to allow them to
find long-term peaceful solutions.
With regard to the humanitarian and human rights
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, there
too we have all failed. Palestinians continue to live in
unacceptable environments where their movement is
restricted, their land and property are seized and they
have very little control over their own future. In Gaza,
Israel’s illegal blockade has harshly and negatively
impacted the economic and social development of the
area. That has been further exacerbated by Israel’s
illegal withholding of tax and customs revenues that
rightfully belong to the Palestinian Authority to
dispense as it sees fit. In that regard, South Africa calls
for the immediate lifting of the illegal blockade and the
release of all tax and customs revenues collected on
behalf of the Palestinian Authority.
On the West Bank, we see continued expansion of
illegal settlements and the confiscation and destruction
of Palestinian property and land in direct violation of
international law, including resolution 2334 (2016).
Again, the Council has not acted to rectify that
injustice. The detailed reports of recent developments
regarding settlement expansion should at least compel
the Council to act.
As we heard last month and was acknowledged
by many members of the Council, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the

S/PV. 8557

Near East (UNWRA) plays a vital role in the lives of
most Palestinians through the provision of health and
education services and employment opportunities in
many fields. Its important work must be fully supported
and encouraged, and we hope the upcoming UNWRA
conference later this month will be supported. We place
on record our appreciation of those countries that,
under difficult circumstances, have continued to help
UNWRA, as Mr. Mladenov noted.
If you want to deny people means of self-reliance,
livelihood and future and turn them into desperate
beggars, take their land and restrict their movement.
That is what has been done and continues to be done
to the Palestinians. The Council has watched and
watched and talked and nothing has happened for
70 years, nothing.
On a positive note, we congratulate the State of
Palestine on successfully joining the International
Atomic Energy Agency as an observer on 18 June.
That is a further step towards full acceptance by the
international community of the reality that Palestine is
indeed a State.
The international community has acknowledged
that the only credible solution is one that is based
on the two-State solution, with the 1967 borders and
East Jerusalem as the capital of the independent and
sovereign State of Palestine, and the State of Israel.
Any peace plan proposed by anyone must acknowledge
those facts and not pre-empt them, and must ensure
a Palestinian State that has sovereignty, territorial
integrity and prosperity.
As we have repeatedly said in the Chamber, no
people can be oppressed forever. That will never
happen. They will resist and resist. Even if there is only
one left standing, that one person will resist. That was
true for all of us and it will be true for Palestinians.
If all but one Palestinian is killed, that one remaining
Palestinian will resist oppression and occupation. The
Council must take note of that.
Peace in Israel is a wish all of us pray for every
day, because we all pray for peace for Israelis. They
are our people. But it will happen only when Palestine
is free and enjoying peace. The Council should
assist both those two communities — Israelis and
Palestinians — in finding peace for the sake of their
children and future generations.

19-185569/21

S/PV.8557

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
too would like to welcome this briefing on the latest
developments in the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. I congratulate
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his enlightening
briefing, which once again reminds Council members
of the need to coordinate their efforts to restore lasting
peace and stability in the region.
Many decades after the partition plan for
Palestine proposed by the United Nations in 1947,
the international community is still struggling to
find definitive solutions to a crisis that is becoming
increasingly intense and complex. The political and
security situation is continuing to deteriorate and to
have a negative impact on the humanitarian situation
in a worrisome way, in particular in the Gaza Strip and
the West Bank, as Mr. Mladenov just reminded us in
great detail and as my colleague from South Africa,
Ambassador Jerry Matjila, has explained. My delegation
therefore urges Israeli and Palestinian leaders to rise
above the circumstances by resuming negotiations
based on relevant United Nations resolutions.
To that end, my delegation reiterates its commitment
to Israel’s security and the inalienable right of
Palestinians to self-determination. Furthermore, the
solution of two States coexisting peacefully within the
pre-1967 borders, with Jerusalem as their capital, is the
one we support.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has reached an
impasse despite numerous mediation efforts by the
United Nations and other international actors. In
addition to the political and security challenges that
are taking on increasingly alarming proportions every
day in the Palestinian territories, particularly in the
Gaza Strip, the West Bank and East Jerusalem, there
is a humanitarian crisis that undermines the hope
for lasting peace that the 1993 Oslo Accord and its
subsequent Protocol had raised. The virtual absence
of an appropriate framework for political compromise
between the warring parties and the inflammatory
ideology and rhetoric displayed on both sides
exacerbate tensions and expose civilian populations
to armed violence. In view of the prevailing delicate
situation, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its call for restraint
to all stakeholders and calls on them to strictly comply
with the relevant United Nations resolutions under
international law, in particular resolution 2334 (2016).
10/21

20/06/2019

My country’s strong propensity for dialogue as the
preferred means of settling disputes between peoples,
as well as its consistent position in favour of the security
of the State of Israel and the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination, form the basis
of its call for peace between Israelis and Palestinians. In
the face of the current impasse, and also of the violence
observed in the Middle East, my delegation reiterates
its support for the international consensus on the need
to relaunch peace talks between the parties concerned,
and from this point of view, we look forward to the
outcome of the conference convened in Bahrain by the
United States.
My country also remains deeply concerned
about the humanitarian situation in Gaza, which is
characterized by increasingly difficult access to health
care, as well as the ongoing water shortages and power
outages. This humanitarian crisis, aggravated by a
difficult socioeconomic situation, with the consequence
of irregular payment of civil servants’ salaries and a
high unemployment rate, particularly among young
people, seems absolutely unacceptable to us. Côte
d’Ivoire therefore welcomes the material and financial
support of the United Nations specialized agencies and
international partners for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) and reiterates its call on them to confirm
their vital actions for the benefit of populations in
distress at the support conference on 25 June 2019.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire wishes to express
its support for all initiatives aimed at creating the
conditions for a resumption of Israeli-Palestinian
dialogue and calls for reconciliation between Fatah
and Hamas to enable the Palestinian Authority to fully
exercise its functions in both Gaza and the West Bank.
It reiterates its support for Mr. Nickolay Mladenov in
his commitment to promoting constructive dialogue
with a view to a lasting settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, which will restore peace and
stability throughout the region.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing,
which was, as always, very precise and informative.
Let me turn first to the situation on the ground,
which is extremely worrisome. In recent days, we
have once again learned about a potential escalation of
violence in Gaza. The firing of rockets into Israel, which
fortunately did not harm anyone, must be condemned
19-18556

20/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in the strongest possible terms. We have also observed
other activities, such as the use of incendiary balloons
launched from Gaza. In this context, let me reiterate
that we recognize the legitimate right of Israel to selfdefence and to ensuring the security of its citizens. Such
acts represent a dangerous escalation that could quickly
spiral out of control. Hamas and other actors in Gaza
must refrain from violent actions and provocations
against Israel, including the aforementioned incendiary
kites and balloons launched with the aim of damaging
Israeli property and assets.
We should uphold the existing international
consensus that the only way forward for the Palestinians
and Israel is the negotiation of a two-State solution,
with the State of Israel and an independent, democratic
and viable Palestinian State in the West Bank and Gaza
living side by side in peace and security, with borders
negotiated on the basis of the 1967 lines and mutually
agreed land swaps. Today our main aim should be
to restore a political horizon for the resumption of a
meaningful peace process to that end. A resolution of
all final status issues, including Jerusalem, should be
found through the negotiated two-State solution.
We must be frank with ourselves — on the political
track, we have to acknowledge that the process is
currently almost entirely blocked. The intra-Palestinian
division only aggravates the situation of the people
of Gaza and weakens the national aspirations of the
Palestinians. There is an urgent need to relaunch the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process. Everyone must
be committed to the Egyptian efforts in this respect.
Poland has long supported and continues to
support parameters for a peaceful solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict that are based on respect
for international principles enshrined in international
law. Regrettably, the situation on the ground continues
to deteriorate, and the idea of a two-State solution
continues to be dismantled piece by piece, in particular
by an expansion of Israeli settlements. We are very
close to the point where it could be difficult, if not
impossible, to establish a viable Palestinian State.
Poland’s position on the Israeli settlement policy
in occupied Palestinian territory is clear and remains
unchanged; it is also the European Union’s wellknown stance. All settlement activity is illegal under
international law. It not only erodes the viability of the
two-State solution and the prospects for a lasting peace,
but also — we have to be honest with ourselves — it is an

S/PV. 8557

obstacle to peace. The adoption of resolution 2334 (2016)
provided a strong reaffirmation of the international
consensus on this matter. The resolution underlined
the illegality of the Israeli settlements, stressing that
the cessation of settlement activities is essential for
salvaging the two-State solution. We are also very
worried about planned demolitions of the Palestinian
village of Khan Al-Ahmar, and we continue to ask
Israel to abandon these plans entirely.
Allow me to conclude by praising the collective
efforts of the international community to allow the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to fulfil its mandate
to provide essential relief, development and protection
services to Palestinian refugees and those displaced
by the conflict. In our opinion, UNRWA remains a
key contributor, providing, as it does, humanitarian
assistance, stability and security in the region. In this
context, we look forward to the UNRWA conference to
be held at the end of this month in New York.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Before I start on
the Middle East, I would just like to say how sorry
we were to hear about the terrorist attack on 16 June
in Nigeria, near Maiduguri, which killed at least 30
people. The press statement on that attack (SC/13852)
that the Security Council just issued is welcome, but our
sympathies and condolences go out to those affected
and to Nigeria.
Turning to the Middle East, I thank Mr. Mladenov
for his briefing. I think some common themes are
emerging. For the United Kingdom, we share the
Secretary-General’s views on the expansion of Israeli
settlements in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. It was disappointing that, on 30 May, the
Israeli authorities published tenders for the construction
of over 500 settlement units in East Jerusalem. That
is a decision that we condemn. As others have pointed
out, the continued escalation of settlement activity
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem is contrary to
international law as reaffirmed by resolution 2334
(2016). An annexation of any part of the West Bank
would also be contrary to international law, not to
mention destructive to peace efforts. I just wanted to
set that out clearly.
Turning to Gaza, the United Kingdom condemns
the rocket attack by Palestinian militants against
southern Israel on 13 June. We strongly condemn all
acts of terrorism and call on Hamas and other terrorist

19-1855611/21

S/PV.8557

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

groups to put a permanent end to their incitement and
rocket fire against Israel. We were saddened by reports
of a Palestinian medic who succumbed to wounds
received last month when he was hit in the face by a
rubber-coated bullet at the Gaza periphery. It is very
hard to comprehend the killing of those delivering
medical services.
We would therefore like to take this opportunity
once more to urge all parties concerned to take action to
reduce the risk of violence and make renewed progress
towards a long-term agreement. It is only through a
long-term political solution that brings the Palestinian
Authority back to Gaza that communities in Israel and
Gaza can be free from the threat of violence.
In response to the fragile humanitarian situation, on
29 May the United Kingdom announced the $2 million
package of support for the World Health Organization
to help address the gap in trauma and emergency care in
Gaza, and will help establish a new-limb reconstruction
unit. We hope that package of support will help relieve
the pressure on Gaza’s hard-pressed health services.
I wish now to turn to the altercations on Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount on 2 June. Given the religious
importance and political sensitivity of the holy sites, we
look to all parties to maintain the status quo and engage
in dialogue to ensure calm, especially during religious
observances such as the holy month of Ramadan.
Turning to a solution to the conflict, along with
other Member States, the United Kingdom continues
to promote a just resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. It is our understanding, and it seems that
the understanding is shared by most Council members,
that a sustainable peace requires a safe and secure Israel
living alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian
State based on 1967 borders with the agreed land
swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital of both States
and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement for
refugees. There need to be security arrangements that,
for Israelis, prevent the resurgence of terrorism and, for
Palestinians, respect their sovereignty, ensure freedom
of movement and demonstrate that the occupation
is over.
To that end, I would like to take this opportunity to
encourage our United States colleagues to bring forward
detailed proposals for a viable Israeli-Palestinian peace
agreement that addresses the legitimate concerns of
both parties. We continue to believe that the only way to
12/21

20/06/2019

achieve that is through substantive peace talks leading
to a two-State solution.
There will be a meeting in Bahrain next week about
the economic situation and proposals. That is welcome.
More needs to be done to enable the Palestinians to
trade freely with the rest of the world. In turn, that
requires greater movement of goods and people and the
easing of Israeli restrictions. Ultimately, in order for
the Palestinian economy to flourish, a political solution
to the conflict needs to be found.
Lastly, others have mentioned the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA), and I would like to reiterate
that the United Kingdom also remains a committed
supporter of UNRWA and of Palestinian refugees across
the Middle East. We welcome UNRWA’s efforts to
broaden its donor base. I would like to encourage others
to step up with more funding and more predictable
disbursements. In that context, we look forward to a
successful pledging conference here in New York
next week.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and thank
Mr. Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing.
Peru is following with profound concern the
persistent cycle of destruction around the question of
Palestine, whereby episodes of escalating violence, as
over recent months, are followed by fleeting periods of
relative calm. This pattern, coupled with the Security
Council’s inaction and the inertia of certain key actors,
has a negative impact in what is already a highly volatile
context and generates unpredictable consequences
for the Middle East and for the world in general. We
are alarmed that the prospects for a political solution
seem to grow ever weaker and that unilateral actions
risk triggering an even greater escalation of tension
and violence.
Peru reiterates its firm condemnation of the
launching of rockets and incendiary devices by
Hamas, which threatens the lives of the Israeli civilian
population, cause material damage and further
undermine the potential for a political solution.
At the same time, we underscore that, pursuant
to international humanitarian law, the legitimacy of
Israel’s self-defence hinges upon its strict adherence
to the principles of proportionality, distinction and
precaution. In that regard, we must recall its obligation
19-18556

20/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to abide by the resolutions of the Security Council. In
particular, we believe there is an urgent and pressing
need to put an end to increased settlement activity, home
demolitions and evictions in the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, in accordance with resolution
2334 (2016). Those actions are contrary to international
law, seriously jeopardize the territorial integrity of
the Palestinian State and undermine the prospects for
achieving a two-State solution.
We note with concern the continuing deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in Gaza and the West
Bank, and how it contributes to fuelling increased
radicalization and extremism among the population. We
welcome the significant financial contributions intended
to improve living conditions in Gaza, which have
helped to improve electricity supply, create jobs and to
provide medical services. Nonetheless, we underscore
the temporary nature of such measures and that they
must be followed by political agreements that bring to
an end the suffering of millions of Palestinians. That
means, among other things, making tangible progress
in the process of intra-Palestinian reconciliation, which
entails the restoration of Palestinian Authority control
throughout the area. It also means ending the Gaza
blockade under conditions that guarantee the security
of Israel.
Moreover, we are concerned at the destabilizing
effect of the Israeli Government’s decision to withhold
a significant proportion of Palestinian taxes. In that
regard, we welcome the willingness of Arab countries
to consider options for providing assistance at a
forthcoming meeting to be held in Cairo. Nonetheless,
we note for the definitive solution to the problem lies
in strict respect for the obligations governing the
economic relations between the parties.
In conclusion, I reiterate our commitment to the
two-State solution, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Organization. For that to be achieved,
the support of the international community and a
constructive role on the part of the Security Council
are essential.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
We are concerned about the continuing clashes and
confrontations in Gaza and at the Al-Aqsa Mosque and
the steadily escalating situation. We took note of the
fact that the basic principles for settling the Palestinian
question were reaffirmed at the emergency summit

S/PV. 8557

of the League of Arab States and the summit of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, recently held
in Saudi Arabia. Safeguarding the legitimate rights
and interests of the Palestinian people is the shared
responsibility of the international community. I would
like to stress the following points.
First, to effectively implement resolution 2334
(2016), the parties concerned must immediately stop
all settlement activities in the occupied territory, cease
and desist the demolition of Palestinian homes and the
destruction of Palestinian property and take measures
to prevent violence against civilians. All legislative acts
and unilateral moves aimed at legitimizing settlement
activities must be stopped immediately and practical
measures must be taken to eliminate their effects.
Secondly, the parties must seek a proper settlement
to the issue of the final status of Jerusalem — a complex
and sensitive matter that is fundamental to settling the
Palestinian question and crucial to regional peace and
tranquillity. Recent clashes at the Al-Aqsa Mosque are
worrisome. All parties must act with caution, based
on the principles of respect for the plurality of history,
thereby upholding fairness and justice, implementing
the international consensus and achieving peaceful
coexistence, in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions and international law. They must
also hold talks to reach a solution that can balance
everyone’s interests.
Thirdly, the parties must remain seized of the
economic and humanitarian situation in Palestine and
take measures to improve it. The prolonged blockade of
the Gaza Strip has led to severe humanitarian situations
in the region and is not conducive to regional stability.
Immediate measures must be taken to lift the blockade
in Gaza in full so as to prevent any potential escalation.
China is concerned about the actions of certain parties
to withhold some of the tax receipts collected on behalf
of Palestine. We call on the parties concerned to fulfil
the obligations under relevant international treaties,
such as the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations,
and fully implement United Nations resolutions on the
issue. The international community should provide
more support for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. We look
forward to the successful conclusion of its upcoming
pledging conference.
The Middle East needs peace and stability. There
is no alternative to the two-State solution — the only

19-1855613/21

S/PV.8557

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

correct answer to the Palestinian-Israeli question. In
line with the Arab Peace Initiative, the principle of
land for peace and the relevant Council resolutions, the
intentional community must adhere to a negotiationsbased approach for advancing a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the Palestinian question so as
to achieve the ultimate goal of establishing a fully
sovereign State of Palestine, based on the 1967 borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital. Any new
initiative should meet those international guidelines.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I wish to thank
Mr. Mladenov for his usual comprehensive update on
the situation on the ground.
Again, we are disappointed about the continuing
provocative actions by the occupying Power, including
its destabilizing actions and violations of the situation
and historic status of Al-Haram Al-Sharif, thereby
potentially creating tensions not only in the region but
also in the surrounding areas.
We are deeply concerned about the fact that no
concrete measures have been taken, including by this
body, in relation to the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). In that regard, the Council should spare no
effort in creating an atmosphere that is conducive for
all parties to implement the resolution.
We also took note of the statement by Mr. Mladenov
on the various provocations in the occupied Palestinian
territory, in particular in Gaza. We call on all parties
to refrain from making further statements that may
escalate tensions. We share the view of Mr. Mladenov
that highlighted that economic measures cannot be
considered as the only element that needs to be solved
when addressing the issue of Palestine.
With those comments in mind, I wish to highlight
three important points in my remarks today.
The first point is the humanitarian crisis in
Palestine. While there is no sign of political talks
in sight, the living conditions of the Palestinians
continue to deteriorate every day, whether in Gaza or
in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Palestinians continue to be deprived of their rights.
Their hope for a better future is fading away. Before our
eyes, the occupying Power continues to dismantle past
political deals and perimeters that are the foundation
of the two-State solution. Widespread and persistent
practices such as continuous violence, the expansion
of settlements and increasing threats by settlers, the
14/21

20/06/2019

blockade of Gaza, the demolition of property and
evictions aggravate the economic situation and pose a
serious security threat. Israel continues to withhold the
transfer of Palestinian tax revenues to the Palestinian
Authority — a dangerous measure by the occupying
Power. Let me again stress that we cannot question the
Palestinian Authority’s refusal to accept a transfer that
is less than the full amount owed to it, but must demand
that Israel not take what does belong to it.
That brings me to my second point, namely, the
significant role of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
amid worsening economic and social conditions in
Palestine. As an organization providing basic services
to half of the people of Gaza, UNRWA provides a small
glimmer of hope. The generous contributions of many
countries are a clear demonstration of the support and
responsibility of the international community with
regard to the existence of UNRWA for the benefit of
the Palestinian people. UNRWA is vital to Palestinian
refugees and to Palestinians at large. It is also the least
the United Nations can do to help the Palestinians, given
the failure of the Security Council to act authoritatively
on its own resolutions as they relate to Palestine. The
United Nations is indebted to Palestine and we must
discharge that debt, now or in the future. With respect
to that point, I wish to remind all of us here that on
25 June, just a few days from now, there will be a
pledging conference for UNRWA. We did a tremendous
job last year, which helped prevent UNRWA from
collapsing. I urge all delegations to demonstrate the
same sense of commitment again this year.
My third point is the maintenance of the historic
status quo of Al-Haram Al-Sharif, to which I alluded
at the beginning. Al-Haram Al-Sharif has always been
the epicentre of violence because of what it represents,
spiritually and culturally. It is critical that we remind
ourselves that what happens there affects not just the
immediate region, but ripples to far distant areas of the
world. In that regard, it is worth recalling that earlier
this month, during the last 10 days of Ramadan, during
a time when there is a great concentration of people
in Al-Haram Al-Sharif, there was another provocation
by settlers and security forces of the occupying Power
trying to gain access.
Once again, that was a violation of the status quo.
What is even more deplorable is that the aggression
took place during the celebration of the occupation
of East Jerusalem in 1967. Not surprisingly, a number
19-18556

20/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of Palestinians were injured during the incident. The
delegation of Indonesia would like to warn that turning
the conflict into a religious one is something that
we must prevent, as the consequences could be very
serious. I believe all of us here agree on that. We call on
Israel to respect history and the status quo and to avoid
any measures or insensitive policy that might result in
a destabilizing effect.
Finally, on a positive note, I welcome the agreement
between the State of Palestine and the International
Atomic Energy Agency on a safeguards agreement,
which has placed the State of Palestine on an equal
footing with other members.
Once again, we call on this body to exercise its
authority with regard to the situation in Palestine. Let
us be fair and place justice above all.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): As in the past, we thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for presenting today’s report
to us, while recognizing the significant challenge that
his work entails in the most adverse of circumstances.
Unfortunately, the current state of the situation in the
Middle East and the direction it is taking continue be a
cause of great concern and outrage for us, as we witness
a progressively worsening trend that is bringing us
dangerously close to the brink of the impossibility
of achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
based on the two-State solution — the only viable one.
Making our feelings heard, however, as we often
do in this Chamber, does not relieve us of the primary
responsibility conferred upon the Security Council for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
the success of which demands taking firm and effective
action in tandem with our positions and in consonance
with the authority and respect that this beacon of world
order deserves. Given the absence of significant political
will and process and the division among positions, the
inertia that we are experiencing with regard to the
Israel-Palestine issue threatens to perpetuate the status
quo leading to actions that are contrary and in clear
violation of international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions.
We continue to observe how the hopes of the
Palestinian people to establish their own State are
fading away in the face of the systematic expansion
of Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, underpinned by a policy that seeks to

S/PV. 8557

legitimize them. The civilian population, both Israelis
and Palestinians, including women and children,
continue to be the victims of an environment marked
by constant violence, fuelled by provocations and
incitement and inflammatory rhetoric, which puts their
lives in jeopardy and deprives them of the possibility
of well-being, compounded, at the same time, with the
inability to embark on a path leading towards a process
of intra-Palestinian reconciliation to build a nation.
Consistent with its guiding principles, the position
of the Dominican Republic remains the same,
including, inter alia, respect for the sovereignty and
self-determination of peoples, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations with respect to the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force. We reject the expansion
of illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem.
Accordingly, we stress that, with regard to
Jerusalem, we recognize, in line with the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,
the character and special status of the Holy City of
Jerusalem, its spiritual, religious and cultural dimension
and heritage, as a sacred place for the three monotheistic
religions of Islam, Christianity and Judaism, and we are
opposed to any measure that alters or seeks to alter that
character and status.
At the same time, we condemn in the strongest
terms all acts of violence continuing to take place
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory, including
the use of lethal force during demonstrations, clashes,
security operations and other actions in Gaza and the
West Bank, which involve children, women and medical
personnel, none of whom should ever be targeted. We
also condemn the firing of rockets and the launching
of incendiary devices and explosives from Gaza into
Israel by Hamas and other Palestinian militants.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains critical,
heightened by an alarming environmental situation
limiting access to drinking water and subsequently
affecting health, food security and development,
which is compounded by widespread insecurity, the
electricity crisis and the lack of opportunities. We
therefore commend the vital work on the ground by
the relevant organizations and agencies of the United
Nations system, such as the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,

19-1855615/21

S/PV.8557

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/06/2019

as well as the support of friendly countries, to alleviate
suffering and to bring about change.

outposts and the demolition and seizure of Palestinianowned structures.

I should like to conclude by saying that we will
not achieve peace merely by making statements month
after month. Let us not deceive ourselves. If we really
want to achieve peace, the first step to that end is to end
the hate speech by both sides. That is our opinion.

We are also extremely concerned about repeated
statements from various sides alluding to a possible
annexation of part of the West Bank. There is no right
to annexation. Should such statements be translated
into Government policy or law, that would constitute
a clear violation of international law. We strongly
advise against taking any steps in that direction, as it
could lead to serious consequences. We reiterate that
Germany will not recognize any changes to the 4 June
1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other
than those agreed by the parties through negotiations.
In its relevant dealings, Germany will continue to
distinguish between the territory of the State of Israel
and the territories occupied since 1967.

Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, let me
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
comprehensive briefing.
We remain fully and permanently committed
to a negotiated two-State solution, based on the
internationally agreed parameters, as the only viable
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that meets
Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian
aspirations for statehood and sovereignty, ends
the occupation that began in 1967 and resolves all
permanent-status issues in order to end the conflict.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is, first and
foremost, a political conflict that requires a political
solution. In anticipation of the upcoming Bahrain
workshop to be held next week, we will look into any
proposal that is aimed at improving the socioeconomic
living conditions of Palestinians. Addressing the
economic aspect of the conflict, however, cannot
replace a solution negotiated between both parties in
order to achieve lasting peace. We will support any
meaningful initiative that aims at reviving the political
process that is acceptable to both parties and based on
the internationally agreed parameters.
One of the main obstacles to achieving a political
settlement is the ongoing Israeli occupation and the
continued settlement activities in the territories occupied
in 1967. We reiterate our position that settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories are
illegal under international law and undermine the
prospect for a negotiated two-State solution. The
continuous expansion of settlement activities by Israel
is a matter of great concern to us That includes the recent
approvals of construction of, and tenders for, hundreds
of new housing units in settlements in the occupied
West Bank and East Jerusalem, including those dating
from the end of May. We reiterate our rejection of any
unilateral steps that jeopardize a two-State solution.
That also includes the construction of settlements in
violation of international law and the related demolition
of Palestinian structures in Area C. We call on Israel
to end the expansion of settlements, the legalization of
16/21

Resolution 2334 (2016) needs to be fully
implemented not only with regard to settlement
activities, but also with regard to acts of terror,
violence against civilians, incitement, provocative
action and inflammatory rhetoric. We welcome the
fact that the latest report of the Secretary-General also
focuses on those obstacles to achieving peace, and the
Special Coordinator gave some appalling examples in
that regard during his briefing. Germany condemns
all attacks on Israel in the strongest possible terms,
including the latest firing of rockets from Gaza, which
are putting Israel’s security and the lives of civilians at
risk. Germany remains steadfast in its commitment to
Israel’s security as a Jewish and democratic State, and
we will not be silent when Israel’s security or right to
exist are questioned or compromised. We call on Hamas
and other groups to stop firing rockets from Gaza into
Israel, and we strongly urge all parties to de-escalate,
exercise restraint and refrain from provocative rhetoric
and actions.
It is obvious that joint efforts to restore a political
perspective on the resumption of the peace process are
urgently needed. We support all attempts to restart
meaningful direct talks and negotiations between
the parties with the objective of creating a lasting
peace. At the same time, we must avoid any unilateral
measures and work collectively to counter the negative
developments on the ground that are undermining the
viability of a negotiated two-State solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict on the basis of the internationally
agreed parameters.
19-18556

20/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Before I conclude, I want to make one last point. In
the meantime and until a solution is found, the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) remains indispensable to
the provision of humanitarian assistance and essential
services in Jordan, Lebanon and Syria as well as
within the Palestinian territories. UNRWA is the key
to stability in the region, and we continue to firmly
support its mandate and encourage others to similarly
continue to support the Agency’s work, politically
and financially.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his detailed
briefing and for his and his team’s tireless efforts.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is becoming
bogged down, the situation on the ground in Gaza and
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, continues to
deteriorate, and we are seeing evidence that this conflict,
the subject of many Security Council resolutions, will
have a positive outcome only if we ensure that those
same resolutions and international law are respected
following a negotiated process between the parties.
A peace can be comprehensive, just and lasting
only if it meets the legitimate aspirations of each of
the parties to achieve their national destiny in peace
and security, within a stabilized region. The goal that
the international community must work towards is
unquestionably the coexistence of two States, with
the city of Jerusalem as the future capital of both, in
accordance with the internationally agreed parameters.
In Belgium’s view, that is the only way to provide the
necessary response to the Israelis’ desire to live in
security in a State that is recognized by all and the
Palestinians’ legitimate aspirations for a sovereign,
democratic and viable State. That possibility can be
supported by economic measures, and here I want to
remind the Council that the European Union is the
world’s largest donor to the Palestinian people. But
economic measures cannot replace a political solution.
The Palestinian economy cannot fully take off until
the occupation ends and Palestinians have free access
to their land and resources, freedom of movement and
access throughout their territory and the ability to
integrate into a regional market.
The continuing settlement policy is a flagrant
violation of international law and the Council’s
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).

S/PV. 8557

Settlement activity, which is accompanied by
expropriations, demolitions and people’s displacement,
undermines respect for Palestinians’ basic rights. It
also fundamentally compromises the two-State solution
that we support, and it will soon be irrevocable. The
recent publication of several requests for offers of
tender to enable more than 800 housing units to be
built in settlements in East Jerusalem is a new example
of that policy, and Belgium firmly denounces and
condemns such developments. In that context, we are
also extremely concerned about the increase in tensions
and violence between Israeli settlers and Palestinians.
Any resort to violence, regardless of who commits it, is
unacceptable, and impunity must not prevail. Belgium
appeals to the parties to avoid any kind of provocation.
We are particularly concerned about the deteriorating
situation in Hebron and East Jerusalem, including in
the Old City. We want to remind the parties of the
obligation to respect international law, which applies
to all, and of Israel’s responsibility, as the occupying
Power, to ensure the protection of Palestinians in
Hebron, Jerusalem and all of the occupied territories.
The recent escalation of violence in Gaza is also
damaging the prospects for a lasting and stable peace.
We would like to remind the parties of their obligation
to respect international humanitarian law, including
the principles of proportionality and distinction, and to
ensure the protection of civilians. If the trends in Gaza
are to be reversed, it will be crucial to invest in both
the humanitarian and political arenas. We urge all the
parties to ensure free access to humanitarian actors. On
the political front, only lifting the blockade and fully
opening the crossing points, while keeping Israel’s
legitimate security concerns in mind, can constitute
an appropriate solution. Restoring that territory to
the control of the Palestinian Authority is also key.
We reiterate our call to all the parties to engage
constructively in intra-Palestinian reconciliation.
Lastly, we reiterate our request to be provided with
a written report as part of this briefing, in accordance
with the usual practice of the Council, based on the note
by the President contained in document S/2017/507, at
least twice a year.
In conclusion, Belgium calls on all parties to the
conflict to work towards a solution in accordance with
international law, with a view to achieving a just and
lasting peace and a stable regional environment.

19-1855617/21

S/PV.8557

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Having come this far in the month, we
are pleased with the excellent way in which you and
your team are steering the work of the presidency,
Mr. President. We congratulate you and encourage you
to maintain that momentum throughout the month. We
also thank Special Coordinator Mladenov and his team
for his detailed and informative briefing.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues to head
in the wrong direction, as we saw from the incidents
that occurred last week, which is very worrying.
Following the extreme violence in May, in which four
Israelis and 25 Palestinians lost their lives, a ceasefire
agreement was signed between Israel and Hamas, under
the joint auspices of the United Nations and Egypt.
Although no one was killed in last Thursday’s crossborder attack, it violated the spirit of that agreement
and demonstrates the mutual distrust and deeply
rooted spirit of confrontation that prevail on both sides
of the conflict, endangering the lives of Israeli and
Palestinian civilians and undermining the efforts of the
international community.
My delegation recognizes the right of Israel
to defend its population from acts of insurgency
and therefore to adopt measures necessary for that,
but such measures should always fall within the
existing framework of international law, in particular
international humanitarian law. No retaliation for
Islamist militia action in Gaza should have an impact
on the local civilian population. We deplore the fact
that dozens of Palestinian civilians were injured
last Friday during the March of Return along the
fence separating Gaza and the occupied Palestinian
territories. Whenever demonstrations are peaceful the
people’s human rights must be respected by the Israeli
security forces. Palestinians have the right to demand
the return of their loved ones, and the protests are the
only political tool through which any citizen can freely
exercise that right. In that regard, we urge the Islamist
militias not to interfere in these demonstrations for
their own purposes as insurgents.
We have to reiterate the concerns we have raised
previously about the ongoing incidents that arise from
the fact that Palestinians and settlers are living side by
side in the occupied Palestinian territories. In places
such as Hebron we are seeing these incidents more
and more often, and ensuring protection by the Israeli
occupation forces is now more essential than ever,
18/21

20/06/2019

as they must guard the rights of the citizens of both
sides equally.
Despite the continued efforts of the international
community, the humanitarian situation in Gaza remains
critical. Widespread insecurity, the shortage of jobs,
the inadequacy of basic services and a lack of food and
drinking water all constrict the lives of Gaza’s 2 million
inhabitants, more than half of whom depend on the
humanitarian support of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA). In view of the situation, my delegation
appeals to the Government of Israel to revise its
blockade policy, which is damaging the local economy,
while also urging the international community to
advance the intra-Palestinian reconciliation process,
which is essential if the Palestinian Authority is to
return to Gaza, and encouraging international donors to
provide UNRWA with more financial support in order
to prevent the collapse of its humanitarian services,
which have been suffering financially since last year
and which a majority of Palestinians in Gaza depend on.
Before concluding, I urge Israeli and Palestinian
politicians to try to find ways to reach a definitive
political solution to their differences and to work
together to consider any initiative that could enable
them to find that solution, bearing in mind that no
result can be accepted by the parties unless they can
reach a consensus on it.
Finally, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
continues to align itself with the purposes and principles
of the Security Council concerning the settlement of
conflicts, and we hope that any outcome for the IsraeliPalestinian conflict will be based on these principles.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing on the situation in the Palestinian
occupied territories.
Resolving the Palestinian question and achieving
a comprehensive Middle East settlement based on
Security Council resolutions must remain a priority for
world diplomacy. We say that because the Middle East
is still in the grip of destabilizing trends, many of them
intentionally introduced from outside. The result is that
new crises are piled on top of old ones. In our opinion,
the recent growing tension in the Persian Gulf is being
artificially whipped up. That crisis is threatening peace
and security in the region along with the international
19-18556

20/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

efforts to resolve the crises and conflicts there,
including between Palestine and Israel.
This is an urgent warning. Any adventurist
attempts using force, should they be carried out, will at
the very least bring disaster. It is not hard to predict that
there would be outbreaks of violence and new waves
of migration, and the consequences for anyone making
such attempts would be horrifying. What we need is
immediate de-escalation and efforts to seek a negotiated
settlement of the current disputes. Confrontation must
give way to dialogue, right now. We want to once again
remind the Council of the mandate whereby resolution
598 (1987) requests the Secretary-General to examine
measures for the security of the region in consultation
with the parties in the region. Security is indivisible.
It is one and the same for everyone, without exception,
and no preference for any individual State. A formula
that says what is permitted for some is forbidden for
others is not going to work.
We cannot allow a new fault line to nullify the
positive trends that we have been seeing recently in
the region. Life in most of the Syrian Arab Republic is
gradually returning to normal. Iraq, which has chosen to
make good-neighbourly relations a priority of its foreign
policy, is receiving political and economic assistance.
The Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
are working actively to find formulas for resolving
other conflicts in hotspots in the region. Work is being
done to bolster efforts to combat the threat of terrorism,
which can be defeated only by putting together a front
that is as united as possible.
However, the quest for a solution to the key Middle
East issue of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is still at
an impasse. This area has recently been dominated by
dangerous trends, in the form of unilateral measures
and aggressive revisions of previously settled
agreements. In our view, the international legal basis for
a settlement in the Middle East, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative,
adopted by the Heads of State of the Arab world, and
the Madrid principles, remains inviolable. We see no
alternative to a two-State solution. Any proposals for
improving the economic situation in the Palestinian
territories must be part of a package with the political
components of a settlement, or the peace initiatives
are doomed to failure. We want to point out that there
has been an international consensus on this issue for
many years. The status of the occupied Palestinian
territories and other occupied territories, including the

S/PV. 8557

Syrian Golan, is determined by the relevant Security
Council resolutions. No unilateral steps can change
that reality.
We believe firmly that no breakthroughs can succeed
in isolation. History has shown that. We consider the
Middle East Quartet of international mediators to be
a unique mechanism, endorsed by Security Council
resolutions, and a relevant and essential format. We
would like to remind Council members of the Quartet’s
2016 report, which includes a detailed road map for the
resumption of a sustainable political process.
Historically, Russia has supported trusting,
friendly relations with both the Israelis and the
Palestinians. That is why we believe that establishing a
political process to implement a two-State formula not
only meets Palestinians’ expectations but also satisfies
Israel’s security concerns. We believe it is vital to
involve the countries of the region and the League of
Arab States more actively in the efforts to achieve peace
in Palestine and the Middle East as a whole. We support
a strong and united League with regard to a number of
international issues, including the Palestinian question.
Russia will continue to cooperate in establishing a
positive agenda for a settlement in the Middle East. Our
proposal for holding a summit in Russia between the
leaders of Palestine and Israel remains on the table. It
is high time to implement the Russian initiative for a
Security Council mission to the Middle East. We have
been working for decades to establish contacts with all
the parties, and we can help to restore unity among the
Palestinians. We greatly appreciate the efforts of Egypt
in that regard.
We also need active international measures aimed
at improving the dire humanitarian situation in the
Gaza Strip. However, any assistance for Gaza must be
provided in coordination with the legitimate authorities
under President Abbas and should be part of the efforts
to restore Palestinian unity. We assume that this
principle will guide the work of the United Nations and
all the parties concerned. We will continue our active
support for the work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
which has a serious political dimension as well as a
humanitarian one.
The instability in the Middle East requires united
measures. We urgently need to take steps to overcome
the impasse in the Palestinian-Israeli issue. Measures
must be taken to spread a culture of peace among

19-1855619/21

S/PV.8557

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

religious groups, which will help to prevent new
upheavals based on ethnicity or religion and protect
the Christians and other religious minorities who have
lived in the Middle East for thousands of years and
have been a vital cultural and civilizational element,
professing principles of tolerance, but who have had to
leave the region having become targets of genocide.
However, rather than imposing an outdated herd
mentality aimed against the other, we should act
with a view to creating platforms for dialogue that
will enable us to pursue the quest for solutions to the
security issues in the Middle East. We want to once
again draw attention to the related Russian initiative on
a security architecture for the Middle East. Russia is
ready to cooperate constructively with partners on all
issues on the Middle East agenda on a platform — to
which there is no alternative — for seeking political
ways to overcome the existing challenges. Establishing
joint political rather than military efforts for the Middle
East demands that we renounce any arbitrary concepts
of a rules-based order and return to respect for the
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Kuwait.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing. We emphasize Kuwait’s
full support for his efforts and we look forward to
receiving at least two written reports annually on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), as is the
case with the various other items on the agenda of the
Security Council and in line with presidential note
S/2017/507.
We regret that what we heard today echoed
Mr. Mladenov’s previous nine briefings in bringing
the message that Israel has made no progress in
implementing the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016)
and has not ceased its settlement activities. It continues
to build settlements and seize Palestinian territories,
in flagrant violation of the resolution. Today we would
therefore like to ask a number of important questions
with a view to reminding the Council of the importance
of implementing that resolution in order to achieve the
peace we all desire.
First, how can there be any real progress in the
peace process when Israel, the occupying Power,
20/21

20/06/2019

is continuing its illegal and illegitimate settlement
activities, in complete violation of its commitments
stipulated in international resolutions, agreements and
treaties? They all affirm that Israel’s establishment
of settlements in the Palestinian territory that it has
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, has
no legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation
under international law and a major obstacle to the
achievement of a two-State solution and a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace. They also stress that ending
all Israeli settlement activities is essential if a twoState solution is to be salvaged. We call on Israel to
immediately and completely cease all its settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory and fully
respect its legal obligations. It must also cease any
unilateral measures such as annexing land by force or
freezing parts of Palestinian tax revenues, and must pay
those tax revenues in full to the Palestinian Government.
Secondly, how can we see any true progress in the
peace process when acts of violence by settlers against
Palestinian civilians increase on a daily basis? It has
been painful to witness the ongoing Israeli attacks
even during the holy month of Ramadan, in addition
to threats, provocations and hate speech, in flagrant
violation of the international resolutions that call for
taking immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence
against civilians, including acts of provocation and
destruction. We reiterate the importance of reviewing
the options mentioned in the Secretary-General’s latest
report on the protection of Palestinian civilians.
Thirdly, how can we see genuine progress in the
peace process when the blockade of the Gaza Strip is
now in its twelfth year and is a direct cause of the dire
situation there that has left millions of civilians on the
brink of economic, medical and humanitarian collapse?
The Israeli forces have continued to target unarmed
civilians participating in the demonstrations of the
Great March of Return, and the death toll has reached
279 Palestinians, including 56 children.
Fourthly, how can we see genuine progress in
the peace process when Israel, the occupying Power,
continues to violate the sanctity of Christian and
Muslim holy sites by implementing measures and
policies aimed at changing the historic character of
Jerusalem — in violation of resolutions 476 (1980) and
478 (1980), which condemn any attempts to change
the demographic composition and character of the
Palestinian territory that has been occupied since 1967,
including East Jerusalem — as well as building or
19-18556

20/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

expanding settlements, moving Israeli settlers, seizing
land, destroying homes and displacing Palestinian
civilians in violation of international humanitarian
law and the relevant resolutions. The Council will not
recognize any changes to the borders of 4 June 1967,
including those regarding Jerusalem, except when they
are agreed to by both parties, through negotiations.
Fifthly, how can we see real progress in the peace
process and the settlement of the conflict when the
Security Council fails to address all of these and
many other violations? The international community
cannot remain silent while the crimes continue to be
committed against the Palestinian people under Israeli
occupation. We must act to uphold our commitments
under international humanitarian law and human rights
law, as well as the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention, and
to guarantee protection of and respect for the civil rights
of those living under occupation, without exception.
In that context, we renew our support for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and its role of
providing the necessary educational, health and social
services to the Palestinian refugee community. We look
forward to the donor conference for UNRWA, which
will be held next week in New York. It is our pleasure
to see the State of Kuwait is on the list of the Agency’s
main partners. In the past four years alone, we have
provided the Agency with voluntary contributions of
$113 million.
It is more important than ever to implement all the
provisions of resolution 2334 (2016), which provides
a realistic mechanism for rebuilding trust between
parties and relaunching the negotiation process based
on resolutions of international legitimacy and agreed

S/PV. 8557

international principles. That was reaffirmed at the
latest Arab Summit, held in Tunisia; the first ArabEuropean Summit, held recently in Sharm El-Sheikh;
and the fourteenth Organization of Islamic Cooperation
Summit, held on 31 May in Mecca. Those summits
confirmed once again that Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories are illegal and that it is
important to remain committed to the two-State solution
in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions.
That is the only realistic way to end the occupation
that began in 1967, including of East Jerusalem, and to
reach a just, lasting and comprehensive peace between
Israelis and Palestinians.
In conclusion, we renew our commitment to peace
as a strategic choice and to resolving the Arab-Israeli
conflict in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of international legitimacy, international law and
all provisions of the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative. The
Initiative stipulates that comprehensive peace and
normalized relations with Israel must be preceded by an
end to the occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories
it has occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem.
Israel must recognize the State of Palestine and the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
their rights to self-determination; to establish their
independent State on their territories, with Jerusalem
as its capital; to return; to compensation for Palestinian
refugees; and a fair solution to their issue, based on
General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

19-1855621/21
