asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6878

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6878th meeting
Tuesday, 4 December 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Loulichki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Morocco)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Mr. M’Beou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-62653 (E)

*1262653*

S/PV.6878

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Arabic): As this is the first
meeting of the Council for the month of December 2012,
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Ambassador
Hardeep Singh Puri, Permanent Representative of
India, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of November 2012. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council when I express
my deep appreciation to Ambassador Singh Puri and
his delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General for Yemen, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Benomar:
Mr. Benomar (spoke in Arabic): Yemen has just
witnessed a historic milestone. On 23 November,
it marked the first anniversary of the signing of its
Peace and Transition Agreement. Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon personally attended the ceremony to
commemorate that achievement. At that time, he
assured the people of Yemen of the full support of the
United Nations for their peaceful transition. During the
preceding months, most people would not have believed
such an agreement possible. Indeed, during that period,
in Yemen, I saw a nation in turmoil and a State on the
verge of collapse.
I saw the capital city, Sana’a, divided and under
artillery fire, making life for the civilian population
unbearable. I saw and was among demonstrators calling
for change, as, for months, they camped out in tents on
the streets and squares of the capital and other major

2

cities. I went to the north of the country, where armed
conflict persists and armed clashes still occur. I was
also in the south, where the future unity of the country
remains an open question.
During this period, most Yemenis have been living
in darkness, suffering from shortages in basic food
supplies and cooking fuel. Moreover, we all observed
with increasing alarm how Al-Qaida managed to
expand its influence, at one point gaining control over
significant swathes of territory in the south. Conflict
and insecurity prevailed, and there was a real threat
that the situation would degenerate into a full-scale
civil war.
During that period of protracted stalemate, the
Secretary-General took the initiative to utilize his
good offices to help resolve the deadlock when the
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) initiative failed to
be implemented. In the end, after six intensive trips to
Yemen, we managed to find a way forward and reach an
agreement, building on resolution 2014 (2011) adopted
in October 2011, which called for a political settlement,
and on the tremendous efforts of the GCC.
The Transition Agreement, which we named the
Implementation Mechanism of the GCC initiative, was
signed on 23 November 2011. It engaged the former
regime and opposition in a clear process for a transition
to good democratic governance. The Agreement went
far beyond simply replacing one individual or governing
party with another.
Rather than resigning, President Saleh agreed to
transfer his powers to his deputy and to make way for
early presidential elections. All sides agreed to support
a consensus candidate who commanded the trust and
respect of all. A Government of National Unity would
exercise power during a two-year transition phase,
during which the military and security forces would
be restructured under a unified command, a National
Dialogue Conference leading to a constitution-draft
process would be held, the resulting draft constitution
would be approved by referendum and, finally, a fresh
set of elections would be set for February 2014.
We made sure the following elements were included
in the agreement: a path for fundamental reforms in the
practice of governance and redress for the wrongs of
the past; recognition of the role of youth and a clear
path for their participation in the transition and the
realization of their aspirations; a focus on political
inclusion that could give an opportunity for the people

12-62653

S/PV.6878

of Yemen to shape their country’s future and establish
a new constitutional order; and the full participation of
women throughout the entirety of the process.
Through that framework, the handover of power to a
Government of National Unity took place successfully.
In February 2012, the second phase of the transition
was ushered in when President Mansour was elected
by an overwhelming majority, in a poll that was at
the same time a kind of referendum on the November
agreement and on the transition itself. Today, one year
later, an air of normality has taken hold in most parts
of the country.
I wish to take this opportunity to commend
President Mansour for his leadership. I also commend
the efforts of Prime Minister Basendwah’s Government,
which have allowed the country to move forward. The
fight for control of the cities by rival militias has ended,
with freedom of movement restored throughout major
urban centres.
However, we cannot overlook the fact that the
road ahead remains long and arduous and that Yemen
continues to face grave challenges on multiple fronts.
First, there is the difficult issue of restructuring the
military. The armed forces remain divided between
two sides. One camp, the powerful Republican Guards,
is led by the former President’s son, and the other,
the 1st Armoured Division, is led by General Ali
Mohsen, who broke from the regime during last year’s
uprising. Corruption remains widespread throughout
the institution. A system of patronage favours loyalty
to military leaders and not the State. Some top military
leaders are publicly engaged in business and politics.
Army commanders are able to engage in murky business
dealings, including the smuggling of subsidized fuel,
inflating the numbers of those in service and pocketing
the excess income from ghost positions. President
Mansour has taken initial and courageous steps to
address military reform. However, the formidable task
of integrating the military and security forces under one
command will remain a serious challenge during the
transition, and will require comprehensive, systemic
institutional reform.
State authority remains limited in parts of the
country. Clashes between the Houthis and Salafists
and tribal groups associated with the Islah party have
left dozens of people dead in the north. The country
remains awash with arms, with new shipments still
reportedly coming in.

12-62653

Terrorism remains a serious threat. In June,
Government forces under President Mansour’s
leadership were able to dislodge Al-Qaida elements
from areas that had fallen under its control. However,
that has led Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula to desert
the open areas and instead disperse and infiltrate major
cities. The continuous spate of terrorist attacks against
Government targets in Sana’a is evidence of that
development, including last week’s abhorrent killing of
a Saudi military attaché.
In terms of governance, one year into the transition,
it is clear that the honeymoon period is over. Yemenis
now expect the Government to deliver concrete
results — to provide better security for the nation
and basic social services. Coalition Governments are,
however, often the product of unhappy relationships and
are bound together in unnatural partnerships. In this
case, the distrust between the two principal political
blocs that constitute the Government of National
Unity has never dissipated and remains entrenched.
Disputes over civil service appointments are just
one example of the issues polarizing the two sides:
the Genereal People’s Congress (GPC) feels that it is
being unfairly targeted for removal, while the former
opposition, which is now in the Government, complains
of insufficient representation and remains adamant in
seeking appointments for key positions.
While both sides signed on to take part in a
Government of National Unity, their war continues
through the media. Partisan reporting by media outlets
owned by each side continues to inflame an already
acrimonious and tense relationship. Former President
Saleh remains active as the leader of the GPC party — and
often acts as the leader of the opposition, demonizing
the Government of National Unity — despite it being
half-composed of his own party and allies. What many
politicians fail to realize is that the political landscape
is changing, with prospects for shifting alliances. They
continue to view the situation with a perspective locked
in the past and in static alliances, rather than looking
ahead to the future and to new realignments.
Unrest in the south has its roots in the
marginalization and discrimination of southerners
that has taken place since unification, including their
perceived lack of access to resources and opportunities.
Long-standing grievances have left many in the
south feeling excluded. Since 2007, southerners have
mobilized to demand equal access to employment and
Government services, land reform and a certain degree

3

S/PV.6878

of local autonomy. That movement, known as the
Hiraak, began as a rights-based movement demanding
equality under the rule of law. Years of empty promises
have deepened resentments and radicalized some in the
movement toward a maximalist agenda for a separate
State.

The continuous engagement of Yemen’s development
partners, together with the establishment of a new
intra-governmental coordinating body to support
the implementation of the pledges, will help channel
funds effectively, so that Yemenis can start seeing an
improvement in their daily lives.

In my outreach to Hiraak leaders in Aden and Cairo,
I explained to them that the National Dialogue provided
an opportunity to address the southern question
through dialogue and compromise, and in accordance
with Security Council resolutions. I urged them to
renounce violence and to participate in the process with
no preconditions. I also urged the Government to take
confidence-building measures to address the grievances
of southerners — of those who were unjustly dismissed
from the civil service or discharged from the military
in the aftermath of the 1994 war, as well as those whose
land and other properties were confiscated. Concrete
progress with regard to those two matters would provide
an enabling environment for a constructive start to the
National Dialogue.

The upcoming National Dialogue provides an
opportunity for Yemenis to build a future that meets
the aspirations of all. In that regard, the preparatory
committee for the National Dialogue, as an allinclusive body, may serve as the crucible for the new
Yemen. My team and I have spent many long days
and hours working with the committee. It has been a
great inspiration to see youth, women, civil society
and representatives of political parties, along with
representatives from the south and of the Al-Houthis,
participating constructively within the committee.
Indeed, the diverse composition and deliberative
style of work of the committee, often with a good
spirit resulting from the genuine commitment of the
participants, have helped them reach decisions based
on consensus and compromise.

Yemen’s humanitarian situation remains in acute
crisis. Our humanitarian colleagues and workers tell
us that nearly half the population of Yemen are food
insecure, with an alarming number living on the edge
of starvation. A quarter of a million children are
severely malnourished and at risk of dying without
proper nutrition interventions. Access to clean water
eludes more than half the population, and basic health
care remains an aspiration for nearly a quarter of the
population. Struggling to provide basic services, Yemen
is nonetheless one of the most generous refugee-hosting
countries, with more than 230,000 refugees and
500,000 internally displaced persons. The 2012
Yemen Humanitarian Response Plan, which requires
$585 million dollars, is only 57 per cent funded. That
leaves a funding gap of more than $250 million.
On the economic front, there are modest signs of
progress. Inflation is decreasing and the decline in
economic activity has slowed. The exchange rate, which
fluctuated during 2011, has now stabilized and reached
the same levels as before the crisis. The momentum
of Yemen’s transition and recovery must be sustained
with strong support from the international community,
especially its regional partners. Through meetings
in Riyadh and in New York, Yemen’s partners have
confirmed their commitment by pledging more than
$7.5 billion to help Yemen with its economic recovery.

4

A few days ago, the committee became deadlocked
over the issue of representation and the allocation of
seats at the upcoming Conference. At their request, I
put forward ideas to help the National Dialogue process
move forward, while stressing that there is no one
ideal formula that could satisfy all stakeholders. I am
pleased that, with that last contentious issue resolved,
the committee’s long hours and efforts are coming to
a conclusion. The fruits of their efforts will soon be
seen in the delivery of a final report and other elements
finalizing the rules and structure of the Conference.
Fully consistent with United Nations standards, we
have been successful in supporting the demands of
local women’s groups that women should constitute at
least 30 per cent of those taking part in the National
Dialogue.
We have been actively supporting preparations for
the National Dialogue through initial funding from
the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund. We have
now established a multi-donor trust fund to channel
international support for the process in a coordinated
fashion and to encourage all donors to contribute so
as to ensure the timely launch of an effective National
Dialogue Conference. Our assistance will continue
through the period of the constitution-drafting process
and the holding of elections.

12-62653

S/PV.6878

I am pleased to report that a new electoral
commission has been established by presidential
decree. In order to keep within the transition timeline,
it will be critical for the new commission to focus on
creating a new voter registry. The road towards new
elections remains long and difficult.
For the country to move forward, a true reckoning
with past injustices, as well as steps to heal old wounds,
are essential. There is a strong sense among Yemenis
that the transition will remain in suspension in the
absence of reconciliation efforts, including restitution
or compensation for victims as well as guarantees
against recurrence and an end to impunity. With those
aims in mind, we hope that an amended draft law on
transitional justice and national reconciliation will be
adopted by consensus.
The transition is threatened by those who have still
not understood that change must occur now. Spoilers
of all sorts have not given up. They remain anxious to
impede the transition and to profit from instability. In
the past few days, Yemenis have once again been left
in darkness without electricity. Oil and gas pipelines
continue to be subject to attack, causing the Yemeni
treasury losses amounting to hundreds of millions of
dollars in revenue. Many Yemenis expect the Security
Council to keep a careful watch on the spoilers’ actions
and to hold them to account.
We will continue to work closely with members of
the Security Council, the Gulf Cooperation Council,
the European Union and other international partners,
in particular with the active diplomatic community in
Sana’a, to support Yemen’s transition. We count on the
continued consensus in the Security Council, which has
played a crucial role in supporting a peaceful transition
in Yemen, to keep the transition on track to deliver
within the agreed timeline.
We are all determined to continue supporting
a transition that is unique in the region, one that is
based on a clear road map. The transition enjoys
the overwhelming endorsement and support of the
population. It is a transition that offers an opportunity
for meaningful participation by all — men, women,
young and old. And it is a transition that offers a genuine
opportunity to unlock the potential that we all see in
Yemen. Yet, while there are tremendous challenges,
I am convinced that Yemen has the potential to be a
prosperous country, one that can become stable and

12-62653

governed according to the genuine will and aspirations
of its population.
Change in the region has all too often been
accompanied by sacrifices that should not have been
necessary and that we cannot ignore. The Yemenis have
shown us, however, that the time of the gun as a tool
for answering the legitimate aspirations of citizens has
passed and that a peaceful transformation can emerge
from the ashes of conflict. As the Secretary-General
observed during his visit to the country two weeks
ago, Yemeni men and women have armed themselves
instead with the principles of wisdom, mutual respect
and peaceful interaction, and have thus avoided the
abyss of civil strife. Let us continue our work together
to support the profound transformation that the country
is now undertaking.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Benomar for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): First, let
me take this opportunity to congratulate the President
and the Moroccan delegation on assuming the presidency
for the month of December, and also to warmly thank
Ambassador Hardeep Singh Puri and his delegation
for India’s excellent stewardship of the Council during
the course of the busy month of November. I should
also like to express particular appreciation to Special
Adviser Jamal Benomar for his briefing and for the
remarkable efforts and his tireless commitment since
his appointment to that position.
Much has been achieved in Yemen since the
signing of the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative on
23 November 2011. The international community’s
focus, as demonstrated through the SecretaryGeneral’s visit last month and the continued hard work
of Mr. Benomar, is paying dividends. The next crucial
steps will need to be to build on the reforms by the
Yemeni Government and to ensure a permanent lasting
change that fulfils people’s basic rights to freedom and
democracy.
Yemen’s immediate challenge is to begin
a transparent and inclusive National Dialogue
Conference. The United Kingdom welcomes President
Mansour’s 13 November announcement of the imminent
start of the Conference and the allocation of seats to
the participants. The challenge now is threefold: first,

5

S/PV.6878

to ensure that the National Dialogue begins this year;
secondly, that it addresses all of Yemen’s key challenges;
and thirdly, that it is representative of women, youth
and all political parties. Outcomes should benefit the
many, not just the few. All those who want to play a part
in shaping Yemen’s future must do so via the National
Dialogue Conference.

The United Kingdom Foreign Secretary, as Co-Chair,
said in conclusion at the Friends of Yemen ministerial
meeting in New York that the challenge now is to turn
those pledges into action, to ensure rapid and effective
implementation on the ground in Yemen so that the
pledges quickly start to make a difference to the Yemeni
people. That remains an urgent task.

The appointment of a new electoral commission
and the subsequent preparations for the constitutional
referendum and 2014 elections are also central
to the transition process. Updating the voter list
must not be delayed. There is a genuine risk of the
Yemeni Government not being prepared in time for a
referendum next autumn, and that could cause delays to
full elections in early 2014. Such a scenario would have
significant implications for the political transition.

In conclusion, let me echo what the Special Adviser
has just said about how far things have moved in Yemen
over the last year. We have progressed from a situation
of acute division, political stalemate, daily disturbances
and armed clashes to one in which a process of dialogue
and transition is now under way. There are formidable
challenges remaining, and the Special Adviser is right
to highlight them. They demand the Council’s continued
close scrutiny. But they should not obscure the progress
that has been achieved. Yemen demonstrates the value
of the Security Council engaging actively in conflict
prevention and coming together in a united way in
support of the effective application of the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices, notably through resolution
2051(2012), which lent strong support to the transition
process and made clear the Council’s readiness to
consider further measures in response to actions aimed
at undermining the political transition.

President Mansour has led a successful military
campaign in southern Yemen, regaining much of the
country lost to Al-Qaida. Despite those successes,
there has been a worrying increase in attacks targeting
military and political personnel. The United Kingdom
condemns such cowardly acts, which inevitably hurt
ordinary Yemenis. Those responsible must be sought
out and brought to justice.
We continue to see negative actions and hear
inflammatory statements from certain individuals,
whom Mr. Benomar called “spoilers”, who wish to
derail the political transition and deny the Yemeni
people what is rightfully theirs: change, stability and a
prosperous future. The United Kingdom reminds those
intent on disrupting peaceful transition that the Security
Council will not hesitate to implement measures under
Article 41 to ensure that the transition remains on track,
as stated in resolution 2051 (2012). The Yemeni people
demand no less.
The 2013 United Nations humanitarian appeal
estimates that more than 12 million Yemenis — around
half the population — are now in acute need of
assistance. It is vital that the international community
enhance its support. The United Kingdom Government
recently launched a $56-million nutrition programme
and a $13-million food security programme, which
will support 2 million Yemenis. In September, the
Yemeni Government received significant international
political and financial support in the shape of both the
Riyadh donors’ conference and the Friends of Yemen
meeting held here in New York. This demonstrates
that the efforts made by President Mansour so far have
the strong support of the international community.
6

Through the hard work, determination and
perseverance of President Mansour and his Government
of National Unity, backed by the United Nations, the
Friends of Yemen and the international community, a
more positive future for generations of Yemenis is now
within reach.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate
Morocco on assuming the presidency of the Council
for this month. I believe that under your leadership our
work this month will be very fruitful. I also wish to
take this opportunity to express my appreciation and
congratulations to Ambassador Hardeep Singh Puri,
the Permanent Representative of India, and his team for
the wonderful work they accomplished during India’s
presidency in November. I would like to thank Special
Adviser Benomar for his briefing.
More than a year ago, the parties in Yemen,
through dialogue and consultation, succeeded in
signing the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Initiative
and Implementation Mechanism. This is a political
transition process completely led by the Yemeni people.
In view of Yemen’s political, security, development and
humanitarian situation, and based on respect for the
12-62653

S/PV.6878

will of the Yemeni Government and people, the Security
Council has issued multiple presidential statements on
the situation there and has adopted resolutions 2014
(2011) and 2051 (2012).
The political transition process in Yemen has made
progress, and the people are carefully implementing the
Council’s relevant resolutions and the GCC Initiative and
Implementation Mechanism. A supreme commission
for the election referendum has been established, and
the National Dialogue Conference will be launched
soon. The Yemeni Government has drafted a national
strategy and development transition plan outlining
steps for future development. China welcomes this.
Meanwhile, the future development of Yemen still
faces many challenges. As to how to deal with the
issues I have mentioned at the next stage, I would like
to make the following four points.
First, Yemen should be supported in its efforts
to uphold peace and move forward with the political
process. The Yemeni people should continue to lead
that process. The international community should fully
respect Yemen’s sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity, as well as the rights of the Yemeni
people to choose their own development path. China
supports various parties in Yemen in carrying out,
in accordance with the relevant Council resolution,
the GCC Initiative and Implementation Mechanism,
and in resolving their differences through dialogue
and consultation, as well as in launching the National
Dialogue Conference on time.
Secondly, we should support Yemen’s efforts to
maintain State security and stability. The international
community should continue to support the Government
in strengthening capacity-building for the security
sector, guarding against and containing the spread
of terrorism and safeguarding State security and
territorial integrity. The international community
should work more closely with the Government, adopt
a holistic approach in dealing with the security threats
Yemen faces and help to eliminate breeding grounds for
terrorism, with the aim of achieving long-term stability
and security.
Thirdly, we should help Yemen to speed up its
economic and social reconstruction. The international
community should honour its aid commitments to
Yemen, help it overcome the current serious economic
and social development challenges and alleviate its

12-62653

humanitarian needs. Substantive progress in Yemen’s
social and economic reconstruction would also be
conducive to smooth completion of the political process.
Fourthly, we should continue to support the
good offices of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Mr. Benomar, the Special Adviser. China welcomes
the GCC’s continuing important role in seeking an
appropriate settlement to this issue. The international
community can coordinate its help and support for the
Yemeni Government through the Friends of Yemen.
The Chinese Government has consistently
supported the Yemeni Government’s efforts to promote
domestic political, economic and social reforms. Over
the years, we have provided assistance, within our
capacity, to Yemen’s economic and social development
and its endeavours to improve its people’s wellbeing. That assistance has been used for economic
and social development programmes, to improve the
humanitarian situation and to help the Government and
people overcome their difficulties. China will continue
to provide what assistance it can through various
means, and to work with the rest of the international
community to carry out positive efforts to help Yemen
move forward with its political transition process and
economic reconstruction, in order to achieve long-term
stability and development.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): Allow me to congratulate
you and your delegation, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of December. Please be assured of our
full support. We also commend the Indian delegation
for its excellent stewardship of the Council during a
very busy November.
South Africa thanks the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jamal Benomar, for his briefing
to the Council today. We once again applaud his efforts
and encourage him to continue to work with the parties
in their attempts to fully implement the Transition
Agreement. We particularly welcome the progress
made towards the preparations for the National
Dialogue Conference, which was scheduled to resume
in mid-November. Mr. Benomar and his team’s efforts
to support the Yemeni stakeholders in their preparations
for the National Dialogue are commendable. We also
appreciate the attempts to ensure that the National
Dialogue is as inclusive as possible so as to prevent
potential dissent from those who may be disgruntled if
left out of the process.

7

S/PV.6878

Last month marked the first anniversary of the
historic Transition Agreement signed by the Yemeni
parties in November 2011. The signing of that
Agreement paved the way for a constructive path for
the people of Yemen through a peaceful transfer of
power, elections, national dialogue and constitutional
reforms. We are disappointed that the National
Dialogue Conference could not resume in November as
originally scheduled, owing to secessionist tendencies
in the South, which have continued to derail progress
in the country’s transitional process. However, we
welcome the agreement by the parties on the allocation
of seats for the forthcoming Conference. That important
Conference should be convened as soon as possible so
as to pave the way for a new political order in Yemen.
We also welcome the promulgation of the presidential
decree establishing the Supreme Commission on
Elections and Referendums, which will play a
significant role in the preparations for the presidential
and parliamentary elections to be held in 2014.
The continuing tensions among political parties
have the potential to derail the transitional process. We
urge all Yemeni stakeholders to forego narrow political
positions and to focus on the bigger picture regarding
the unity and stability of the country. We encourage
the Yemeni authorities to intensify their efforts towards
the reunification and reconciliation of the population
in order to heal all wounds and create a new future
devoid of grudges and factionalism. All stakeholders,
in particular young people, should be included in that
process.
The Secretary-General’s recent visit to Yemen
was a significant moment indicating the support of the
United Nations for the people of Yemen in their time
of need. We echo his words, which I quote: “This is a
process which must be irreversible: there is no turning
back”.
President Saleh and his allies should be condemned
for the destructive role that they continue to play in
Yemeni politics. Counterproductive activities must
be discouraged, and those responsible for acts of
aggression must be cautioned. The growing number of
terrorist activities in the country is deeply worrying. In
particular, we are deeply concerned about the presence
and expansion of Al-Qaida, especially in the South. It is
important that the international community support the
Yemeni authorities in dealing with that threat, which
is likely to spill over to the rest of the region if left
unchecked.
8

The deteriorating socioeconomic and humanitarian
situation in Yemen is still a cause of concern. We call on
the international community to provide urgent support
to alleviate that situation. In that regard, we welcome
the meetings of the Friends of Yemen, which continue
to provide an opportunity to pledge significant support
to the transitional process.
Yemen is very different today from what it was a
year ago. Significant progress has been made in moving
the country towards democracy and stability. It is worth
noting that the success of the mediation in Yemen
was, to a great extent, a result of positive cooperation
between the United Nations in general and the Security
Council in particular, regional organizations and other
international stakeholders. Specifically, the Security
Council, which is divided on many critical issues,
spoke with one voice and cooperated with regional
organizations, principal among which was the Gulf
Cooperation Council. That shows that working together
we can accomplish more.
Finally, we support the idea of a Council visit, and
we would encourage the Council to visit Yemen at an
appropriate time. We believe that a visit to Yemen would
bolster the efforts of President Mansour and unblock
some of the bottlenecks in the transitional process. A
visit would also indicate to the people of Yemen that
the Council is accompanying them in their transition
towards a new phase in their country’s history.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
wish to join others in congratulating you, Sir, upon
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
December, and to thank Ambassador Puri and his team
for their leadership of the Council last month. Let me
also thank Special Adviser Benomar for his briefing.
We appreciate his hard work to support the National
Dialogue and the broader transition process in Yemen.
My remarks today will focus on three areas. First,
the United States remains committed to working
with President Mansour, the people of Yemen and
the international community to support a successful
National Dialogue. Secondly, the international
community must work to translate recent Friends of
Yemen pledges into concrete aid through the Mutual
Accountability Framework. Thirdly, we must continue
to oppose those who seek to undermine Yemen’s
progress.
On 23 November, we marked the first anniversary
of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Initiative

12-62653

S/PV.6878

and Implementation Mechanism, which laid the
groundwork for Yemen’s political transition. To meet
the goals laid out one year ago, President Hadi Mansour
and the people of Yemen must move forward with an
inclusive, transparent and timely National Dialogue
to build consensus on issues fundamental to Yemen’s
future, including the structure of the Government and
constitutional reform.
We welcome the recent announcement regarding
progress on the composition of the National Dialogue,
and we look forward to hearing more details and a
timeframe for the dialogue to commence. We also
commend the efforts of the preparatory committee and
the United Nations Special Adviser to ensure that the
dialogue includes representatives from all elements of
Yemeni society, including political parties, southerners,
Houthis, women and youth. The outreach and support of
Special Adviser Benomar will continue to be important
as Yemen turns its attention from the preparations for a
dialogue to substantive questions of reform.
Beyond the National Dialogue, we also need to
consider several other issues that are important for a
successful political transition. We welcome President
Mansour’s 29 November decree naming a new Supreme
Commission for Elections and Referendums. We hope
the Commission will be empowered to update Yemen’s
voter rolls and complete other steps necessary for the
constitutional referendum in 2013 and elections for the
presidency in February 2014.
Separately, a focus on transitional justice
would promote accountability, the rule of law and
reconciliation, furthering reinforcing stability in
Yemen. We look forward to hearing more regarding
progress in those areas.
With nearly half of Yemen’s population lacking
adequate food and basic services, humanitarian
assistance remains critical to achieving stability.
In September, the Friends of Yemen pledged over
$7 billion to bolster the ongoing transition and address
Yemen’s basic needs. We commend the generosity of
our international partners and call on them to follow
through on their pledges in support of the priorities
that the Yemeni Government has laid out in the Mutual
Accountability Framework. We also urge donors to
contribute to the United Nations 2012 humanitarian
response plan, which, as we heard earlier, remains only
57 per cent funded, as well as the 2013 appeal expected
this month. For our part, the United States has more

12-62653

than doubled its assistance to Yemen, including over
$117 million in humanitarian assistance in fiscal year
2012.
While humanitarian assistance is critical in the near
term, there can be no lasting stability in Yemen without
economic progress. The United States is partnering with
the Yemeni Government, the private sector and civil
society to promote long-term sustainable development,
boost economic activity and reform, and strengthen
investment opportunities.
Our Ambassador to Yemen recently brought a
trade mission to the United States, during which
Yemeni business leaders met with companies and
organizations throughout the United States to explore
potential cooperation in areas such as renewable
energy and water resources. We are also partnering
with Yemeni ministries to expand essential services,
improve efficiency, combat corruption and enhance
transparency. Progress in those areas could do much to
solidify Yemen’s transition.
The international community must also remain
resolute in confronting violent extremists and others
who attempt to block Yemen’s progress. Attacks on
Government officials and other civilians cannot be
justified, and we condemn such acts of terrorism in
the strongest possible terms. We also recognize the
enormous personal sacrifice and commitment of the
Yemeni military and police, who have helped to turn
the tide against those who attempt to use violence as a
means to block positive change.
In line with the terms of the GCC implementation
mechanism, we strongly support President Mansour’s
decrees to restructure Yemen’s military and security
institutions, which the Council also called for in
resolution 2051 (2012).
We call on all Yemenis to show that they will put
Yemen’s national interests ahead of parochial concerns
and abide by the letter and spirit of the GCC Agreement.
In May 2012, President Obama signed an executive
order that allows the United States to take action
against those who seek to undermine the transition.
Shortly thereafter, resolution 2051 (2012) affirmed
the Council’s willingness to consider measures under
Article 41 of the United Nations Charter for the same
purpose. We will continue to follow closely any efforts
to undermine the Government of National Unity and

9

S/PV.6878

the political transition, and we are ready to consider
further action, as appropriate.
Last year, hundreds of thousands of Yemeni men
and women took to the streets to courageously demand
reform. Their courage initiated a historic transition.
The United States is committed to doing its utmost to
continue supporting these aspirations for a democratic,
stable and prosperous Yemen.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Mr. President, I
wish at the outset to express my congratulations and
best wishes for your tenure during this month. You
know, Sir, that you can count on our full support.
I wish also to say a very warm word of appreciation
and thanks to Ambassador Puri and his team for the
way they conducted our business in the most efficient
way during what was a very busy month. I also thank
the United Nations in general for providing us with a
Yemeni-like temperature today, which I think is very
appropriate for our debate.
I wish to thank Mr. Benomar for his briefing and
especially for his commitment to and continued efforts
in support of a democratic transition in Yemen. He has
given us a very full, correct and precise report on the
situation, the achievements made and the challenges
ahead.
Let me also say a word of appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his continued good offices. We
welcome his recent trip to Yemen on the occasion of
the first anniversary of the signing of Yemen’s historic
Transition Agreement, and we fully support his message
of praise and encouragement to the people of Yemen.
Indeed, under the able leadership of President
Mansour, Yemen has come a long way over the
course of the past year, despite the many difficulties
encountered. The transition process remains largely on
track and several important benchmarks have been met,
the latest of which are the agreement on the distribution
of seats in the National Dialogue Conference and the
establishment of the Supreme Commission for Elections
and Referendum.
We warmly welcome these much-awaited
developments and look forward to the early launch
of a National Dialogue Conference that makes allows
for a participatory, representative, transparent and
meaningful process and engages effectively all regions,
groups and segments of Yemeni society, including
women and young people.

10

Notwithstanding the numerous accomplishments
registered, the challenges are manifold. Heinous acts
of terrorism continue to claim lives and destroy public
and economic infrastructures. Portugal vehemently
condemns any such acts, which are criminal and
unjustifiable regardless of their motivation, wherever,
whenever and by whomsoever committed, and we fully
support Yemen’s efforts to combat terrorism.
While calm has returned to many parts of the
country, security is still an issue of concern. We
welcome the achievements of the Committee on Military
Affairs and encourage further measures to complete the
restructuring of the security and armed forces under
a unified, professional leadership structure, which is
essential to guaranteeing State authority and law and
order throughout the country.
In addition, it remains necessary urgently to
address the economic and humanitarian situation,
notwithstanding the fact that some progress has been
made, as we heard from Mr. Benomar. Although
many people have recently returned to their homes,
thousands remain displaced and deprived of the most
basic services and needs. We are particularly troubled
by the hundreds of thousands of children under the age
of 5 who suffer from malnutrition. Equally disturbing
are reports that the education of children continues to
be disrupted by attacks against and the occupation of
schools, which we strongly condemn.
We welcome the commitment made by the
Government of National Unity to end the use and
recruitment of children by the Yemeni armed forces and
call on all parties to urgently end such unlawful acts.
We are hopeful that the National Dialogue Conference
will enable concrete advances to be made on the issue
of transitional justice. Grievances will need to be
resolved if a peaceful and lasting democratic transition
is to succeed. On the other hand, all those responsible
for human rights violations and abuses must be held
accountable. The National Dialogue Conference
may also provide a valuable forum to respond to the
concerns of those that have distanced themselves from
the process in a way that preserves the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Yemen.
In conclusion, Yemen has come a long way,
but there is still a long and difficult road ahead, as
Mr. Benomar indicated. We call on all Yemenis to build
on the progress of the past year and to press ahead
with the next phase of the transition process, during
which a number of key milestones are to be reached.
12-62653

S/PV.6878

Those include, first, the convening of an all-inclusive
National Dialogue Conference; secondly, constitutional
and electoral reform to prepare for general elections by
February 2014; and, thirdly, steps to address transitional
justice and support national reconciliation.
Steady progress on such complex and sensitive
issues will not be easy. The international community
must therefore continue to support the people of
Yemen. The United Nations and the Security Council
in particular must remain vigilant and ensure that
all parties abide by resolutions 2014 (2011) and 2051
(2012). The full implementation of those resolutions
is essential for a peaceful, inclusive, orderly and
Yemeni-led political transition that meets the legitimate
demands and aspirations of the Yemeni people for
peaceful change and meaningful political, economic
and social reform.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
I wish to congratulate you, Sir, and your delegation
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December. I wish you great
success in your stewardship of the Council and assure
you of my delegation’s full support and cooperation.
I wish also to thank colleagues for their kind words
concerning India’s presidency last month.
I thank Special Adviser Jamal Benomar for his
comprehensive briefing on recent developments in
Yemen, including the Secretary-General’s recent visit
to Sana’a to mark the anniversary of the signing of the
agreement brokered by the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC).
Nearly a year ago, when the Security Council
adopted resolution 2014 (2011), Yemen was facing
a serious situation on the political, security and
humanitarian fronts. On the one hand, the Yemeni
people’s aspirations for democratic transformation
and a stable and secure future were thwarted due
to divisions among the political class. On the other
hand, extremist and terrorist groups, some linked to
Al-Qaida, were expanding their presence in various
parts of the country, particularly in the south. Clashes
among various factions of the military had led to the
deaths of several hundred Yemenis.
By virtue of the unanimous support of the
international community, anchored in the Security
Council, the efforts of the GCC succeeded, resulting in
the signing of an agreement between the main Yemeni
parties. It is a great tribute to the Yemeni people and their

12-62653

leadership that the country is making steady progress
in the implementation of the Transition Agreement. We
commend President Mansour, whose leadership of the
transition process has made an immense contribution
in turning a situation of despair into one of hope for
a stable, secure, democratic and prosperous Yemen.
We would also like to congratulate the Yemeni people
for their determination to resolve current challenges
through an inclusive, Yemeni-led political process.
India stands by the people and the Government
of Yemen in their journey towards a stable, secure,
prosperous and democratic future. Despite the
significant progress made during the past year, Yemen
continues to face multiple political, security, economic
and humanitarian challenges.
The political situation remains delicate. The
political parties and regional stakeholders have yet to
overcome differences over important issues, including
transitional justice and reconciliation. The fragility
of the situation has compounded the humanitarian
situation affecting nearly 10 million Yemenis.
Al-Qaida and affiliated militant groups continue
to carry out attacks against Government institutions
and officials. Tribal militias also continue hostilities in
the southern and northern parts of Yemen. We strongly
condemn all terrorist acts and violence in Yemen and
urge all groups to lay down their arms and join the
political process to address their grievances.
We also fully support Yemen’s political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We call upon the international community to continue
its assistance to the Government of Yemen in its fight
against terrorist groups and in its efforts to stabilize the
security situation.
We have noted that the Yemeni Government has
taken several important initiatives to restructure the
armed forces, appoint a new electoral commission
and resume economic activities. The preparatory
committee for the National Dialogue Conference is
engaged in a serious and inclusive dialogue among
all stakeholders and is in the final stages of its work.
Political parties are actively engaged in dialogue to
resolve differences over the law on transitional justice
and national reconciliation. We hope that the National
Dialogue Conference will ensure the involvement of
all stakeholders, including youth and women’s groups,
the Al-Houthi insurrection, the rebellion in the South,
and civil society. We also hope that those initiatives

11

S/PV.6878

will pave the way for holding the referendum on the
Constitution in 2013 and elections in the beginning of
2014, as envisaged in the Transition Agreement.
India has had a long and historical relationship
with Yemen. We have partnered with Yemen in
humanitarian, human resource development and various
capacity-building areas. In addition to its engagement
as part of the Friends of Yemen group, India would
be happy to look at specific proposals for cooperation
with the Government of Yemen, particularly in the
fields of training, capacity-building, entrepreneurship,
development, small and medium enterprises, education
and information technology within the bilateral
cooperation arrangements. India has also provided a
consignment of rice amounting to $2 million and will
very soon be sending another consignment of wheat
worth the same amount. In addition, India will also
be supplying medicine worth $2 million to Yemen.
India stands ready to offer concessional lines of credit
for projects and programmes considered urgent and
necessary by Yemen under the umbrella of credit lines
for the least developed countries. The Indian Ocean
Rim Association for Regional Cooperation provides
another framework for cooperation with Yemen.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that the continuing
support of the international community is crucial to
Yemen as it consolidates the gains that have been made
during the past year. We would like to wish the friendly
people of Yemen continued progress, peace and
prosperity and reassure them of India’s support as the
country traverses through a crucial phase in its history.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, let me, as
others have done, congratulate you, Mr. President,
and the whole Moroccan Security Council team for
your assumption of the presidency for this month, and
assure you and your team of our full support. Let me
also commend Ambassador Puri and his team for their
outstanding leadership in what turned out to be a very
challenging month. Many thanks also to Mr. Benomar
for his excellent briefing. This will probably be my last
statement on the situation in Yemen, as my country’s
Council membership comes to an end soon, regrettably.
Allow me, therefore, to take this opportunity to begin
with three more general observations.
First, when peaceful demonstrations in Sana’a were
met with violence in early 2011, my delegation was
among those calling early on for appropriate Council
action. Not all shared that sense of urgency, but, in

12

hindsight, there is no doubt that that was the right
thing to do. By addressing the situation on the ground,
we made clear that the international community was
watching. That also shows that early action by the
Council can help prevent a conflict from escalating
further. The horizon-scanning briefings provided by the
Department for Political Affairs proved instrumental in
that regard.
Secondly, the Council, in October last year,
unanimously endorsed the Transition Agreement of
the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), which paved the
way towards a democratic transition process. It is no
secret that agreement among Council members was not
easily reached. Some saw the Council as indulging in
undue interference in internal matters, but again it was
the right thing to do. I am convinced that it was the
Council’s united endorsement of the GCC Transition
Agreement that made the difference on the ground.
Sadly, that contrasts starkly with the situation in Syria,
where consensus in the Council on effective measures
continues to elude us.
Thirdly, what the Council says and what it does
matters to the people in Yemen, and it is registered by
those eager to turn back the hands of time. That is why
my delegation co-sponsored resolution 2051 (2012) in
June. In that resolution, the Council not only expressed
its full support for the transition process, under the
leadership of President Mansour, but we also warned
potential spoilers of the consequences that they would
face. The Council must remain closely engaged with
the situation in Yemen. If necessary, it will have to take
appropriate action.
We can acknowledge today the progress achieved.
It is the accomplishment, first and foremost, of the
Yemeni people, especially the youth. They have stood
up for freedom, democracy and dignity. It was their
struggle that found recognition in the Nobel Peace
Prize being awarded to Ms. Tawakkol Karman. We
must ensure that those legitimate demands of the
Yemeni people are met. The progress achieved thus
far is by no means irreversible. We have already seen
numerous attempts by the old guard in the political and
security apparatus to resist change or even to hijack the
process. Yemen’s transition will thus require continued
international support from the Security Council and
beyond.
The United Nations plays a pivotal role. SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Special Adviser Jamal
Benomar deserve our support. Their efforts were
12-62653

S/PV.6878

also recognized by the Government and the people
of Yemen during their recent visit to Sana’a. At the
Friends of Yemen meeting in September in New
York, the international community also underlined its
commitment to supporting the Yemeni people on their
path to democracy.
A meaningful, fully inclusive and balanced National
Dialogue is a key element for the success of Yemen’s
transition. Progress is urgently needed. We welcome
the agreement reached last week on the remaining
outstanding issues by the preparatory committee, with
the support of Mr. Benomar and his team. We encourage
all relevant actors to engage constructively so that the
National Dialogue Conference can start without further
delay. My country will continue to support those efforts
on the ground.
In closing, I want to highlight the important visit
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
to Sana’a last week. The fight against the recruitment
of child soldiers has been a matter of long-standing
concern for my Government, including during our
tenure here in the Council. We welcome the commitment
made by President Mansour to ban the recruitment of
children into the regular armed forces, and we call on
the armed groups to do likewise. That was also called
for in resolution 2051 (2012). Finally, let me assure the
Yemeni people and my colleague, Ambassador Jamal
Abdullah Al-Sallal, that my country will remain a
reliable partner for Yemen after 31 December.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): There continues to be a great need for
consolidated work on the Yemeni settlement with
the active involvement of the United Nations. It
demonstrates the advantages of a comprehensive
engagement model in which outside players pursue a
coordinated policy and send identical signals to the
parties to the conflict, preventing them from worsening
the confrontation, while at the same time not imposing
recipes for solutions. As a result, the settlement of many
issues on the domestic political agenda is considerably
less painful.
In analysing the situation in Yemen, we welcome
the policy of the country’s leadership of implementing
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
Riyadh transition agreement of 23 November 2011 on
the peaceful transition of power.

12-62653

We note the efforts of Sana’a to move the political
transition process forward, with the primary provision
in the short term being the convening of the National
Dialogue Conference. Russia is ready to continue
to provide the necessary assistance to the Yemeni
authorities in carrying out that task, in the context of ten
observer countries monitoring the National Dialogue
and ensuring the implementation of the intra-Yemeni
agreement on the peaceful transition of power.
We are actively strengthening contacts with the
leaders of the main political forces in the country, in
particular in the south, and urging them to be more
flexible and cooperative. It is critical that the fragile
balance of political forces in Yemen not be interrupted
on the eve of the conference. To avoid that scenario, we
must strengthen external political and moral support for
the political process in the Republic of Yemen in order
to make it irreversible. We welcome the resolution,
with the assistance of Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, Mr. Benomar, of the quota issue
regarding participants in that key exercise.
At this critical juncture, the Yemenis must unite
around President Mansour in order to successfully
implement the necessary political and socioeconomic
changes and, above all, to draw up and adopt a new
constitution and to hold presidential and parliamentary
elections in 2014 in line with that constitution. In that
connection, we welcome the news of the signing late
last month of the presidential decree establishing the
Supreme Commission for Election and Referendum.
Political differences in Yemen must be replaced by the
careful and coordinated work of all actors to address all
urgent issues in the country.
Ensuring security continues to be an urgent matter.
We firmly condemn the terrorist act by unknown
persons in Sana’a on 28 November, which caused
the death of the military attaché of the Embassy of
Saudi Arabia and his bodyguard. The perpetrators
and masterminds of that attack by bandits against
the staff of a foreign diplomatic mission must be
duly held to account and the immunity of diplomatic
and consular staff guaranteed, in strict compliance
with the provisions of the 1961 Vienna Convention
on Diplomatic Relations. The tragedy in Sana’a again
clearly demonstrates the essential fact that there are
no good or bad terrorists. Irrespective of the grounds,
such crimes must be robustly and wholly condemned.
Double standards cannot be applied as justification.

13

S/PV.6878

The Yemeni Government faces challenges,
including the ongoing fighting against Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula, overcoming the tragic humanitarian
crisis, eradicating poverty and unemployment, ensuring
the provision of basic services for the population and
assisting refugees and internally displaced persons. At
the same time, the Government must rapidly implement
an entire range of socioeconomic reforms. That is now
critical.
Regional organizations and the international
community must play a significant role in these efforts.
The third and fourth ministerial meetings of the Friends
of Yemen, held in Riyadh and New York in May and
September, respectively, were fruitful. The outcomes of
such events must be strengthened and increased.
We believe that the efforts of Special Adviser
Mr. Benomar to work with the Yemeni political forces
are significant. We look forward to such ongoing
effective work in order to address the urgent tasks
continuing to face Yemen.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset, allow me to congratulate
the delegation of Morocco on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council. I take this opportunity to
assure you of our full support and to wish you every
success in your important work.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Hardeep Singh Puri of India and his
delegation for their excellent leadership of the Council’s
work last month. I also thank Mr. Benomar for his
briefing.
In the year that has elapsed since the signing of the
historic Transition Agreement that set Yemen on the
path to democracy, the country has made great strides
in that direction. The Government and people of Yemen
must be congratulated on the progress achieved to
date and on their determination to move their country
forward. It is clear that what has been achieved should
be consolidated and that efforts to carry out an inclusive
Yemeni-led political transition process that meets
the legitimate demands and aspirations of the people
should be continued.
The convening of an all-inclusive National Dialogue
Conference, scheduled to take place later this year, in
accordance with the second phase of the transition
process, takes on particular importance. The outcome

14

of the dialogue is also vital to drafting the constitution
and to conducting the general elections to take place in
2014.
The international community must render all
possible assistance to the Yemeni people in meeting
those objectives. The recent visit by the SecretaryGeneral to Yemen reiterated international support for
the political transition in the country.
Azerbaijan also welcomes the Friends of Yemen
ministerial meeting held in New York on 27 September,
which pledged additional funds to support the transition
process in Yemen. We appreciate the efforts of Special
Adviser Mr. Benomar to help bridge the differences
among the various groups and to bring them to the
dialogue. It must be underscored that engagement with
all political forces and groups is vital in order for them
to be able to express their expectations of the process.
In that light, we welcome the recent progress
in deciding the quotas of political parties and of
other groups participating in the National Dialogue
Conference. All political forces in Yemen must realize
that a successful transition process depends on the
involvement and cooperation of all stakeholders in
implementing the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and Implementation Mechanism, in accordance
with Security Council resolutions 2014 (2011) and
2051 (2012).
The presence of the rebel groups in northern Yemen
and of Al-Qaida-related groups in the south of the
country remains a major threat to Yemen’s security and
stability. The intensification of suicide attacks against
the Yemeni military by those groups, as well as the new
clashes that erupted between Yemeni military forces
and Al-Qaida-related groups in Abyan at the end of
October, gave rise to legitimate concerns. Once again,
we would like to express our support to the President
and Government of Yemen for the determined efforts
in fighting the terrorist threats.
The humanitarian situation in the country
remains harsh, although the recent financial pledges
of donors offer some alleviation of the economic and
social hardship faced by the population in need. More
must be done in that regard. The problem of internal
displacement in northern Yemen is alarming and
represents a heavy economic and social burden on
the State. It is nevertheless encouraging to witness
the growing number of returning internally displaced
persons in the south of the country. According to the

12-62653

S/PV.6878

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, that is the first significant decline in
displacement since May 2011, when fighting between
Government troops and militants erupted in the south.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate
Azerbaijan’s full support for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Yemen and
to express our hope that the tenacious work of the
Yemeni authorities and the continued support of the
international community will yield the best possible
results for a successful transition in Yemen.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I join
my colleagues in most warmly congratulating you,
Mr. President, and your delegation on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
are sure that your leadership and efficiency will bring to
the Council all the dynamism for which you are known.
I also wish to express my thanks to Mr. Hardeep Singh
Puri, Ambassador of India, and his entire team for their
leadership and the very serious way in which they led
the work of the Council in the past month.
I want to thank and commend Special Adviser of
the Secretary-General for Yemen Jamal Benomar for his
very important work in that country. We greatly regret
that the planned Security Council mission to Yemen
could not occur, but we are aware that Mr. Benomar’s
influence and participation in the entire process have
been highly significant. We see great progress in
the developments he explained to us today, the first
anniversary of the signing on 23 November 2011 in
Riyadh of the historic Transition Agreement, which
ended the violence in Yemen and put the country on the
path of democratic transition.
The people and Government of Yemen have acted
valiantly, resolutely and in a timely way to save the
country from civil war. As the Secretary-General said
on his recent visit to Sana’a, the process of change that
has been set in motion is irreversible. We underline
the strong commitment of the United Nations and the
important role it plays in the progress made to date in
Yemen. The people and Government of Yemen need and
deserve our full support in building a more democratic,
prosperous and participatory society.
In our view, building strong foundations for the
democratic transition taking place in Yemen under the
leadership of President Mansour and his Government
of National Unity will require an inclusive and
participatory National Dialogue, and that the outcomes

12-62653

of that dialogue be incorporated in the constitutional
process to be concluded by the end of 2013, leading to
general elections in February 2014.
We are therefore pleased that, through discussions
in the preparatory committee, an agreement has been
reached on appointments to open seats at the National
Dialogue Conference. The Special Adviser has proposed
that 112 of the 556 Conference seats be assigned to the
General People’s Congress and its allies, 85 to Houthis,
40 to women and 40 to young people, which will allow
the protracted stalemate to be overcome. We commend
the dedicated efforts of the parties concerned, who
have opened the way for the National Dialogue to be
effective, broad, constructive and participatory.
We welcome the recent reports from the Geneva
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees that many internally displaced persons
are returning to their homes in southern Yemen.
According to the Office, in the past four months more
that 80,000 people have returned, which represents the
first significant reduction in the number of internally
displaced persons since May 2011. If that trend is to
continue, it will require the sustained and committed
support of the international community — all the more
so when more than 300,000 people remain displaced
because of the conflict between Yemeni Government
forces and the Al-Houthi group, which has now lasted
almost 10 years.
We must make every effort to ensure security
and stability in Yemen. We therefore welcome the
significant pledges made by various donors at the
3 September meeting of the Group of Friends of
Yemen in Riyadh to support reconstruction, to provide
for basic infrastructure and humanitarian assistance
needs, and consolidate security and stability in Yemen.
It is also essential to address such hugely important
problems as political dialogue and preparations for the
2014 elections.
Yemen has undergone a profound change since
President Mansour’s accession to power last February.
However, many relics of the past persist, especially in
the military, and they must be overcome. We note that,
in the process of centralizing control over the armed
forces, President Mansour issued a series of directives
in August whereby he placed divisions and brigades of
the Republican Guard and the First Armoured Division
under his authority.

15

S/PV.6878

We reiterate our strenuous condemnation of the
terrorist attack of 11 September in which at least
11 people died. We call on all actors in Yemen to
reject violence in all its forms and manifestations,
and we encourage them to play a constructive role in
implementing the Transition Agreement.
The ongoing attacks in southern Yemen that have
claimed many victims clearly show the need to make
progress on the reorganization of the State’s armed
forces. Reports of the broad influence of Al-Qaida in
Yemeni territory remain a cause for concern. We are
aware of the fragility of the transition process. That is
why we call on the authorities to commit themselves
irreversibly to creating solid institutions and to
establish more open and inclusive processes to ensure
Yemen’s stability in the long term.
A National Dialogue driven by the Yemenis
themselves is essential to the country’s democratic
future. The Security Council and the international
community must continue to assert with one voice their
support for Yemen’s unique example of transition, which
enjoys the support of the majority of the population.
Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on the
assumption by the Kingdom of Morocco to the Security
Council presidency for December. I wish you every
success and assure you of my delegation’s full support.
I would also like to congratulate Ambassador Puri of
India on his outstanding guidance of the Council’s
work last month. Like many speakers, I would also to
thank the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Benomar, for his briefing.
I would like to focus on three points: the political,
security and humanitarian aspects of the situation.
On the political level, we welcome the efforts by the
Yemeni Government to create a political agreement
based on democratic institutions. In that context, Togo
particularly commends President Mansour’s directive
of 29 November establishing the Supreme Commission
for Election and Referendum. The creation of the
Commission is an important milestone on the road to
holding the upcoming elections, in which all Yemenis
are to take part, and which we hope will be peaceful
and credible.
We believe that it is the duty of the Yemeni political
class to maintain and strengthen the achievements of
the transition so far. Such cooperation, which we call
for with conviction, can come about only through an

16

inclusive National Dialogue, which the international
community considers to be the best framework for
discussion focused on adopting consensual agreements
to redefine the future of the country. This national
conversation should also make it possible to address all
questions, especially those concerning Yemeni unity
and the reconciliation of all its sons and daughters.
Togo therefore urges all political and military
groups, especially Al-Hiraak and its leaders, to respond
positively and promptly to President Mansour’s call to
return to dialogue, whose success could mitigate the
country’s strained social atmosphere and persuade the
various players to agree on certain crucial questions.
We commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
to work with Yemeni authorities to launch the National
Dialogue. His trip to Yemen on 19 November was proof
of his commitment to helping the country to resolve all
outstanding points of contention through constructive
dialogue. We urge President Mansour and the Yemeni
Government to pursue their efforts to launch an
effective National Dialogue Conference, despite all the
obstacles to its convening.
My delegation believes that the Security Council
should assist the Yemeni authorities in finding new
solutions to the claims of the southern groups, which
continue to delay the holding of the Convention. Contact
between the Government and those groups remains a
path to be explored.
As for the security situation, Togo welcomes
efforts that have led to a decrease in violence in recent
weeks. However, we firmly condemn the attack of
28 November in Sana’a, which took the life of a Saudi
Arabian diplomat and his Yemeni bodyguard. We call on
all Yemenis to renounce violence and to work together
to reconstruct their country. In response to those acts
of terrorism, it is more urgent than ever for States to
reaffirm their support for the Yemeni authorities by
persuading them to do their utmost to combat and
eradicate the scourge. This fight will be successful only
if the problem of divisions within the army is resolved,
allowing space for its restructuring.
With respect to the struggle for peace and security
in Yemen, we are encouraged by President Mansour’s
promise to end child recruitment by Government
forces. Other armed groups must also renounce child
conscription, which violates the provisions of relevant
international conventions.

12-62653

S/PV.6878

At the humanitarian level, the situation remains of
concern, despite the contributions of donor countries.
While thanking them for their generosity, we call on
the international community, especially the Friends
of Yemen, to strengthen efforts to improve the living
conditions of refugees. Furthermore, the international
community should take up the situation of Yemeni
women, in the light of reports that four out of five
women have seen their situation deteriorate over the
past 12 months.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
join my colleagues in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency this month. I wish you
the full success that you deserve, and I am certain
that you will play an outstanding role in the Council.
We also thank the Indian delegation for its exemplary
presidency in November.
I wish to begin by thanking Mr. Jamal Benomar
for his interesting and timely presentation and by
commending him for his ongoing work in Yemen.
A year has passed since the signing of the Gulf
Cooperation Council Transition Agreement, putting an
end to nearly 11 months of fighting in Yemen. Since
then, we have seen progress achieved throughout a
fairly complicated transition process that could be
instructive for other countries in a similar situation. We
believe it essential for the transition process to continue
and for the constitutional and electoral reforms to
be concluded. It is also essential that the unity and
democracy process be completed in a framework of
respect for the fundamental rights of all the people.
In that context, we welcome the visit of the SecretaryGeneral to Yemen last month. We hope that it will give
renewed impetus to the development of policies and
capacities that will contribute to a successful conclusion
of the transition process. In particular, we believe that
the National Dialogue Conference must be launched
as soon as possible, although we also understand that
if it is to meet expectations, it must be appropriately
prepared with the support of all the people of Yemen.
On that point, we warmly welcome the
announcement of the agreement to resolve the
contentious issue of seat assignment for the inclusive
National Dialogue Conference, which is a key element
of Yemen’s democratic transition. The agreement
clears the way for the National Dialogue Conference to
be convened by the end of the year. Its results will be
incorporated into the drafting of a constitution by late

12-62653

2013 that will, in turn, enable general elections to be
held in February 2014.
In our opinion, a vital part of that process is for
all parties to demonstrate mutual respect and to refrain
from using force to achieve their ambitions. They must
demonstrate flexibility in addressing complex issues
and be prepared to accept those compromises that will
form a common denominator to preserve the interests
of all concerned. In addition, we consider efforts to
completely restructure the security sector to be a major
step forward. It is crucial to unify Yemen’s armed forces
in order to empower them in the fight against all groups
seeking to destabilize and block the new Government’s
efforts to establish a democratic State. In that context,
we commend President Mansour’s efforts to achieve a
political transition, which must respond exclusively to
the interests of the Yemeni people.
We oppose and condemn all acts of violence or
terrorism, irrespective of the source, especially those
aimed indiscriminately against civilians. We therefore
urge all groups in Yemen to refrain from provocation and
to cooperate in the due implementation of resolutions
2014 (2011) and 2051 (2012). We also consider it critical
for every individual responsible for violations or abuses
of human rights, including acts of violence, to be held
accountable for their actions.
The problems facing the people of Yemen cannot be
resolved solely by addressing the security situation. All
of the measures to counter poverty and unemployment
must also be implemented. Policies must be adopted to
respond to the social and economic problems that have
made Yemen a fertile ground for social dissatisfaction
and kept the people in unstable economic conditions.
We therefore believe that the results of the meeting
of donor countries are positive. We hope that the
assistance offered will continue to ensure progress in
the transition process.
The Yemeni authorities must continue on the
current path of the transition process. At the same time,
they must work to implement policies to alleviate the
major problems facing their people, especially poverty,
hunger and insecurity.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on assuming
the presidency of the Council and assuring you of my
delegation’s full support. I also thank Ambassador Puri
and his entire delegation for their excellent presidency
in November.

17

S/PV.6878

I thank Mr. Benomar, Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General, for his briefing on the situation in
Yemen. I welcome the first anniversary on 23 November
of the signing of the Gulf Cooperation Council
initiative, which paved the way to a peaceful political
transition in Yemen. The Secretary-General travelled to
Yemen on that occasion to demonstrate the support of
the international community to the transition in Yemen.

is requested of it, when the time comes, to support
the members of the National Dialogue as they explore
the possible outlines of a future constitution. We also
welcome the mandate issued by the Yemeni Parliament
to President Mansour to appoint a new electoral
commission, and we encourage the rapid progress made
on efforts to hold a referendum on the constitution in
2013 and national elections in early 2014.

France reiterates its full support to President
Mansour and to the Yemeni Government in their efforts
to implement an orderly political transition that meets
the aspirations of the Yemeni people. The transition
in Yemen is exemplary, primarily because of the
commitment of the Yemenis themselves. It shows that,
in situations of overt crisis, the implementation of an
orderly, peaceful and democratic transition is possible.

Secondly, the Yemeni authorities must give
particular attention to the ongoing deterioration of
the humanitarian situation. The resolution of the
humanitarian crisis is crucial to stabilizing the country
and to its subsequent economic recovery. Given the
magnitude of the needs, we welcome the results of
the donors’ meeting in Riyadh and the meeting of the
Friends of Yemen in New York, which raised nearly
$8 billion through 2014.

The Yemenis have made considerable progress in
implementing resolution 2014 (2011). The formation of
a Government of National Unity, the beginning of the
restructuring of the armed forces and the successful
holding of presidential elections are all milestones in
the completion of the first phase of the transition. The
voter turnout in the presidential elections far exceeded
the most optimistic estimates and demonstrated that
the people of Yemen, in particular youth and women,
support the transition mechanism and thereby sought to
take ownership of it.
In order to consolidate the second phase of the
transition, it is now urgent to achieve progress in three
areas.
First is the launching of the National Dialogue,
which must provide an opportunity for all stakeholders
in Yemen, in particular youth and civil society, to
collectively draft a new social contract and achieve
national reconciliation. We welcome the agreement
reached on the distribution of groups within the
preparatory committee of the National Dialogue
Conference. In this respect, we welcome the work
undertaken by the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral and by the ambassadors of the 10 countries
that are guarantors of the transition. We call on all
Yemeni parties to implement the National Dialogue
in a transparent and balanced way and to include all
stakeholders in accordance with the timetable for the
transition.
With the other sponsor countries of the Gulf
initiative, France will provide any legal expertise that

18

In the confident wager that we are all making on
the future of Yemen, France has a particular place.
With an cumulative amount of $4.5 billion in economic
investments, it is the leading investor in Yemen. France
wishes to maintain its commitment to the country
through its projects, which are aimed in particular
at developing the electricity sector. Concessional
assistance of more than $80 million will finance both the
provision of electricity to rural areas and the regulated
distribution of electricity throughout the country. The
effective implementation of these projects, however,
still hinges on an appropriate security framework.
These actions are in keeping with the framework of
broader cooperation, which ranges from training to
security and includes humanitarian and food assistance.
The third priority is restructuring the security and
defence forces. France reiterates its firm condemnation
of all acts of terrorism, regardless of their justification.
In this regard, the Yemeni Government needs to
allocate the appropriate resources to protect industrial
installations, as their repeated sabotage is denying
the country the use of its own resources and deterring
investors. The security of airports and maritime ports,
two areas that are targeted by terrorists, also remains
a major challenge to the economic development of the
country.
The Security Council and the United Nations must
remain fully committed to the Yemenis. The transition
in Yemen has been a success for the Council. Through
its resolution 2014 (2011), the Council played a decisive
role with respect to a peaceful political transition in

12-62653

S/PV.6878

Yemen and in keeping with the expectations of the
people of Yemen. If they remain fully committed to the
salutary path they have chosen, Yemenis can count on
the assistance of the Council as they consolidate their
transition.
However, we are particularly concerned by the
actions and statements of certain players that could
disturb, delay or destabilize the political transition. We
remind them that, in resolution 2051 (2012) of 12 June,
the Council underscored its determination to support
the transition in Yemen, including by expressing its
readiness to consider further measures, including under
Article 41 of the United Nations Charter, if such actions
continue. My country and the Council continue to stand
with the Yemenis in this historic transition, thereby
confirming our support to the legitimate democratic
aspirations that currently abound in the region.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s debate. Let me begin by
congratulating the Kingdom of Morocco on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for December.
We commend the able manner in which India
discharged its responsibilities as Council President
for the previous month. We are are also grateful to the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Jamal Benomar, for his briefing. We commend his
work. We welcome the participation of Ambassador
Jamal Abdullah Al-Sallal in this meeting.
By avoiding a potentially devastating civil war,
Yemen has shown the world that dialogue and political
will can lead to the peaceful resolution of complicated
issues. The Secretary-General’s good offices played an
important role in this regard. We share the optimism
he expressed during his recent visit to Sana’a that
Yemen will overcome all its problems and hurdles as
it prepares for the 2014 presidential and parliamentary
elections. Progress, however, does not obviate the need
to keep the challenges in sight.
Pakistan enjoys deep historical, cultural and
religious ties with the people of Yemen. The peace,
stability and prosperity of Yemen are dear to us.
We hope that the full implementation of the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative for the transfer of power
in Yemen will lead to a normalization of conditions in
the country. The continued support of the international
community for this endeavour is crucial. This does
not mean, however, that the international community
should micromanage Yemeni affairs. Respect for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
12-62653

of Yemen should remain paramount to the Council’s
deliberations on the issue.
We note with satisfaction that the preparatory
committee of the National Dialogue Conference has
completed its work. We hope that it would now lead to
the convening of an inclusive national dialogue process
and a timely conclusion of the transition process. We
also welcome the formation of the Supreme Commission
for Election and Referendum.
It is heartening to note that the Government of
Yemen remains committed to fighting terrorism. We
fully support the efforts of President Mansour in that
regard and stand ready to provide any assistance that
may be required. Pakistan strongly condemns terrorist
attacks in Yemen. Our thoughts and prayers are with the
victims of those heinous crimes. We remain concerned
by the sporadic violence that keeps cropping up.
We strongly condemn the murder of a Saudi
diplomat and his Yemeni bodyguard, and offer our
sincere condolences to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia as
well as to Yemen. Such dastardly acts should strengthen
our resolve to combat terrorism and extremism in all
their manifestations.
We welcome the report that more than 80,000
internally displaced people have returned home in
the past few months, the first significant decline in
displacement since May of last year, when fighting
between Government troops and militants erupted in
the south of Yemen. That follows the re-establishment
of Government authority in the southern province of
Abyan and an improvement in security.
Statistics relating to the extent of the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen, however, remain worrisome. With
83 per cent of children under five malnourished,
44.5 per cent of the Yemeni population food-insecure
and 50 per cent of Yemenis without access to clean
water, as well as with frequent outbreaks of disease, the
population awaits the concrete dividends of transition.
Gaps in humanitarian response can undermine
political transition and mar the long-term prospects
for peace and development. It is disconcerting to
note that the United Nations humanitarian appeal for
Yemen has been funded only at around 50 per cent. The
international community must rise to the occasion and
must do everything possible in that regard.
We once again reiterate Pakistan’s unflinching
support to the process of transition in Yemen and to the

19

S/PV.6878

Government and people of Yemen as they go through
this trying phase in their history. We are confident that
the resilient people of Yemen will be able to surmount
those obstacles and emerge stronger.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Morocco.
I would like to thank Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen, for his
comprehensive briefing on the latest developments.
I would also like to thank him for his tireless efforts
on behalf of the transition in Yemen. I assure him of
Morocco’s full and continued support for his efforts to
convince the different parties in Yemen to participate
fully in the comprehensive National Dialogue to be held
in the near future and to find a way out of the complex
sensitivities with the south, particularly in the light
of the grave differences between the parties. I also
commend the achievement, timeliness and success of
the Secretary-General’s recent visit to Yemen.
That brotherly country, with the determination
of its people, has been able to avoid war and chaos
beginning with the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation
Council and the implementation of the plan on which
Yemenis have agreed, in order to create a new situation
in their country — a situation of democracy, liberty and
stability.
Against that backdrop, we applaud His Excellency
President Mansour for his firm commitment to
supporting political dialogue and to promoting
political transition in Yemen, as well as to reforming
the security sector with a view towards realizing the
aspirations of Yemenis toward a peaceful transition and
comprehensive reform in preparation for the holding of
the National Dialogue Conference.
The establishment by the preparatory committee for
the National Dialogue in Yemen of the assigned seats to
the parties that will contribute to the conference augurs
well for all the parties and is an extremely important step
in the right direction. We look forward with optimism
to the beginning of the comprehensive National
Nialogue. We also hope that the latest achievement will
be followed by a declaration on the part of those who
have so far hesitated, particularly among adherents of
Al-Hiraak and among the Houthis, to the effect that
they will participate in the National Dialogue.

20

We call upon all civil society stakeholders to
take part in that important undertaking, which is the
backbone of the political transition in Yemen, so as
to avoid undermining the political settlement reached
in the particularly delicate transitional phase. The
Government of National Unity should expeditiously set
out a plan for the achievement of transitional justice
and reconciliation in order to foster the environment
necessary to overcome the obstacles at this stage and
to prepare and mobilize for the extremely important
National Dialogue.
We would like to express our serious concern
with regard to the challenges still facing Yemen,
particularly in view of the continued attacks against
officials and Government targets, along with fuel
sources and electrical grids. Those attacks and the
continued violence and tension in some areas, together
with separatist tendencies and the threat of Al-Qaida,
represent extremely great dangers that must be faced.
We therefore call on the international community
to provide further support to Yemen with a view to
establishing peace and stability, which in turn will
support regional stability as well.
The political and economic situation in Yemen
has led to grave social consequences, such as the
spread of poverty and malnutrition among children.
International statistics provide us with extremely
alarming information in that regard. We therefore
call upon the international community in general and
donors in particular to make additional efforts to assist
Yemen and its people to meet the increasing challenges
that face its new leadership.
The changes we have witnessed in Yemen
demonstrate the qualitative improvement and the
sincere effort to establish and protect the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Yemen. We look forward
to the completion of all preparations necessary for
launching the National Dialogue Conference, which
is an extremely important opportunity for Yemen
to introduce constitutional reforms and to achieve
democracy and the aspirations of its people for
prosperity, peace and stability.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Sallal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic):
First, I would like to congratulate His Excellency

12-62653

S/PV.6878

Mr. Mohammed Loulichki, Permanent Representative
of the Kingdom of Morocco, and to wish him and
his delegation every success in their conduct of the
Council’s work this month. I would also like to thank
His Excellency Ambassador Hardeep Singh Puri,
Permanent Representative of India, and his delegation
for their outstanding success and wise leadership of the
work of the Council last month.
I am also pleased to thank the President and all
the members of the Council for the interest they have
shown in what is taking place in my country, as well
as for their commitment to the success of the political
settlement in Yemen, as well as the country’s unity,
security and stability. We would also like to express
our sincere appreciation to Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen, for his
continued efforts to reconcile the parties and to prepare
the environment for the National Dialogue conference,
as well as for his strenuous efforts to present us his
valuable and comprehensive briefing, which I hope will
command the interest of the Council.
The Council has no doubt closely followed the
situation in my country and understands the difficulties
that Yemen has been facing for over a year. Its members
must therefore be well informed of the reality on the
ground and be in a position to promote the trust of our
people in its cultural history and in the wisdom of its
leadership to overcome those difficulties.
In his briefing, Mr. Benomar referred to the
progress achieved in the ongoing political process
and the obstacles that need to be addressed. There is
no disagreement on the grave difficulties faced by my
country with regard to completing the second phase
of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) initiative.
Despite the complexity of the situation and the
gravity of the challenges before us, the Government of
National Unity has achieved great progress in a short
period, in particular in restoring many services that
were interrupted last year, such as electricity and fuel
supplies and other basic daily necessities for the people.
In that context, I would refer to a statement by the
President of the Republic that was made a few days ago
in Sana’a at the celebration commemorating the signing
of the GCC initiative. In it, he stressed the ability of
Yemenis to achieve their aspirations as they did when
the GCC initiative was signed. The peaceful transfer
of power and the success of the early presidential
elections last February confirmed that ability. I would
take this opportunity to express our sincere thanks

12-62653

and appreciation to United Nations Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and to the Secretary-General of the Gulf
Cooperation Council, Mr. Abdul-Latif Bin Rashid
Al-Zayani, for having participated in the ceremony
and for their commitment to the implementation of
the initiative, which is proof of the region’s and the
international community’s commitment to assisting
Yemen to succeed in its endeavours and to create the
new future to which it aspires.
Today, having listened to Mr. Benomar’s briefing, I
believe that we are all working for one purpose, namely,
to make political transition in Yemen a success. That
requires the international community to support the
efforts made by President Mansour and his Government
of National Unity.
We are now in the second phase of the GCC initiative.
I would therefore like to draw the Council’s attention
to some of the efforts made by the political leadership
in my country, with a view to implementing the GCC
initiative and resolutions of the Security Council. The
Military and Security Committee continued its work to
foster security and stability with a view to normalizing
the situation through direct supervision and activity in
the field. The Committee has achieved tangible success
in the capital, Sana’a, and in other capitals of Yemen’s
governorates. Moreover, President Mansour has taken
many important decisions. For example, he has begun
to separate certain military units from others and has
guaranteed leadership rotation for key positions in the
security apparatus. Secondly, he has established an
independent investigation committee to look into human
rights violations that occurred in 2011. Thirdly, he has
established the Supreme Commission for Elections and
Referendum. I would also like to note that, recently,
a branch of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights was opened in Yemen, as was a Yemeni
office for the GCC.
I would like to stress that President Mansour
and his Government of National Unity will continue
to make efforts to complete the second phase of the
GCC initiative and its mechanisms, foremost of which
is the holding of the National Dialogue Conference,
which we are determined to have begin on time. It is
also noteworthy that the President wants to foster the
necessary environment for the National Dialogue and
to ensure the necessary conditions for the success
of that historic undertaking so that everyone can
contribute with transparency to obtaining tangible
and positive results in the form of domestic peace,

21

S/PV.6878

multilateral democracy, the protection of human rights
and good governance — all of which is in response to
the aspirations of Yemenis. Undoubtedly, the recent
agreement on the allocation of seats among political
parties and other political forces, including civil
society organizations, youth, women and other social
components, in the National Dialogue Conference is
an extremely important step forward. The technical
preparatory committee for the National Dialogue has
almost finished its work and will submit its final report
to the President in the next few days. He, in turn, will
take a decision to begin the Dialogue, after having
selected candidates from all the parties.
The President reiterates his full commitment
to the drafting of a new constitution and the holding
of a referendum on it without delay, as well as the
holding of presidential and parliamentary elections on
schedule. Undoubtedly, the international community
should continue to support the efforts by the President,
particularly with regard to the National Dialogue
Conference.
The political crisis is but one aspect of the situation
in Yemen. Other aspects include humanitarian and
economic difficulties, which can be attributed to various
causes. The most threatening of them is terrorism, of
which Yemen has become a victim. Despite our limited
resources and weak national economy, we continue to
fight that scourge relentlessly — with international
cooperation — in order to eliminate it from our country.
There is no doubt that the problems encountered by
Yemen during the past year have adversely affected the
economic and humanitarian situation in the country.
Extreme poverty has spread and unemployment has
increased, which has weakened the national economy
as a whole, which, in turn, threatens the security and
stability of our country. Furthermore, it threatens the
stability and security of the entire region and could
impact the international community. Yemen is also
bearing a colossal burden as a result of the unrelenting
waves of asylum seekers from nearby countries in the
Horn of Africa.
It is no secret that the economic situation in
Yemen could become an insurmountable obstacle to
all political progress. Indeed, our economic difficulty
represents 70 per cent of all the challenges we face.
Permit me to appeal to all our brothers and friends at
the United Nations to continue to support Yemen in its
crisis so that we can build a modern State with strong
national institutions. The international community

22

must also show patience in dealing with Yemenis in the
light of the grave and numerous challenges they face.
They should encourage them to find solutions.
I would like to express our thanks to all those who
have stood by us, starting with the donors’ conference in
Riyadh in June through the Friends of Yemen meeting
held here in New York in September. That support
is extremely important to us. It comes at a historic
moment, when we look forward to a better future and
greater prosperity for Yemen. I would like to urge all
those brothers and friends who have made pledges to
fulfil them as soon as possible in order to help alleviate
the Yemeni citizens’ economic burden and to support
the various economic and humanitarian programmes of
Yemen’s Government of National Unity, with a view to
making the country’s political transformation a success.
I would like to conclude with what I said earlier: we
in the Yemeni Government are working together with
the international community in support of the political
transition process towards the 2014 general elections,
in a way that realizes the aspirations of the Yemeni
people, particularly their dream of a stable, democratic
society and a modern civil State of law and order,
justice, equality, democracy and human rights.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Benomar to respond to the comments made
by the members of the Security Council.
Mr. Benomar: As we heard today, there is
resounding international support for the remarkable
efforts made and led by the Yemeni people to move
their country forward. I would like to reiterate that the
transition in Yemen is largely on track. Yes, there are
challenges in the security, economic and humanitarian
fields, but the transition is moving forward.
I would like to make special mention of the young
people who courageously took to the streets, opening the
way for the people’s aspirations to be realized. We should
not forget how we got here. It all started with young
people peacefully demanding change. I am pleased to
see Security Council members acknowledging the role
they played and their commitment to supporting the
people’s aspirations.
I would also like to pay tribute to Yemen’s political
leaders, who have had the courage to pull their country
from the abyss; Yemeni leaders who negotiated face
to face, constructively, in my presence in November
in Sana’a, and who concluded an agreement that made

12-62653

S/PV.6878

this unique, peaceful transition possible. Yemenis have
developed, through a Yemeni-led process, a Yemeni
road map for change and recovery. Our role was, and
continues to be, to support their efforts and facilitate
agreement at their request, with Yemenis always in the
lead.
I am pleased to see Security Council members
unanimously commending the leadership and efforts
of President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour. He
has led the way with strong and effective stewardship,
steering the country towards a more stable, prosperous
and bright future.
I am very pleased to see the Security Council
speaking with one voice in support of the Yemeni
transition. The National Dialogue definitely represents
the beginning of a new Yemen. It provides an opportunity
to broaden the political process, ensuring inclusion
by allowing Yemenis, men and women, from north to

12-62653

south, from across the political spectrum, to engage
in dialogue and collectively shape the future of their
country. Let us continue our innovative cooperation in
support of Yemenis in their efforts to forge ahead.
We have all emphasized the importance of a
timely start to the National Dialogue. In that regard,
it will be important for Yemen’s partners to contribute
financially to the United Nations trust fund that has
been established to support the National Dialogue. I
would also like to reiterate the importance of delivering
in a timely fashion on the pledges that Yemen’s partners
have made in the meetings of the Friends of Yemen in
support of Yemen’s economic recovery.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
speakers on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

23
