Resolutions adopted on the report• of the Third Committee

Decides to accord priority during its twenty-third
session to the item entitled :
"Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance:
" (a) Draft Declaration on the Elimination of All
Forms of Religious Intolerance;
" ( b) Draft International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination based on Religion or Belief".
1625th plenary meeting,
11 December 1967.
2331 (XXII). Measures to he taken against nazlsm
and racial intolerance

The General Assembly,
Considering the fact that in the Charter of the United
Nations the nations expressed their determination to
reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal
rights of men and women and of nations large and
small,
Noting that concern has been expressed regarding
recent manifestations of racial intolerance, including
the revival of certain groups and organizations professing totalitarian ideologies such as nazism which
may embitter relations between peoples and groups,
Con firming that nazism is incompatible with the objectives of the Charter, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, the United
Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination, the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and other international instruments,
Recognizing that measures should be taken to halt
nazi activities wherever they occur,
1. Resolutely condemns any ideology, including
nazism, which is based on racial intolerance and terror
as a gross violation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations;
2. Calls upon all States to take immediate and effective measures against any such manifestations of nazism
and racial intolerance.
1638th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.
2332 (XXII). Meaaures for the speedy implementation of international instruments
against racial discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1905 (XVIII) of 20 November 1963, 2017 (XX) of 1 November 1965 and
2142 (XXI) of 26 October 1966,
Expressing its profound concern that many Governments continue to violate fundamental human rights
and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
through policies of apartheid, segregation and other
forms of racial discrimination,
Concerned also that the principles of the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination and the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimina-

19

tion are being grossly violated in some parts of the
world, particularly in South Africa, in the rebellious
colony of Southern Rhodesia and in the Territory of
S_o?th West Af~ica, whi~h is under the direct responsibility of the United Nations and now illegally occupied
by the Government of South Africa,
lyoting that many States have not yet signed and
ratified the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
1. Urges all eligible Governments which have not
yet done so t? sign, ratify and implement without delay
the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the other conventions dir_ected against discrimination in employment
and occupation and against discrimination in education·
'
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make available
to t_he Com~ission on Human Rights at its regular
sess10ns the information submitted by Governments of
Member ,?tates on mea_sures taken for the speedy implementation of the Umted Nations Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
3. !?equests the Secretary-General, the specialized
agencies and all organizations concerned to continue to
take measur_es _to propagate, through appropriate channels! the principles and norms set forth in the United
Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination and in the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
4. Requests the International Conference on Human
Righ_t~ to consider the question of giving effect to the
provis10ns of the United Nations Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
~arms of R~cial Discrimination and the question of the
m!pl~me~tah_on of the conventions directed against disc~imi_na~ion_ m ~mployment and occupation and against
d1s~nm1_nati_on_ in. education in so far as they relate to
racial_ discnmmat1on, especially in South Africa, in the
rebel!10us colony of Southern Rhodesia and in the
~emtory of ~outh West Africa, which is under the
~hrect respons_tbility of the United Nations and now
1llegally occupied by the Government of South Africa·
'
5. Recommends that the Commission on Human
Ri~h!s continue to give consideration, as a matter of
pnonty! to mea~ures for the speedy implementation of
the Umted Nat10ns Declaration on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial. Discrimin~tion and that it report,
through the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session;
6. Condemns the Government of South Africa and
the illegal _regime in Southern Rhodesia for their open
~nd nefarious practices of racial discrimination and
intolerance against the African and other non-white
peoples in the Republic of South Africa, in the Territory of South West Africa, which is under the direct
respoi:isibility of the United Nations and now illegally
occupied by the Government of South Africa and in
the rebellious colony of Southern Rhodesia; '
~- Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
desist from all such nefarious practices;
8. Decides to consider at its twentv-third session the
question of the elimination of all fo~ms of racial discrimination.
1638th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.
