UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/864
10 August 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 6 AUGUST 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
6 August 1999, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

99-23247 (E)

100899

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/864
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 6 August 1999 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to
the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
monthly report on the operations of the Stabilization Force (SFOR). I would
appreciate your making this report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1999/864
English
Page 3

Enclosure
Monthly report to the Security Council on the operations
of the Stabilization Force

1.
Over the reporting period (21 June-20 July), there were approximately
30,100 troops deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions
from all North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) allies and 16 non-NATO
countries. Stabilization Force (SFOR) troops continued to conduct surveillance
and reconnaissance by means of ground and air patrols, with combat aircraft
flying approximately 105 hours. During the reporting period, the only changes
in the force size and composition were the withdrawal of a Norwegian company
with approximately 150 personnel and armoured vehicles and a Russian reinforced
company, which temporarily left as part of the advance party for KFOR in Kosovo.
2.
SFOR continued to monitor entity compliance with the provisions of Security
Council resolution 1160 (1998), which prohibits the transport of weapons into
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, with an intensified presence on the ground
in order to enforce the intent of the embargo. There have been encouraging
results from the increase in efforts to discover weapons either voluntarily
handed over by the entities or uncovered by SFOR.
3.
On 6 July, SFOR troops in multinational division south-west, acting within
their mandate, detained an individual indicted for war crimes by the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The individual,
Radislav Brdjanin, was later transported to The Hague.
4.
During the reporting period, the overall situation became more stable. The
general atmosphere in Republica Srpska is much less tense since the end of the
Kosovo conflict. There has been no evidence of any planned anti-SFOR/
international organization activities in the theatre. With high profile events
such as the recent indictee arrest and commemorations of the fall of Srebrenica,
no openly hostile attitudes or behaviour towards SFOR have been noted. SFOR
continued to ensure compliance with the Peace Agreement and undertake routine
framework operations in order to ensure that the tension and unrest in the
region did not jeopardize the stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Operations
mounted by the multinational divisions across the SFOR area continued area
reconnaissance, surveillance involving ground and air patrols, and weapon
storage site inspections, as well as support to international organizations in
theatre.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
5.
Despite NATO action against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the
entities remain substantially compliant with the military aspects of the Peace
Agreement. However, throughout the reporting period tensions remained in
contested areas, and acts of intimidation and violence occurred with the
attempted return of minority displaced persons and refugees. Incidents occurred
during late June in the areas of Bijelina, Dobor, Banja Luka and Prijedor. The
issues of the return of minority displaced persons and refugees will continue to
strain inter-ethnic relations, and SFOR continues to provide surveillance and
/...

S/1999/864
English
Page 4

security in support of the flow of refugees into their former houses in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
6.
During the reporting period, a total of 351 military weapons storage sites
inspections were carried out by SFOR, including 144 Bosniac, 41 Bosnian Croat,
146 Bosnian Serb and 20 Federation site inspections.
7.
Following the lifting of the training and movement ban for the entity armed
forces on 21 June, normal training and movements have been conducted in
compliance with the instructions to the parties. However, as a result of
non-compliance with the instructions to the parties, the ban on the Republica
Srpska Police Anti-Terrorist Brigade remains in effect until further notice. In
total, 805 training and movement activities have been monitored: 310 Bosniac,
78 Croat, 365 Bosnian Serb and 52 Federation. However, at the meeting of the
Joint Military Commission on 17 June it was judged that the level of compliance
by all entity armed forces with regard to training and movement had been
encouraging and that, as a result, SFOR would undertake a complete review of
training and movement regulations.
8.
The summer demining campaign has continued, with 44 entity armed forces
teams conducting 825 mine-clearing operations and removing 3 anti-tank mines,
95 anti-personnel mines and 30 unexploded ordnance from 75,731 square metres of
land. However, a Republica Srpska Army (VRS) dispute over non-payment of
allowances to deminers has arisen. While soldiers’ basic wages have been paid
normally, the dispute concerns an additional allowance for soldiers employed in
humanitarian demining that was negotiated within VRS last year.
Cooperation with international organizations
9.
Within capabilities, and in accordance with its mandate, SFOR continues to
provide assistance to the international organizations in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including the International Police Task Force (IPTF), the Office of the High
Representative, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
SFOR has provided security support to IPTF and local police in dealing with
disputes over returns of displaced persons and refugees and has continued its
presence in sensitive areas to guarantee a secure environment after the Brcko
arbitration decision and to monitor the exhumation campaign of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. SFOR supported the return of the
international organizations to the Republica Srpska as the threat diffused, and
continued to provide guidance on the present security situation and its likely
development.
10. After prolonged lobbying by SFOR, the Office of the High Representative and
OSCE, agreement was reached at the meeting of the Standing Committee on Military
Matters (SCMM) held on 15 July, to establish a permanent secretariat for SCMM,
representing the entity ministries of defence and the entity armed forces. The
secretariat began its work on 19 July. Furthermore, SCMM agreed to establish
two working groups. One of the groups, comprising the entity armed force
commanders, will consider detailed proposals to reduce the armed forces of the
Republica Srpska and the Federation by 15 per cent by the end of the year. The

/...

S/1999/864
English
Page 5

other, comprising the entity defence ministers, will draw up proposals on a
common security policy for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
11. Sarajevo, Mostar, Banja Luka and Tuzla airports now have authorized
operating hours of 0400-2000 GMT for civilian traffic.
Outlook
12. The Stabilization Pact Summit, scheduled for the last week of July, will
focus the attention of all local entities and the international community. SFOR
will continue to monitor the situation closely in the light of the situation in
Kosovo. Isolated incidents can be expected as a result of the return of
refugees and displaced persons.

-----
