A /75/PV.83

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

83rd plenary meeting

Friday, 18 June 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 34 (continued)
Prevention of armed conflict
(a) Prevention of armed conflict
Draft resolution (A/75/L.85/Rev.1)
The President: I take to the rostrum with a heavy
heart, for during the seventy-fifth session of the General
Assembly we have borne witness to the deterioration of
the situation in Myanmar. Political turmoil has given
way to an increasingly militarized Myanmar. From
the collapse of civilian rule to arbitrary arrests and
indiscriminate attacks against civilians by the military,
Myanmar is not a safe place for the people whom we
pledged to serve.
As a result of the deteriorating political situation,
humanitarian needs are growing. We will hear a
detailed update from the Special Envoy about the
current situation, but know this: communities are being
uprooted as tens of thousands of people flee violence.
The safety of those internally displaced people is at
present uncertain, as humanitarian access remains
restricted in all conflict-afflicted areas owing to
insecurity, banking disruptions, road blockages and
pre-existing access challenges.
Civilians are in acute need of food and shelter, as
well as hygiene and sanitation facilities. Water-borne
diseases are threatening the most vulnerable people,
who are contending with the early arrival of the rainy
season. I ask Member States, in the midst of a global

pandemic, how are we going to stop the spread of the
coronavirus disease in Myanmar if people cannot safely
socially distance, wash their hands, wear masks or
get vaccinated?
The multiplicity of threats facing the country
is staggering. This is not just a crisis for the people
currently in Myanmar; it is also a crisis for the more than
1 million displaced Rohingya people who have found
safe shelter in Cox’s Bazar. I commend the Government
of Bangladesh for stepping up to meet the needs of its
most vulnerable neighbours in their darkest hour. I was
proud to represent the General Assembly on a recent
visit to Cox’s Bazar in Bangladesh. Upon arrival, the
threat of a cyclone loomed large. I have truly never
experienced destructive rain like that in all my life. It
was a stark reminder that we cannot underestimate the
impact extreme weather has on the Rohingya and their
host community.
There is a watch tower in Camp 8W from where
you can see the full expanse of the camp. As far as the
eye can see it is camp structures. Think about that for
a moment — you literally cannot see life beyond the
camp. The Rohingya cannot see life, or a future, beyond
that camp. The community leaders I met were clear
in their message: they are grateful for a safe shelter,
but they want a better future. Frankly, they deserve a
better future.
Their resilience is unmatched. In particular, the
women I met in the camp remain undefeated despite
the unimaginable horrors they have survived. They are
continuing to fight — not just for their own survival

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-16013 (E)

*2116013*

A/75/PV.83

but for that of their children, their community and their
people. They need their rights to citizenship and freedom
of movement to be upheld. A voluntary, dignified and
safe return is the ultimate goal, but that is contingent on
conditions in Myanmar rapidly improving.
They cannot do that alone. They need the full
support of the General Assembly. They need those
with influence in the region to step up and advocate
for their future. I welcome the united voice of the
Security Council on the issue of Myanmar, and I hope
that will continue. I also welcome the engagement of
regional organizations, in particular the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation. The international community
must continue to stand united in its support for the
people of Myanmar and for peace and stability in
their country.
A system built on brutality and bloodshed will not
survive. It is not too late for the military to reverse the
negative trajectory on the ground, exercise restraint
and respect the will of its own people.
We must raise our voices for those who have been
silenced, detained, injured or killed. We must be ardent
advocates for the protection of all fundamental human
rights, including the rights to freedom of expression,
access to information and peaceful assembly, which
have been repeatedly infringed upon by the militaryled authorities.
Heinous acts of violence against civilians and
young people — including sexual and gender-based
violence against women protesters — cannot continue.
The indiscriminate use of lethal force against peaceful
demonstrators is unacceptable.
I call for the immediate release of all of those
arbitrarily detained and full and unimpeded
humanitarian access, which is necessary to protect
those most at risk.
Above all, I call for peace in Myanmar. Draft
resolution A/75/L.85/Rev.1, which is before the General
Assembly, is another step in that direction. I hope that
it can be adopted by consensus. For when it comes to
Myanmar, we must act as nations united. I trust that
Member States, as guardians of the Charter of the
United Nations, will join me in this call for peace.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Liechtenstein to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.85/Rev.1.
2/19

18/06/2021

Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I have the honour
and pleasure to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.85/
Rev.1 on behalf of the members of the core group and
the additional co-sponsors listed in the draft resolution,
as well as Angola, Australia, Japan, Mexico and New
Zealand, which have become co-sponsors since its
submission. The total number of co-sponsors currently
stands at 58.
When the General Assembly heard the briefing by
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar
on the situation in Myanmar presented on 26 February,
Member States expressed their grave concern at
developments in Myanmar: the reversal of Myanmar’s
democratic transition, the violence perpetrated against
peaceful protesters and the stifling of political dissent.
Since then, the situation has continued to deteriorate.
Hundreds of protesters have been killed and hundreds
of thousands have been displaced by the military
crackdown, creating a humanitarian catastrophe
unfolding right before our eyes.
The military has not heeded the many calls to
exercise restraint, cease violence, release all those
detained arbitrarily and stand down to allow democracy
to be restored in Myanmar. There is a real and present
danger of a full-fledged civil war.
In late February, many of us highlighted the need
to remain seized of the situation in Myanmar and to
act in the light of the situation on the ground. After a
very lengthy process of consultations, today we have
the honour to introduce, on behalf of the co-sponsors,
draft resolution A/75/L.85/Rev.1.
The draft resolution supports, complements and
strengthens the efforts of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) to restore Myanmar on the
pathway to democracy. It supports the role of the
Special Envoy and calls for full cooperation with her
by the Myanmar armed forces. It condemns the use of
lethal force and violence by the Myanmar armed forces,
calls on them to reverse their course and reaffirms the
Assembly’s support for the people of Myanmar.
The draft resolution also highlights the need for
accountability for the grave crimes committed against
the people of Myanmar, in particular the Rohingya,
which are under scrutiny by various international justice
mechanisms, and it stresses the principle of command
responsibility in connection with the ongoing attacks
on the civilian population. It calls on all Member States
to prevent the flow of arms into Myanmar and issues a
21-16013

18/06/2021

clear call for an inclusive and peaceful dialogue among
all parties, in accordance with the will of the people
of Myanmar, while supporting and complementing the
pronouncements of the Security Council and adding
its voice to Human Rights Council resolution 42/3, of
3 October 2019.
Draft resolution A/75/L.85/Rev.1 is the result of
intensive negotiations with a wide range of partners,
in particular the member States of ASEAN, which
took the initiative to address the crisis in a five-point
consensus adopted at the ASEAN Leaders Meeting held
on 24 April. Those close consultations with ASEAN
States, with whom we share the wish for the adoption of
the draft resolution without a vote, have resulted in the
revised version of the text before the General Assembly.
We wish to thank our ASEAN partners for the fruitful
and constructive exchanges held, which enabled us to
put forward the present text.
The people of Myanmar deserve the full and
unreserved support of the General Assembly in their
struggle for a peaceful and democratic future. Draft
resolution A/75/L.85/Rev.1 aims to strengthen the
efforts of ASEAN and the United Nations to that end.
We look forward to its adoption today and call on all
delegations to support the text.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/75/L.85/Rev.1, entitled “The situation
in Myanmar”.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
The Islamic Republic of Iran expresses its grave
concern at the deteriorating security and human rights
situation in Myanmar, which could engender serious
adverse repercussions in the region and beyond. In
that connection, we call on Myanmar’s armed forces
to refrain from further violence, exercise the utmost
restraint, uphold democratic institutions and respect
human rights and the rule of law.
While reaffirming our strong commitment to
the sovereignty, political independence, territorial
integrity and unity of Myanmar, we underline the need
for a long-term peaceful political solution and national
reconciliation through an inclusive and peaceful

A/75/PV.83

dialogue among all parties in Myanmar, in accordance
with the will and interests of the people of that country.
The continued deterioration of the Rohingya Muslim
community’s security, human rights and humanitarian
situation, particularly in the light of recent political and
security developments in Myanmar, as well as the tragic
events resulting from the widespread outbreak of the
coronavirus disease, remain matters of grave concern.
It is incumbent upon Myanmar’s authorities to
uphold their responsibility towards the Rohingya
Muslim population and ensure the voluntary and
sustainable return of all internally displaced persons
and refugees from the Rohingya Muslim population
in safety, security and dignity and in accordance with
international law. Furthermore, Myanmar must make
every effort to eliminate the root causes of the current
crisis, including the denial of citizenship, which has led
to the statelessness and deprival of the rights of Rohingya
Muslims, and to address the continued dispossession
and discrimination from which they suffer.
We emphasize the importance of conducting
international, independent, fair and transparent
investigations into the gross human rights violations
against the Rohingya Muslim community and holding
accountable those responsible for such brutal acts and
crimes against it in order to deliver timely justice to
the victims.
The Islamic Republic of Iran reiterates its
commitment to working closely with the United Nations
and other international and regional partners, in
particular the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
to facilitate a peaceful solution for the current crisis
and ensure full respect for the human rights, well-being
and security of the people of Myanmar, including the
Rohingya Muslim community.
While supporting the ongoing efforts of the
international community to facilitate a peaceful solution
for the current crisis in Myanmar, in particular the steps
taken by the United Nations, ASEAN and the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, we are of the view
that, regrettably, draft resolution A/75/L.85/Rev.1 has
failed to adequately and comprehensively address the
plight of Rohingya Muslims. Therefore, my delegation
will abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.
Ms. Hassan (Egypt): Egypt has been closely
following with great concern the recent developments

21-160133/19

A/75/PV.83

in Myanmar. Under those circumstances, Egypt would
like to highlight that the Rohingya community may be
further exposed to more dangers and threats. There
is indeed a serious concern that those developments
might impede the process of the safe and sustained
repatriation of the Rohingya Muslims. Furthermore,
we reiterate our position in support of the Muslim
Rohingya people and call for ensuring their safety and
security and recognizing their fundamental rights.
Egypt believes that the annual draft resolution
introduced by the member States of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation in the Third Committee represents
the right platform and venue for addressing the situation
of the Rohingya. It is worth asking how draft resolution
A/75/L.85/Rev.1 would help settle the current situation
in Myanmar, taking into consideration the ambiguity
of the General Assembly mandates to address such an
issue, as well as the lack of clarity of the link between
the agenda item under which the draft resolution has
been introduced and the current crisis in Myanmar.
While abstaining in the voting on this draft
resolution, my delegation would like to correct a
factual mistake in the sixteenth preambular paragraph
of draft resolution A/75/L.85/Rev.1, which refers
to the “Independent Investigative Mechanism for
Myanmar”. The correct name, as contained in Human
Rights Council resolution 39/2 and General Assembly
resolution 75/238, is the “Independent Mechanism
for Myanmar”. We disassociate ourselves from the
incorrect name and reaffirm the correct name as
contained in relevant Human Rights Council and
General Assembly resolutions.
Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): As a neighbouring
country and fellow member State of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Thailand has
been following the developments in Myanmar closely
and with much concern because the peace, stability
and prosperity of Myanmar and Thailand are closely
linked. In fact, Thailand has been on the front lines of
spillover impacts from the instability in Myanmar, so it
has a lot at stake.
Thailand knows well that the situation in Myanmar
is really complex, which is why dialogue among all
relevant stakeholders in Myanmar is imperative and
urgently needed.
The future of Myanmar will have to be decided by
the Myanmar people themselves, but the international
community can play an important role in creating
4/19

18/06/2021

conditions conducive to that dialogue. The five-point
consensus adopted by the ASEAN Leaders Meeting
held in April reflected the collective will of ASEAN
to help address the situation and facilitate the return
to normalcy in Myanmar. We therefore note with
appreciation that draft resolution A/75/L.85/Rev.1
contains clear language in support of the ASEAN
process and calls on all stakeholders in Myanmar to
cooperate with ASEAN and the Special Envoys of the
ASEAN Chair and of the United Nations SecretaryGeneral.
Ultimately, a unified message from the international
community will be vital, but unfortunately that unified
message was not possible today. We understand that
the General Assembly may have faced constraints in
addressing the security dimension of the situation.
Whatever the case may be, in order for Thailand to
continue to contribute constructively to bring about
a peaceful resolution in the interest of the people of
Myanmar, we have decided to abstain in the voting.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.85/Rev.1, entitled “The situation
in Myanmar”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.85/Rev.1, the delegation of Somalia has
withdrawn its sponsorship of the document.
In addition to those delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.85/Rev.1: Angola,
Australia, Japan, Mexico and New Zealand.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
I give the floor to the representative of Liechtenstein
on a point of order.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I would
appreciate it if you, Mr. President, could inform the
Assembly which delegation requested a vote on the
draft resolution.
The President: It was the delegation of Belarus.
A recorded vote was taken.
21-16013

18/06/2021

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, South Sudan,
Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Viet Nam
Against:
Belarus
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, China, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Libya, Mali, Mauritania,
Mongolia, Nepal, Pakistan, Russian Federation,
Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Yemen, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution A/75/L.85/Rev.1 was adopted by 119
votes to 1, with 36 abstentions (resolution 75/287).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, may I remind

A/75/PV.83

delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Tozik (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): We have
just witnessed the adoption of resolution 75/287 — yet
another resolution based on a politicized, countryspecific topic. The Republic of Belarus voted against it.
At the outset, we would like to note that we fully
share the aspirations to bring an end to the violence
and to achieve peace and harmony in Myanmar. We
welcome the efforts of the countries of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations to resolve the problem at the
regional level.
The position of the Republic of Belarus is in no
way aimed at hindering international steps to settle
the situation in Myanmar. Quite the opposite: we
fully endorse the collective — and, more importantly,
multilateral — approach to responding to emergent
crises in the in the world. Regrettably, this sort of
collective, truly multilateral spirit is lacking, in our
view, in resolution 75/287.
Belarus does not accept the practice of adopting
country-specific resolutions in the General Assembly.
Such documents are always biased in nature, with a
one-sided view of events. By intervening in internal
political affairs, they end up exacerbating the situations
they are intended to address. Resolution 75/287, on the
situation in Myanmar. is no exception.
Resolution 75/287 imposes on a sovereign State
specific models for interaction with human rights
structures and mechanisms, and it also it also openly
encroaches on the mandate of the Security Council with
respect to arms control. In order to promote a negative
image of Myanmar, the resolution intentionally includes
aspects that have nothing to do with the aims of the
resolution itself, such as the problem of the Rohingya
refugees in Rakhine state and citations to human rights
mechanisms that were created long before the events
that are the focus of the resolution.
I wish to separately draw attention to the way in
which work proceeded on the draft of the resolution.
Although the text was very much rushed — it came into
being practically from one day to the next — it was
included in the schedule of the plenary session of the
General Assembly. What disappoints us is the closed
nature and the lack of transparency with how the text was
drafted. The delegations of the States Members of the

21-160135/19

A/75/PV.83

United Nations were deprived of the opportunity to take
part in drafting the text, which is open discrimination.
I wish to pose a couple of rhetorical questions to
the drafters of the resolution. Where is the pluralism of
opinion? Where in the discussion is the multilateralism
that is always touted by the authors of the resolution?
Did people hear and consider all of the opinions and
assessments of the situation?
Our delegation was never involved in discussing
the text of the draft resolution, although the principled,
consistent stance of Belarus on all country-specific
resolutions is well known. Despite some cosmetic
changes that were made to the draft at the last moment,
its essence remained unchanged. It is our view that
this resolution remains, in its nature, a countryspecific resolution.
In this very time slot in this very Hall, a highlevel meeting on middle-income countries had been
scheduled. Heads of delegations at the highest levels,
including the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belarus,
were slated to make statements. We are a middle-income
country. As such, we actively participated in bringing
forward this topic at the United Nations, and we pinned
great hopes on this event, which, with striking rapidity
and ease, was taken off the agenda. Instead, a meeting to
discuss a draft resolution on the situation on Myanmar
was held, which, in our view, was unacceptable.
I would like to conclude by noting that Belarus
recognizes the important role the United Nations plays
in the maintenance of international peace and security,
but this and other aims can be reached successfully
only with the full and unconditional adherence to basic
principles of the work of our Organization, including
inclusiveness and openness.
Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): Today’s resolution
on the situation in Myanmar (resolution 75/287) is of
utmost importance to Bangladesh. We share a border
with Myanmar. We are hosting over a million of their
people. Stability in Myanmar is therefore critically
important for us, so that a durable solution for the
million Rohingyas whom we host and who have been
victims of atrocity crimes may be found. However,
the resolution falls short of our expectations. It fails to
recognize the urgent need for creating conditions for the
safe, voluntary and sustainable return of the Rohingyas.
We acknowledge the efforts of the delegations that
were involved in the negotiations. We thank them for
6/19

18/06/2021

reaching out to us. However, we do not see our key
priorities reflected in the resolution, especially in the
operative part. Therefore, despite being one of the most
affected countries, Bangladesh decided to abstain from
the voting on resolution 75/287.
As a democratic country, Bangladesh deeply cares
about restoration of constitutional order in Myanmar.
However, any resolution on Myanmar, whatever
the context, would remain incomplete if it does not
recognize the root causes of the Rohingya crisis and
make concrete recommendations to address them.
Failure of the international community to address the
root causes, even after the ethnic cleansing in 2017, has
led to a culture of impunity in Myanmar, and we can see
that reality playing out now for other minorities as well.
Bangladesh is not a party to the 1951 Refugee
Convention. Yet we have opened our borders for the
persecuted Rohingyas on multiple occasions over the
last four decades. We greatly appreciate the international
community’s support, including the humanitarian
assistance for the displaced Rohingyas whom we are
hosting. However, humanitarian assistance alone does
not solve the Rohingya problem, nor does it help with
the challenges that Bangladesh faces as a host country.
What is needed is a political solution. The crisis
was created in Myanmar, and its solution must be
found in Myanmar. We remain bilaterally engaged
with Myanmar in good faith towards that end. In
the same spirit, we have engaged with countries and
organizations of the region and sought their support. We
have placed our trust in the United Nations. My prime
minister stood at the General Assembly and appealed
to the international community to take custodianship
of our bilateral efforts. Unfortunately, no progress has
been achieved so far in creating the conditions essential
for the safe return of refugees.
Resolution 75/287 calls for the swift implementation
of the five-point consensus reached at the leaders’
summit of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), which does not address the repatriation
issue. Moreover, the recent comments in public media
by the Myanmar military chief, who was at the ASEAN
leaders’ meeting, ruled out the possibility of any policy
reform, which would be fundamental for the safe and
sustainable return of the Rohingyas. In this situation,
it was all the more important for resolution 75/287 to
stress the need for creating an environment conducive
to the return of the Rohingyas.
21-16013

18/06/2021

Every year. in the Third Committee, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and the
European Union (EU) jointly submit a draft resolution
on the human rights situation of Rohingya Muslims and
other minorities in Myanmar. The resolution recognizes
the importance of addressing the root causes of the
Rohingya crisis and also calls for actions that would lead
to a comprehensive solution to Myanmar’s democratic
and other sociopolitical challenges. The resolutions of
the Human Rights Council do the same thing, including
the latest one adopted in March after the military coup
in Myanmar (A/HRC/RES/46/21).
We have also been encouraged to see the press
elements of the Security Council and the presidential
statement that recognized the impacts of the coup
on the repatriation of Rohingya Muslims and other
displaced minorities (S/PRST/2021/5). It is therefore
very disappointing to see that resolution 75/287 has
deviated from this trend.
While we abstained from the voting on this
resolution today, our efforts to resolve the Rohingya
crisis with support of the General Assembly will
continue. For the last four years we have received
the overwhelming support from the international
community on the Rohingya issue. It is these efforts that
have resulted in the creation of multiple mechanisms in
the United Nations, such as the Office of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary- General on Myanmar, the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
Myanmar, the Independent Investigative Mechanism
for Myanmar and others. Multiple accountability
processes have taken concrete shape thanks to our
combined efforts. Bangladesh will continue to engage
with the brotherly countries of the OIC and other
partners including ASEAN and the EU, to continue to
strive to reach an early resolution of this crisis.
Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): Malaysia remains gravely
concerned over the situation in Myanmar following the
military takeover of 1 February 2021. The continued use
of lethal violence against unarmed civilians, which has
resulted in a high number of casualties, is unacceptable
under any circumstances. In this regard, Malaysia has
consistently called on all parties to exercise utmost
restraint to stop this deplorable situation immediately.
De-escalation and ending violence must be made
our priority. Malaysia reaffirms its strong support for
Myanmar’s democratic transition peace process and

A/75/PV.83

inclusive economic development, in full respect of the
will and aspirations of the people of Myanmar.
From the outset, Malaysia approached the
introduction of resolution 27/287 in the spirit of an
adoption by consensus. Process-wise, we would have
hoped that the Core Group would have held more
inclusive, open-ended and transparent consultations
with the wider membership of the United Nations.
We acknowledge the efforts undertaken by the
Core Group to engage the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) and note that the majority of
ASEAN’s proposals and comments have been taken on
board. This is important, as what impacts Myanmar has
and will continue to affect the region.
In general, the substance of the resolution is in line
with Malaysia’s positions on the matter and highlights
key issues that need to be addressed. For instance, it
calls for the end of violence and the prompt release of
detained political leaders, which is vital for the inclusive
national dialogue that is conducive to reconciliation.
We also appreciate the resolution’s acknowledgement of
ASEAN’s role and its references to the ASEAN leaders’
meeting and its outcome.
We call on the international community to
support and work together with ASEAN in engaging
Myanmar to implement the five-point consensus. We
also look forward to cooperation being extended by
all stakeholders in Myanmar to ASEAN and the tobe-appointed Special Envoy of the ASEAN Chair to
Myanmar. Malaysia also welcomes the recognition
of the role played by the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, particularly on the issue of the Rohingya,
and we note the inclusion of references to the plight of
the Rohingya in the resolution.
Malaysia has been greatly affected by the instability
in Myanmar, and we currently shelter around 200,000
displaced persons from the country, the majority of
whom are Rohingyas from Rakhine state. We firmly
call for the voluntary, safe and dignified return of
displaced persons to Myanmar, and we wish to see the
continuation of the repatriation mechanism that was
agreed by both Bangladesh and Myanmar.
Equally important is the role of the United Nations,
and the visit of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral on Myanmar must also be facilitated. In
this regard, Malaysia welcomes the adoption of
resolution 75/287, which sends a strong message that

21-160137/19

A/75/PV.83

the international community supports the will of the
people of Myanmar. It also complements the efforts
undertaken by the Security Council and Human Rights
Council. While the resolution is far from perfect, it is
timely. With reports of continued violence, we fear that
a worsening of the situation in Myanmar may result in
spillover effects to the region, including Malaysia.
Malaysia’s relationship with Myanmar is based
on the premise of constructive engagement and not
isolation. Malaysia was among the first to recognize
the potential of Myanmar to be part of ASEAN. We
advocated Myanmar’s inclusion in ASEAN in 1997,
ignoring criticism from some quarters because we
believe in the potential of Myanmar to be a responsible
partner that will contribute positively towards ASEAN.
Our constructive engagement has allowed Malaysia
to engage closely with Myanmar, bilaterally and within
the ASEAN framework, including on sensitive issues.
A similar approach has been adopted with regard to the
Third Committee resolution on the situation of human
rights of Rohingya Muslims and other minorities
in Myanmar.
Malaysia will continue on this path of constructive
engagement with all relevant parties in Myanmar with
a view to contributing to a peaceful resolution and the
return to normalcy in the country.
Our vote today was based on the substance of the
resolution, which we believe will positively contribute
to improving the situation on the ground. Malaysia
stands ready to engage constructively and galvanize
efforts with the international community in favour of
resolving the current political crisis.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I would like to explain our
vote on resolution 75/287 on the situation in Myanmar.
As a country that shares both land and maritime
borders with Myanmar, India has direct stakes in the
maintenance of peace and stability in the country. In this
regard, India welcomes the initiative of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) on Myanmar and
the five-point consensus. Our diplomatic engagements
will be aimed at strengthening these efforts. We also
call for upholding the rule of law and the release of
detained leaders.
The Security Council has also expressed strong
support for ASEAN’s positive and constructive role
in facilitating a peaceful solution in support of the
people of Myanmar. The Council has also called for an
8/19

18/06/2021

early visit of the Special Envoy of the ASEAN Chair
to Myanmar.
India’s position on the situation in Myanmar has
been clear and consistent. We expressed our deep
concern on the developments in the country. We strongly
condemned the use of violence and urged maximum
restraint. We affirm that the path to democracy in
Myanmar should continue to move forward through
the process of democratic transition, which India has
steadfastly supported. There can be no turning back on
this issue. India will continue to engage with measures
to accelerate and support the democratic transition
in Myanmar so that the hopes and aspirations of the
people of the country are fully respected and met.
On the issue of the repatriation of the displaced
persons from the Rakhine state in Myanmar, India, as
the only country that shares a long border with both
Bangladesh and Myanmar, has the highest stake in
resolving this issue at the earliest. We have continued
to counsel our partners on the need for a balanced and
constructive approach to this issue. Our support has
been for the people on the ground both at Cox’s Bazar
and in the Rakhine state.
We commend Bangladesh for hosting a million
displaced persons on its territory. It is important
for the international community to recognize and
understand the humanitarian burden that Bangladesh
continues to bear and the efforts that it has undertaken
to ensure the well-being of the displaced persons. It
is also important for the international community to
support — financially and otherwise — efforts of the
Government of Bangladesh. Further, the effort towards
the safe, speedy and sustainable repatriation to the
Rakhine state of Myanmar of the displaced persons
currently in Bangladesh should be expedited. We call
on both sides to engage actively in this regard. As
Myanmar’s immediate neighbour and a close friend
of its people, we are cognizant of the serious impacts
of political instability and of the potential of that
instability to spill over beyond Myanmar’s border.
India has been calling for greater engagement with
the objective of peacefully resolving all issues. There
is already an initiative ongoing under the auspices of
ASEAN. It is important that we extend support for
these ASEAN efforts.
During the discussions on resolution 75/287,
we engaged in a spirit of finding a constructive and
pragmatic way forward and accordingly shared our
21-16013

18/06/2021

suggestions to those who piloted the resolution.
However, we find that our views were not reflected
in the draft that was considered for adoption today.
We would like to reiterate that a consultative and
constructive approach involving the neighbouring
countries and the region remains important as the
international community strives for the peaceful
resolution of the issue. The fact that support for the
resolution is lacking from all neighbouring countries
and from several countries in the region itself should
hopefully serve as an eye-opener to those who chose
to pursue a hasty course of action. We therefore do
not believe that the submission of the resolution for
adoption at this juncture was conducive to aiding our
joint efforts towards strengthening the democratic
process in Myanmar. India was therefore constrained
to abstain from the voting on resolution 75/287.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
All along, China has closely followed developments
in Myanmar, worked actively with Myanmar parties
and constructively participated in relevant Council
discussions and in a joint consensus reached at the
Council. China sincerely hopes that all the Myanmar
parties will resolve their differences sooner through
political dialogue and within the constitutional and
legal framework, avoid the recurrence of violence,
restore the social stability of the country and relaunch
its process of democratic transition at an early date.
Recently, the Brunei Foreign Minister Erywan
Yusof and Secretary-General of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Lim Jock Hoi led
a delegation to Myanmar with a focus on exchanging
ideas on implementing the consensus reached at a
special session of the ASEAN leaders’ meeting. This
visit by the ASEAN delegation is an important step in
implementing the five-point consensus. It takes on a
positive significance.
During the just-concluded special Foreign
Ministers’ meeting to celebrate the thirtieth anniversary
of the dialogue relations between China and ASEAN,
China elaborated its principled position on the current
situation in Myanmar. China and ASEAN reached
broad consensus.
Myanmar is a member of the ASEAN family. China
supports the Association in playing its constructive role
in properly Myanmar’s domestic issues. China supports
a gradual implementation of the five-point consensus
within the ASEAN framework. China will continue to

A/75/PV.83

maintain close communication with ASEAN and play a
constructive role in its own way.
Myanmar’s current issues represent a twist in its
political transition process. Essentially, it is a domestic
issue. Whether or not it can be solved properly in the
end, it mainly depends on Myanmar itself. History has
shown that blind external pressure or the imposition
of sanctions on Myanmar is not only ineffective, but,
quite on the contrary, they might aggravate the issue
and ultimately harm the Myanmar people.
We hope that all parties will be able to abide by
the purpose and principles of the United Nations
Charter, work under the precondition of respecting the
sovereignty, political independence, territorial integrity
and national unity of Myanmar, be objective and fair,
support the efforts of countries of the region, avoid
unilateral sanctions and inappropriate intervention and
create a favourable external environment for Myanmar’s
domestic political reconciliation.
China has always been opposed to the adoption of
country-specific resolutions by the General Assembly.
The draft resolution adopted today as resolution
75/287 failed to undergo adequate discussions and
consultations by the wider United Nations membership.
It is lacking in transparency and inclusiveness and
contains some elements that are not constructive, which
made it hard for China to accept the resolution. Based
on the foregoing, China abstained from the voting on
resolution 75/287.
Mr. Kyaw Moe Tun (Myanmar): At the outset, I
would like to thank the representatives of Liechtenstein
and the European Union, as well as the Core Group
and the sponsors of the draft resolution just adopted as
resolution 75/287, and for their efforts and hard work
towards a smooth adoption of the resolution. I wish also
to thank all delegations that supported the resolution.
In this regard, I would like to state the following
points. First, Myanmar supported the resolution by
voting in favour of it, because we believe that it will,
to a certain extent, contribute to putting pressure on
the military to stop its inhumane acts in Myanmar
and further consolidate the people’s efforts aimed at
restoring democracy in the country.
However, the resolution falls far short of our
expectations. The people of Myanmar have always
wished that the international community, including
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),

21-160139/19

A/75/PV.83

would respect the desire and voices of the Myanmar
people. It is imperative that there be engagement with
all relevant stakeholders in Myanmar, in particular
representatives of the National Unity Government,
ethnic organizations and civil society groups.
Secondly, the resolution does not include some
important elements, such as the imposition of an arms
embargo. The military is killing innocent civilians
and peaceful protesters with lethal weapons and heavy
artillery, both of which are imported. I hereby appeal
to all States Members of the United Nations States,
especially those that are exporting weapons to the
Myanmar military, to stop selling them immediately.
Selling weapons to a murderous military can be
construed as aiding and abetting the military to commit
serious crimes, including crimes against humanity,
ethnic cleansing, war crimes and genocide.
Thirdly, time is of the essence for the people of
Myanmar if the lives of innocent civilians are to be
saved and if democracy is to be restored in the country.
We are very disappointed that it took almost three
months to adopt this watered-down resolution, despite
the omission of many important points that could save
the lives of the people of Myanmar. On 26 February
2021, in an informal meeting of the plenary, I appealed
to the international community from this very seat to
take the strongest possible action to immediately end
the military coup. In the first 100 days following that
appeal, almost 900 people, including many young
people and children as young as seven years old, were
murdered. The people of Myanmar have noted that if
the international community, including the United
Nations, had taken a decisive and timely action against
the military, it would have prevented the loss of life of
over 800 innocent civilians.
Fourthly, it is critically important that no country
support the military and the State Administrative
Council of Myanmar in any way whatsoever, whether
intentionally or unintentionally or directly or indirectly.
Such support would encourage the military and the State
Administrative Council to commit further atrocities
and inhumane acts against the people of Myanmar.
Recently, the Myanmar military forces burned the
entire village of Kinma in the central part of Myanmar
to the ground, and those who could not run for their
lives were burned to death. That is not acceptable to
us, and it should definitely not be acceptable to the
international community.
10/19

18/06/2021

Finally, a strong and decisive action from the
international community and the United Nations is
immediately needed to save the lives of the people
of Myanmar and to stop the military’s brutality and
inhumane acts in the country. I therefore urge the
Security Council to seriously look into the crisis in
Myanmar and take the strongest and most decisive
action possible against the military and the State
Administrative Council without further delay.
Mr. Vongnorkeo (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): My delegation would like to explain our
abstention in the voting on resolution 75/287 on the
situation in Myanmar as follows.
As an immediate neighbour sharing a common
border with Myanmar, and as a fellow member of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has closely
followed the situation and the recent developments in
Myanmar. My delegation welcomes the inclusion in the
resolution of the elements relating to the holding and
outcome of the ASEAN leaders’ meeting on 24 April
2021. However, we are of the view that there remains
some language in the text that is not in line with the
previous practice of General Assembly resolutions,
given that General Assembly mandates and resolutions
are different from those of the Security Council or the
Human Rights Council.
It was our desire from the beginning that resolution
75/287 be adopted by consensus, that is, without a
vote, so that it could send a positive signal to the
wider international community, thereby not showing
a division, but creating an environment conducive to
ensuring a peaceful solution to the ongoing situation
in Myanmar and, more importantly, helping support
and not undermine the ongoing efforts of ASEAN,
particularly the full implementation of the five-point
consensus reached during the ASEAN leaders’ meeting.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): Since the onset of the
developments on the 1 February 2021, Singapore has
taken a clear and consistent position on the situation
in Myanmar. We strongly oppose the use of lethal
force against unarmed civilians. It is deplorable and
unacceptable under any circumstances. We call on the
Myanmar military authorities to put an end to further
violence and bloodshed and for all sides to refrain
from escalating tensions. We also call for the release
of all political detainees, including foreigners, and for
21-16013

18/06/2021

meaningful negotiations and dialogue among all parties
to be undertaken.
Singapore voted in favour of resolution 75/287,
as it recognizes the central role of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and calls on all
stakeholders in Myanmar to cooperate with ASEAN and
the Special Envoy of the ASEAN Chair or other envoys
of the Association to swiftly and fully implement the
five-point consensus reached at the ASEAN leaders’
meeting on 24 April.
The key elements of the resolution are in line with
Singapore’s position to end the violence and begin
a process of genuine political dialogue and national
reconciliation in Myanmar. We support the calls for
unimpeded humanitarian assistance to safely reach
those in need. The resolution is also in line with our
position to strongly support the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar.
Singapore will continue to do what it can to
support and contribute to the efforts of ASEAN and the
Secretary-General in facilitating a return to normalcy,
peace and stability in Myanmar. But there must also
be a genuine desire within Myanmar for meaningful
dialogue, negotiation and reconciliation. We hope that
wisdom and good sense will prevail, and we stand ready
to do our part.
Ms. Sulaiman (Brunei Darussalam): We have just
seen the adoption of resolution 75/287, entitled “The
situation in Myanmar”, and Brunei Darussalam shares
the concern of the international community on the
situation in that country, especially on the reports of
fatalities and escalation of violence.
As current Chair of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), Brunei Darussalam
welcomes the support accorded to ASEAN as reflected
in the fourth and fifth preambular paragraphs and
operative paragraph 3 of the resolution. ASEAN will
continue to play a positive and constructive role in
facilitating a peaceful solution in the interests of the
people of Myanmar and their livelihoods, including
the full implementation of the five-point consensus
that was adopted at the ASEAN leaders’ meeting on
24 April 2021.
We also wish to reiterate our position as reflected in
the ASEAN Chairman’s statement on the developments
in the Republic of the Union of Myanmar, issued on
1 February 2021, the Chairman’s statement from the

A/75/PV.83

informal ASEAN Ministerial meeting, issued on
2 March 2021, and the Chairman’s statement from
the ASEAN leaders’ meeting, issued on 24 April, as
well as Brunei Darussalam’s national statements at the
twenty-ninth session of the Human Rights Council on
12 February and at the informal meeting of the General
Assembly on the briefing by Special Envoy of the
Secretary General on Myanmar on 26 February, and its
statement on the developments in the Republic of the
Union of Myanmar on 24 March 2021.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor to explain our position after the
voting on resolution 75/287.
Vietnam’s position on the issue is clear and
consistent. In the interest of time, we will not reiterate all
aspects of our position, but we will stress the following.
We remain deeply concerned over the clashes and
attacks that have taken lives of many people over the last
few weeks across Myanmar. The people of Myanmar
must be protected from the threat of an all-out civil war.
We therefore reiterate our call for all parties in Myanmar
to immediately to stop violence, restore trust, take up
dialogue, strive for reconciliation and implement the
five-point consensus reached at the leaders’ meeting of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
in April. The international community should continue
to engage with Myanmar and create an environment
conducive to the achievement of this goal, pursuant to
the fundamental principles of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.
We understand that the resolution we adopted today
is not perfect and that it does not reflect the full picture
of the situation on the ground, but we voted in favour
of the resolution to express our strong commitment to
the efforts aimed at helping to facilitate de-escalation
and at starting dialogue and reconciliation. Our vote in
favour is to support engagement over disengagement,
cooperation over confrontation and trust over distrust.
Myanmar is a member of ASEAN. Together with
all other ASEAN members, we will try our best to help
Myanmar overcome this difficult period for the benefit
of the Myanmar people, and for peace, stability and
prosperity in our region.
Ms. Charikhi (Algeria): My delegation has taken
the floor to explain its position after the voting on
resolution 75/287.

21-1601311/19

A/75/PV.83

At the outset, let me thank the members of the
Core Group and acknowledge their endeavours to
accommodate the positions, comments and concerns
expressed, which have led to the adoption of this revised
resolution entitled “The situation in Myanmar”.
We believe that further efforts could have been
made to ensure a consensual adoption of the resolution.
That could have been a strong message of unity and
shared understanding among members of the General
Assembly to address the situation in Myanmar,
reflecting all views, especially those of the members of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
and of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
My delegation joins other members of the General
Assembly in expressing its solidarity with the people
of Myanmar and in calling on all parties to exercise
the utmost restraint, paving the way for a democratic
solution in Myanmar.
Nevertheless, Algeria abstained from the voting
on this resolution, in line with its principled position
on country-specific resolutions adopted by the
United Nations. Indeed, Algeria believes that the
General Assembly and any other United Nations organ
or mechanism must always be guided by the principles
of the United Nations Charter.
We recall that the General Assembly should
provide an opportunity to seek further dialogue
and constructive cooperation with all delegations
in a holistic and comprehensive manner, far from
politicization and selectivity, and should therefore not
constitute a platform to discuss internal affairs of any
State Member of the United Nations. Furthermore, we
know that the adoption of resolution 75/287 took place
after the ASEAN leaders’ meeting held in Jakarta on
24 April to discuss, inter alia, the situation in Myanmar.
We believe that regional efforts and the role played by
ASEAN members should have been put at the centre of
this resolution.
In saying so, let me take this opportunity to
welcome the adoption of key consensual decisions
during the Jakarta summit that were designed to seek
a peaceful solution in the interests of Myanmar people.
The decision to appoint a special envoy of the ASEAN
Chair and that envoy’s upcoming visit to Myanmar,
together with representatives of countries of the region,
is a very positive step towards mediation and dialogue
efforts. It should be welcomed and supported by the
General Assembly as a manifestation of nation-al and
12/19

18/06/2021

regional ownership of matters related to peace, security
and democratic transition.
In fact, Algeria believes that resolution 75/287
should have built further on the recognition by the United
Nations that regional and subregional organizations
such as ASEAN and the OIC are well placed to understand the root causes of conflict in their respective
parts of the world and to promote confidence-building
measures and political dialogue at various levels.
My delegation has always underlined and supported
the role of regional organizations in peacebuilding
efforts, recognizing that they have a comparative advantage in the promotion of confidence-building and
dialogue and in assisting Member States to peacefully
prevent and resolve conflicts. In this regard, we believe
that the Jakarta summit opened promising path-ways
for constructive dialogue with all parties concerned
in Myanmar.
Finally, I would like to reaffirm Algeria’s support
for the efforts of the OIC aimed at protecting the
Muslim Rohingya people who have been affected by
the current situation in Myanmar. We call for ensuring
the safety and security of the Rohingya people and
welcome the international community’s efforts to find
a durable solution to the refugee crisis they are facing
in this difficult context.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The current internal political situation in
Myanmar is being tracked very carefully in Russia. We
believe that this challenging time for the country is one
in which the belligerent parties need to show maximum
restraint and avoid the use of force.
In our view, the primary task is to establish a
constructive dialogue with the aim of moving Myanmar
society forward towards national reconciliation. A
particular role in the process of the peaceful resolution
will certainly be carried out by the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). The summit
in Jakarta showed that clearly. We welcome the
statement by the Chairman of the Association issued
on the 24 April as well as the five-point consensus.
It is a clear example of effective practical efforts by
regional powers to achieve peace in Myanmar. We
believe that implementing the initiatives enshrined in
the consensus, including appointing a special envoy
of the ASEAN Chair, who, with the assistance of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, will help to
gradually normalize the situation in the country.
21-16013

18/06/2021

In this context, we were baffled by the circulation at
the General Assembly of a draft resolution on Myanmar.
We believe that the very fact that such a country-specific
resolution was drawn up in the General Assembly blurs
the lines of the division of labour among the organs in
the United Nations system. The issue is already on the
agenda of the Security Council, which is confirmed
by the Council’s regular products on the matter. Just
this morning, incidentally, the Security Council held
its most recent meeting on the situation in Myanmar
(S/PV.8800).
I should also like to voice my deep disappointment
and bewilderment at the way that resolution 75/287 was
drawn up, specifically the lack of desire by the authors
to discuss it thoroughly in a broad format, which can be
interpreted only as an attempt to hide the fact that the
text does not fully consider the opinions of all Member
States. This shortcoming was clearly highlighted in the
statements of colleagues who have spoken before me.
With respect to the content of the resolution, we
are compelled to note that the authors were not able to
take a balanced approach or show an appropriate level
of understanding of the complexity and multifaceted
nature of the current realities within Myanmar. Instead,
the text attempts to push forward one-dimensional
national positions of certain Member States.
Resolution 75/287 stands out because of its
politicized nature. Indeed, some of its passages
are openly biased or are divorced from reality. The
resolution focuses on criticism of the authorities in
Naypyidaw while neglecting the issues that have to do
with the impact on current events from other actors
operating in internal political processes in Myanmar.
We are firmly convinced that documents such as this
serve only to sow division in the General Assembly,
and this is something that we have seen very clearly
during our meeting today.
We still believe that the task of the international
community is to help Myanmar find a way out of
the current crisis. A precondition for the efforts
undertaken is the consistent adherence to the principles
of non-intervention in the internal affairs of sovereign
States, neutrality and renunciation of sanctions and
political and diplomatic pressure, which only served to
push Myanmar toward a full-blown civil conflict.
In the light of the foregoing, the Russian Federation
was unable to support the draft resolution submitted
by the Core Group. We regret to note that resolution

A/75/PV.83

75/287, despite its stated aims, will not contribute to
efforts to provide constructive international assistance
aimed at resolving the situation in Myanmar.
Mr. Moharram (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia abstained in the voting on
resolution 75/287, entitled “The situation in Myanmar”.
In this respect, my country’s delegation would like to
make the following observations.
Despite a lack of clarity on the part of the sponsors
regarding the negotiation process, my delegation sought
to achieve a balanced text that takes into consideration
the concerns of all States concerned with this crisis.
The resolution sufficiently and clearly ignores
important aspects of the humanitarian crisis suffered
by the Muslim Rohingya minority and other minorities
in Myanmar.
It cannot be ignored that the ongoing political crisis
in Myanmar has exacerbated the bitter humanitarian
situation that the Muslim Rohingya minority is facing,
which makes it less possible for those refugees to return
home safely from the scattered camps. Accordingly, my
delegation and delegations of other countries asked the
sponsors to include a clear reference to the oppressed
Muslim Rohingya minority in the operative paragraphs
of the resolution in a way that reflects the gravity of the
humanitarian situation of these people.
My delegation calls on Myanmar to assume its
responsibilities towards the Muslim Rohingya minority
and put an immediate end to all acts of violence and
violations of international humanitarian law. Further,
we demand that all measures necessary to do justice for
the victims must be taken and that an end must be put
to the impunity of all those involved in the violation of
international humanitarian law.
My delegation emphasizes once again the consistent
position of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in supporting
the Rohingya Muslims, and we call for ensuring their
safety and security while recognizing their fundamental
rights, including their right to full citizenship, the
creation of conditions conducive for their voluntary,
safe and dignified return, and their reintegration into
the society.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): Cambodia abstained from the
voting on resolution 75/287, entitled “The situation in
Myanmar”, taken under agenda item 34, “Prevention
of armed conflict”, and wishes to express the
following views.

21-1601313/19

A/75/PV.83

Given the current situation in Myanmar, it is
very important for the international community to
focus on creating an environment conducive to the
coming together of the concerned parties to engage
in a peaceful dialogue, which, I believe, will lead to a
peaceful solution for the country.
Since the political problem arose in Myanmar on
1 February 2021, Cambodia has joined the efforts of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
and consistently supported the ASEAN Chairman’s
statement issued on 1 February and the Chairman’s
statement issued at the informal ASEAN Ministerial
meeting on 2 March 2021.
My delegation wishes to stress that the five-point
consensus agreed by the ASEAN leaders at their
meeting in Jakarta on 24 April 2021 is an important
outcome that will pave the way towards peaceful
dialogue and reconciliation among the concerned
parties as well as towards de-escalating the tension and
bringing violence to an end. Accordingly, I call on the
international community to support the implementation
of the five-point consensus.
In accordance with the ASEAN Charter and the
United Nations Charter, Cambodia fully supports
resolving the political problem in Myanmar through
peaceful means, and it hopes that the situation
in Myanmar will soon return to normalcy, peace
and stability.
Ms. Nassrullah (Iraq): Iraq voted in favour of
resolution 75/287, entitled “The situation in Myanmar”,
adopted today by the General Assembly.
Iraq reiterates its position in support of the Muslim
Rohingya people. However, Iraq believes that neither
the current language on the Muslim Rohingya nor the
resolution in general meets our expectations nor does
it properly convey the situation on the ground. Further
spotlight should have been given in the text to the
suffering of the Muslim Rohingya, as there is indeed
a serious concern that the developments on the ground
might impede the process of the safe and sustained
repatriation of the Rohingya Muslims.
Furthermore, Iraq would like to disassociate
itself from the nineteenth preambular paragraph of
the resolution.
Ms. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates): The United
Arab Emirates remains deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation and the impact of the recent
14/19

18/06/2021

developments in Myanmar on the ongoing suffering of
the Rohingya Muslim minority, including on those who
have been displaced.
The role of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
is crucial to protecting the Rohingya Muslim minority
and ending their suffering. In this regard, the
United Arab Emirates reiterates its support for the
ongoing regional effort that hopefully will lead to a
sustained solution.
We appreciate the role played by the countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations in facilitating a
peaceful solution that supports the people of Myanmar.
The United Arab Emirates reaffirms its support for
the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire
in response to the growing risk of another outbreak
of the coronavirus disease and other humanitarian
health challenges.
While the United Arab Emirates supports many of
the provisions of resolution 75/287, we note that it did not
receive the consensus support of Member States, nor do
the operative paragraphs of the resolution sufficiently
address the suffering that the Rohingya continue to
face. For those reasons, my delegation abstained in the
voting on the resolution.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
We will now hear statements after the adoption of
the resolution.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): It has been 137 days since a coup d’état seized
control from the democratically elected Government in
Myanmar. However, it was only today that the General
Assembly took action to respond to the coup. One would
have thought that the violence and the deterioration
of the human rights situation in the country would
have prompted a more expeditious reaction from the
international community, but this was not the case. Time
is a luxury that the people of Myanmar do not have.
It is in no one’s interest for the junta to last. Remaining
silent — or speaking with a timid voice — enables,
emboldens and entrenches human rights violations in
Myanmar. Costa Rica refuses to remain silent. That is
why Costa Rica co-sponsored and voted in favour of
the resolution we adopted today (resolution 75/287),
and we hope that it will be a fundamental component
in promoting stability, human rights and peace in all its
aspects in Myanmar.
21-16013

18/06/2021

In supporting this resolution, Costa Rica wishes
to emphasize three aspects. First, Costa Rica urges the
immediate suspension of the supply, sale or direct or
indirect transfer of all arms, ammunition and related
equipment to the junta. The junta depends on — and
uses on a daily basis — the weapons that some members
of the international community continue to provide to
it. Such weapons shoot bullets into the eyes of children
or that ricochet off the torsos of young men. They
terrorize and push ethnic minorities across borders and
corner women into sexual victimization. To continue
supplying arms to the junta is to give it a blank cheque
to commit violence.
As required by international law and the Arms Trade
Treaty, transfers of arms, ammunition and equipment to
Myanmar or any conflict zone must stop immediately.
Stopping these transfers is one of the clearest and
most effective ways to undercut the violence and send
a powerful message that the international community
condemns the junta’s brutality and will not tolerate
its gross human rights violations. In the absence of
Security Council leadership, unilateral embargoes have
been useful, but what we really need is a unified and
concerted effort to stem arms flows.
Secondly, Costa Rica urges that there be
accountability for all serious human rights violations
in Myanmar wherever they occur. Serious human
rights violations must be thoroughly investigated,
and perpetrators must be held accountable to
avoid impunity. Impunity is a perverse virus that
contaminates everything around it. Costa Rica also
insists that the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
be granted immediate entry to Myanmar so that she can
carry out her mandate thoroughly, freely and without
obstruction. Costa Rica also supports the International
Criminal Court’s investigations into crimes within
its jurisdiction and looks forward to its findings. The
centrality of victims and their special status in the
design and implementation of justice are crucial to
ensuring successful accountability.
Thirdly, Costa Rica again highlights the role
of Burmese youth in defending democracy in their
country. Like many countries in its region, Myanmar
is a young country. Some 10 million of its 53 million
citizens are students. Unfortunately, the junta has
targeted their schools, suspended their classes and
dismissed their teachers. For those students, peacefully
protesting in the streets can have dire consequences.
We must follow their example and protect them.

A/75/PV.83

Millions of my brothers and sisters — in all their
ethnic, religious and regional diversity — continue
to courageously challenge the military coup that is
attempting to steal a peaceful, democratic future from
them. The junta is not the face of Myanmar. The junta is
illegitimate in its origin, form and function. The junta
continues to assassinate and detain children, deploy
military armaments against civilians, assault medics,
incarcerate journalists, use arbitrary arrests and
enforced disappearances to strike fear in the hearts of
anti-coup protesters, as well as persecute the political
opposition and defenders of human rights.
We must take immediate and decisive action
against the military junta. We already know that timidly
waiting or issuing verbal condemnations is insufficient.
We must demonstrate through resolutions, such as the
one just adopted, that juntas cannot assault, attack
and arrest their way to legitimacy — in Myanmar or
anywhere else in the world.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Ukraine condemns in
the strongest terms the military coup and the overthrow
of the democratically elected Government in Myanmar,
as well as the use of excessive and lethal force, which
has led to injuries and fatalities among peaceful
demonstrators and members of civil society, including
women, youth and children. In that regard, we echo
the calls of the Secretary-General and the Security
Council on the Myanmar military to refrain from
violence against peaceful demonstrators and bring an
end immediately and unconditionally to the systematic
targeting of civil society.
Ukraine is deeply concerned by the reports that
State Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi faces new charges
and calls for the immediate release of all Myanmar’s
political leaders, civil society representatives, human
rights advocates, journalists and media workers who
were arbitrarily detained, as well as the end of the state
of emergency and the restoration of the rule of law.
We remain deeply alarmed by the crackdown on
the freedom of expression, including through Internet
blocks, and call on the military to ensure unimpeded
telecommunications. Ukraine urges the military and
security forces of Myanmar to conduct transparent
investigations into all allegations of human rights
violations and abuses, as well as to bring those
responsible for the violence to justice. Impunity for the
perpetrators of the terrible violations in Myanmar must
be immediately brought to an end.

21-1601315/19

A/75/PV.83

18/06/2021

We call for safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access to the most vulnerable populations, including
people in detention, as well as for the voluntary,
dignified and sustainable return of the Rohingya and
other minorities to Myanmar. Ukraine reiterates its
full support for the efforts of regional organizations, in
particular the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
aimed at calming and stabilizing the situation in
Myanmar. We also recall the need to grant prompt and
immediate access to the Special Envoy on Myanmar to
assess the developments on the ground and create the
preconditions for dialogue and the return of Myanmar
to the democratic path.

Therefore, in spite of the fact that a response to those
violations from our Organization has taken so long,
we believe that today we are taking an important step
forward to amend in some way our long silence in the
face of the victims, including children, who have lost
their lives and the thousands of people who have been
detained.

We profoundly regret — and it is a shame, in all
senses of that word — that resolution 75/287, which
could have been adopted without a vote and thereby be
even more powerful as a message to the military junta,
was put to a vote by Belarus, which is represented by
that lonely red dot on the screen in front of us. The
reference by the only country that voted against the
resolution to the role of the Security Council is worth
noting, including in the light of the candidacy of that
country to the Security Council. Today’s voting results
speaks for itself. All dictatorships should, and will
eventually, feel lonely in this Hall.

However, a gradual change will not be the result of
a miracle. The international community is called upon
to facilitate a solution that brings an end to repression
and violence against civilians and to firmly support the
people of Myanmar in their fight for peace, security and
prosperity for all. It is our duty to stand at their side and
insist upon a peaceful return to democratic governance,
which the minorities in Myanmar are legitimately
demanding at enormous risk to themselves.

Considering that the Security Council is unable to
take meaningful action because of the position of the
one usual suspect — the Russian Federation — Ukraine
hopes that the resolution just adopted will represent
a timely and decisive response by the international
community that will contribute to the peaceful
settlement of the situation in Myanmar.
Finally, we would like to reaffirm Ukraine’s firm
support for the sovereignty, political independence and
territorial integrity of Myanmar.
Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, the Dominican Republic
wishes to express its concern and rejection of the
indiscriminate attacks against civilians in Myanmar,
including peaceful protesters, women, young people
and children, which have been seen over the months
prior to today’s meeting. We also reiterate our deep
concern with regard to the arbitrary detention of
members of the Government and press and call for their
immediate release.
Myanmar is currently in its fourth month of crisis.
The continued attacks on civilians are an infringement
on the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
16/19

The situation is more critical today. It is imperative
to establish the conditions for dialogue, with the sole
objective of an immediate return to the rule of law and
respect for fundamental freedoms, leading to a more
stable, promising and peaceful outlook for Myanmar.

The international community must show its full
support for the people of Myanmar and for the younger
generation, which has shown great courage and
determination in its efforts to bring an end to the crisis
and steer its country back towards democracy.
Mr. Rae (Canada): Canada was proud to be
a member of the core group and proud to have been
involved intensely in the discussions that led to the
adoption of resolution 75/287. We attach a great deal of
importance to the conversations that we have had with
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and with many other countries in trying to find a
resolution that reflects a couple of basic issues that I
think need to be presented clearly to the Assembly.
(spoke in French)
The first thing that needs to be said is that the
attack on civilians is not only a question for one
country but also a question for the General Assembly
and for the United Nations. It is neither legally nor
politically correct to think that sovereignty nullifies all
other principles of democracy and humanitarian law.
That is not true. That is not the reality of the situation.
Yet I continue to hear, in particular in the statement
by the representative of Belarus, the sense that national
sovereignty is an absolute principle, so that the people
21-16013

18/06/2021

of the world, the courts and all the institutions of the
United Nations have nothing to say about a humanitarian
situation, a human rights situation or the very existence
of a population.
Statutes on genocide and conventions on torture
have been created. Important international laws
intended to guarantee the existence of human rights
have been adopted.
(spoke in English)
To me it seems quite clear that the Charter of the
United Nations speaks of the equality of all nations and
that equality speaks to the existence of the principle
of sovereignty. But the Charter does not say that the
principle of sovereignty trumps every other value that
we have as an Assembly. When a people is being denied
the integrity of its existence and where human life
itself is being threatened by virtue of a person being a
member of one ethnic group or one religion or another,
it is not interfering in the internal affairs of another
State to say that we can have something to say about
that as an Assembly.
At the same time, it is very important for us to
respect the concerns, issues and points of view of
those who reflect the political and social realities of
different countries around the world. I know that in
our discussions about that and in our negotiations, we
have tried to be respectful of the points of view of the
members of ASEAN and the perspectives of a number of
different countries, but always with the understanding
that our purpose was to advance the causes that actually
have been part of the history of this Organization for
more than 75 years.
For 75 years, we have been slowly building a
complex network of laws and institutions and values
that are intended to respect the dignity of difference
among us, but also the reality of the universality of
what it means to be a human being and what it means
to have rights. We have reflected that in any number
of documents, for which virtually every member of the
General Assembly has voted since 1945.
Therefore, Canada takes the view not that we
are perfect, not that we do not ourselves face human
rights challenges — because we do. I understand that
a spokesman for the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
China commented on the discovery by Canada of
the horrendous human rights abuse brought to light
by finding 215 graves of unidentified children in the

A/75/PV.83

graveyard of a residential school; for that and other
atrocities, which we fully recognize as being completely
unacceptable, we all, as Canadians, must and do
apologize and recognize them as mistakes committed
in our past about which we can have nothing but shame
and frankly embarrassment.
But that does not preclude us from saying that we
renew our commitment to human rights, we renew
our commitment to reconciliation and we renew our
commitment not only to a Canada that is just and that
respects the rule of law but also to a world that respects
the rule of law.
What the Tatmadaw has done is to obliterate the
result of an election; pretend that it was stolen when
it was not; throw the opposition in jail completely
illegally and with no foundation; kill hundreds of their
own citizens; and continue a war with a number of
regional groups and forces that have been at battle in
the state of Myanmar for the same 75 years that we have
been sitting in this Hall.
The Tatmadaw then proceeded to go to a meeting
with ASEAN leaders, made commitments, accepted the
establishment of a Special Envoy of ASEAN and sat
and listened to the five principles, which were accepted
by ASEAN leaders with the Tatmadaw in the room, and
then walked away and said, “We were only kidding. We
are not going to do that.”
To me, those are questions that are fundamental
to the stability of the region and the stability of the
world. That is why Canada believes that a resolution
is appropriate and timely and that it is right for us to
be doing whatever we can to move forward, together
with as many people as we can, to reflect the need
for engagement to get Myanmar back on the path to
democracy, which we all celebrated a short six years ago.
I deeply regret that not everyone voted in
favour — some have abstained. Having been the Special
Envoy of my country to Myanmar and having visited
the camps in Cox’s Bazar and having had extensive
discussions with members of the Rohingya community
in Myanmar, Bangladesh and many other countries,
I fully understand the importance that a great many
countries attach to the principle that the Rohingya
should be allowed to return to their country in freedom
and in dignity and with a right to citizenship.
I fully endorse that principle. We have said it on any
number of occasions. We refer to it in two particular

21-1601317/19

A/75/PV.83

18/06/2021

paragraphs of the resolution that we have just adopted.
I sincerely and truly hope that the path to democracy in
Myanmar will be a path of inclusivity and respect and
that recognizes the dignity of every person living in
Myanmar, including the Rohingya people.

released immediately; the central and constructive
role of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations be
respected and supported; the United Nations be granted
unhindered access; human rights and international law
be respected; and democratic governance be restored.

You, Mr. President, and I have both been in the camp
in Cox’s Bazar and you and I both know — you, Sir, have
described it very eloquently from the rostrum — the
situation facing refugees in Cox’s Bazar. I can confirm
equally challenging conditions in the camps in Sittwe
and say that it is possible to keep in our hearts and
minds the importance of the principle of democracy and
of saving all of the civilian population in Myanmar and,
at the same time, say there must be special attention
paid to the Rohingya people. Canada fully endorses an
approach that says we must do both of those things.

The strong message sent out today by an
overwhelming majority of the membership of the
General Assembly will complement and reinforce the
unified statements made by the Security Council on
4 February (SC/14430), 10 March (S/PRST/2021/5)
and 1 April. My delegation hopes that the United
Nations will continue to play its part in supporting the
democratic transition in Myanmar, in accordance with
the will and interest of the people of Myanmar.

I congratulate and thank the representatives who
have supported us. As I used to say after an election,
I thank the people who voted for me and I also thank
the people who I hope in a few weeks’ time will claim
that they voted for me. So I say to those who could not
find a path to support that resolution: we must all learn
from this experience. We must all listen to each other
and we must all aspire to achieving greater unity in the
name not of unduly intervening in the affairs of another
country but in the name of saving lives, stopping
killings and bringing countries to peace.
That is the historic mission of this Organization.
We are supposed to be saving future generations from
the scourge of war. Some of those generations are living
right now in Myanmar. Are we going to save them from
the scourge of war or are we going to say, “Well, no,
sorry we cannot help you because you live in a certain
country that has borders and boundaries and we have
nothing to say about what is happening to you”? I think
that is morally wrong but I also think it is legally wrong.
I do not think it is right. I think that we have to accept
the fact that, in the General Assembly, we shall forever
live with the necessary and vital tension between the
principle of national sovereignty and the principle of
the universality of human rights and the importance for
us to be saving lives.
Mr. Bae Jongin (Republic of Korea): My
delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution 75/287.
As a co-sponsor of the resolution, we firmly believe
that it clearly demonstrates the collective and united
will of the international community that violence
against civilians stop; arbitrarily detained leaders be
18/19

The Republic of Korea stands firmly together with
the people of Myanmar. In close cooperation with the
international community and all relevant stakeholders,
we will continue to play a constructive and responsible
role in support of the swift restoration of democracy
and peace in Myanmar.
My delegation also reiterates its firm support for the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar
and hopes that she will be able to visit Myanmar as soon
as possible for engagement with all relevant parties.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): Today, after months of
consultations among Member States, resolution 75/287,
on the situation in Myanmar, was adopted by an
overwhelming majority, including Japan. Throughout
the process, Japan insisted that the resolution should
freely reflect the voices of countries of the region, in
particular the members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), and that it should be adopted
by consensus. We truly regret that the final draft of the
resolution was put to a vote.
Yes, some Member States, including those from
the region, did not vote in favour. However, in our
understanding, those votes were by no means intended
to demonstrate solidarity with the Myanmar military;
rather, the adoption of the resolution was a sign of the
resolute will of the international community against
the acts carried out by the Myanmar military. The
Myanmar military must not misjudge that point and
must take it seriously.
As expressed on many occasions, the Government
of Japan continues to strongly urge the Myanmar
military to immediately cease all acts of violence,
release those who have been detained and swiftly
21-16013

18/06/2021

restore Myanmar’s democratic political system. The
Myanmar military should swiftly implement ASEAN’s
five-point consensus.
Japan reiterates ASEAN’s central role in addressing
the situation and hopes that the ASEAN Special Envoy
will be appointed and visit Myanmar as soon as possible.
I hope that the ASEAN Envoy will work closely with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Burgener.
The most important thing is that the Myanmar
military and all the parties concerned, as well as the

A/75/PV.83

international community and the United Nations, work
together closely to take the necessary steps for the
people of Myanmar. Japan will continue to play its role
in that regard.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the vote.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 34.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

21-1601319/19
