UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY CjDUNCIL
TiV,!?hii;f-NINTH

YEAR

i780 th,.
MEETING:

19 JULY 1974

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Prdvisionai agttida (S/Agenda/l780)
Ad@tio;il bf the agenda ..................

............

..i..:4....;
..;....;....;.:...:...A

1

.............
.......

TIie Situation in Cjlprus:
Letter dated 16 Julv 1974 from thk SCi5etarir’-General
to the President
_
Secdrity Cow&i1 (S/ 11334);
* dated 16 July 1974 from the Permarient Rafj&&itatit;e
tif Cyprus
United Nations addressed to the President bf the $ecbity b.in6if
(S/l 1335) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..~~...........

1

1

SIPV. 1780

,:.

. ‘.:

i

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the’security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
I
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resblutions and
Decisions of the Secbity
Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

.I
-.
.‘.

1.J

, ‘.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTIETH

Held in-New York on Friday,
President:

Mr. Javier PEREZ

de CUELLAR

(Peru).

1. Adoption
2.

19 July 1974, at 3.30 p.m.

,

agenda (S/Agenda/l780)

“I have the honour to inform you that by
decision of the Government
of the Republic of
Cyprus as from 15 July 1974 the till-then Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations,
Mr. Zenon Rossides, has been relieved of his post
and duties. Signed: Dimitriou,
Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Republic of Cyprus”.

The second telegram reads as follows:

of the agenda

“I hereby have the honour to inform you that
Ambassador Loucis Papaphilippou
has been designated as Permanent Representative of the Republic
of Cyprus to the United Nations, and he will be
arriving. in New York within the next 24 hours
accompanied by members of the Cypriot delegation
to the United Nations. His credentials and those
of the Cypriot delegation will be presented to you
,by him personally. In.order that the new Permanent
‘Representative
of the Republic of Cyprus to the
United Nations may be able to attend the Security
Council meeting on Cyprus, which is scheduled for
today, I hereby request an adjournment
of the
meeting of the Security Council for 24 hours.
Signed: Dimitriou,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Cyprus.”

The situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1334);
(b) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative.
of Cyprus to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1335)
The meeting was &led

,

Security Council that he had received from Nicosia,
on 17 and 18 July 1974 respectively, two telegrams.
The first read as follows: .

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia,
Austria,
Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic,
China, Costa Rica,. France, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania,
Peru, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon
and United States of America.
Provisional

MEETING

to order at 3.45 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security Council
(S/11334);
(b) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1335)

3. The members of the Security Council took note
of the information given by the Secretary-General.
They are agreed that, in respect of the current debate
on the situation in Cyprus, in which Cyprus was
invited to participate, at its request, by decision of
the Council taken at its 1779th meeting, the President
of Cyprus, His Beatitude Archbishop Makarios, who
had expressed the wish to address the Council,” would
be received in that capacity. Consequently Ambassador Rossides, having been duly ,accredited by the
Head of State of Cyprus, is to be regarded as representing Cyprus in the current debate on the situation
in Cyprus in the Council. Accordingly, if I hear no
objection, I shall invite His Beatitude Archbishop
Makarios and the representatives of Turkey and Greece
to take seats at the Council table.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
Members of the Council will recall that at its 1779th
meeting the Security Council decided, following
appropriate requests, that Cyprus, Turkey and Greece
might participate without the right to vote in the
discussion of the item before the Council in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and the
established practice of the Council. In this connexion
I wish to make the following statement.

4. I now request the Chief of Protocol to escort
His Beatitude Archbishop Makarios into the Council
chamber and to the seat reserved for Cyprus.

.2. In the course of consultations among all members
of the Council, the Secretary-General
informed the
1

’

a coup by the Greek junta was brewing, and this
feeling became more intense during recent weeks
when the terrorist organization EOKA-B,
directed
from Athens, renewed its wave of violence. I knew
all along that that illegal organization had :its roots
and supply resources in Athens. I became aware that
the Greek officers staffing and commanding
the
National Guard were ,recruiting members for that
organization, and they supported it in various ways,
to the point of giving it access to the munition supply
stores of the National Guard. In the camps of the
National Guard, the Greek officers were conducting
open propaganda in’ favour of that illegal organization
and turned the National Guard from an organ of the
State into an instrument of subversion. Whenever,
from time to time, I complained to Athens about
unbecoming conduct by Greek offtcers of the National
Guard, the reply was that if I had concrete evidence
in proof thereof those found guilty would be recalled.
From the whole tenor of their attitude, I received
the unmistakable
impression
that their standard
response was a pretence of innocence. A few days
ago documents came into the hands of the Cyprus
police clearly proving that EOKA-B was an appendage
of the Athens regime.

President Makarios was escorted into the Counc)l
chamber and took a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Olcay (Turkey)
and Mr. ‘Panayotacos
(Greece) took places at the
Council table.

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
In addition, I wish to inform members of the Council
that I have received letters dated 17 July 1974 from
the representative of Yugoslavia and 19 July 1974
from the representative of Romania, and also one
of today’s date from the representative
of India,
requesting that Yugoslavia,
Romania
and India,
respectively, be invited to participate in the Council’s
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure. Accordingly,
I propose, if I hear no objection and in accordance
with the usual practice, to invite the representatives
mentioned to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote.
8.. In view of the limited number of seats available
at the Council table, I shall invite those representatives to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber, on the usual -understanding that they wit1 be invited to come to the
Council table when it is their turn to address the
Council.

10. Funds were being remitted from Athens for the
upkeep of that organization and detailed directives
regarding its actions were also given to it. I then
found it necessary myself to address a letter to the
President of the Greek regime, General Gizikis, asking
him to give orders for the cessation of the violence
and bloodshed by EOKA-B and ,for its dissolution.
I also requested him to recall the Greek officers serving
with the National Guard, adding that my intention
was to reduce the numerical strength of this force
and to turn it into an organ of the Cyprus State. I
was waiting for a reply. My impression was that the
Athens regime did not favour the reduction of the
force, much less the withdrawal of the Greek officers.

At the invitation
of the president.
Mr. PetriL
(Yugoslavia),
Mr. D&a
(Romania)
and Mr. Jaipal
(India} took the ‘places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

7. The PRESIDENT
(interpreiation
from Spanish):
I now have the honour to call upon His Beatitude
Archbishop Makarios, the President of Cyprus.
8. President MAKARIOS:
I should like at the
outset to express my warmest thanks to the members
of the Security Council for the keen interest they have
shown in the critical situation created in Cyprus
after the. coup which was organized by the military
regime of Greece and was put into effect by the Greek
officers serving in and commanding ,the Cyprus National Guard. I am particularly grateful that the Council
agreed to postpone its meeting until my arrival here
to give me the opportunity of addressing it on the
recent dramatic events in Cyprus.

11. The Greek Ambassador in Cyprus called on me,
on instructions from. his Government,
in order to
explain that the decrease in the numerical strength
of the National Guard or the withdrawal of the Greek
officers would weaken the defence of Cyprus in case
of danger from Turkey. That’was an argument which,
even though it appeared logical, was not convincing
because I knew that, behind that argument, other
interests were hidden. I replied that as things had
developed, I considered the danger from Turkey of a
lesser degree than the danger from them. And it was
proved that my fears were justified.

9. What has been happening in Cyprus since last
Monday morning is a real tragedy. The military regime
of Greece has callously violated the independence of
Cyprus. Without a trace of respect for the democratic
rights of the Cypriot people, without a trace of respect
for the independence and sovereignty of the Republic
of Cyprus, the Greek junta has extended its dictatorship to Cyprus. It is indeed a fact that for some time
now their intention
was becoming obvious. The
people of Cyprus for a long time had the feeling that

12. On Saturday, 13 July, a conference under the
,presidency of General Gizikis was held in Athens
which lasted for many hours. It was attended by the
Greek Chief of Staff of the armed forces, the Ambassador of Greece to Cyprus, the Commander of the
National Guard ,and other offtcials, for the purpose of
discussing the content of my letter. As was stated in
the communique issued at the end of,this conference,
2

it was to be reconvened on Monday, 15 July. The
reference in the communique to a second conference
was deceiving; for while on Monday I was waiting
for a reply to my letter the reply came, and it was
the coup.

17. When I reached London, I was informed of the
content of the speeclidf the representative of the Greek
junta to the United Nations. I was surprised at the way
they were trying to deceive world public opinion.
Without a blush, the Greek junta is making efforts
to simplify the situation, claiming that it is not involved
in the armed attack and that the developments of the
last few days are an internal matter of the Greek
Cypriots.

13. On that day, I returned from my summer house
on the Troodos mountains, where I had spent the
week-end, and by 8 a.m. I was at my office at the
Presidential Palace. Half an hour later I was welcoming in the reception room a group of boys and
girls, members of the Greek Orthodox Youth from
Cairo who had come to Cyprus as my guests for a
few days. Hardly had I greeted them when the first
shots were heard. Within seconds the shots became
more frequent and a member of the Presidential
Guard informed me that armoured cars and tanks
had passed the fence and were already in the yard
of the Presidential Palace, which was shaking from
mortar shells. The situation soon became critical. I
tried to call the Cyprus Radio Station for the purpose
of issuing a special broadcast announcing the Presidential Palace was under attack, but I realized that
the lines were cut off. Heavy shelling was everincreasing. How my life was saved seemed like a
providential miracle. When I eventually found myself
in the area of Paphos, I addressed the people of Cyprus
from a local radio station informing them that I was
alive and that I would struggle with them against
the dictatorship which the Greek regime was trying to
impose.

18. I do not believe that there are people who
accept the allegations of the Greek military regime.
The coup did not come about under such circumstances
as to be considered an internal matter of the Greek
Cypriots. It is clearly an invasion from outside, in
flagrant violation of the independence and sovereignty
of the Republic of Cyprus. The so-called coup was
the work of the Greek officers staffing and commanding
the National Guard. I must also underline the fact
that the Greek contingent, composed of 950 offtcers
and men stationed in Cyprus by virtue of the Treaty
of Alliance, played a predominant role in this aggressive affair against Cyprus. The capture of the airport
outside the capital was carried out by officers and
men of the Greek contingent camping near the airport.
19. It is enough to state on this point that certain
photographs appearing in the world press show armoured vehicles and tanks belonging to the Greek
contingent in Cyprus. On the other hand, the Greek
officers serving with the National Guard were directing
the operations. In these operations, they recruited
many members of the terrorist organization EOKA-B,
whom they armed with weapons of the National Guard.

14. I do not intend to occupy the time of the members
of the Security Council with my personal adventure.
I simply wish to add that during the second day
of the armed attack the armoured cars and tanks were
moving towards Paphos, while at the same time a
small warship of the National Guard began shelling
the Bishopric of Paphos where ,I was staying. In the
circumstances, I found it advisable to leave Cyprus
rather than fall into the hands of the Greek junta.

20. If the Greek officers serving in the National
Guard were not involved, how does one explain the
fact that among the casualties in battle were Greek
officers whose remains were transported to Greece
and buried there? If Greek officers did not carry out
the coup, how does one explain the fact of night
flights of Greek aircraft’ transporting to Cyprus personnel in civilian clothes and taking back to Greece
dead and wounded men? There is no doubt that
the coup was organized by the Greek junta and was
carried out by the Greek officers commanding
the
National Guard and by the officers and men of the
Greek contingent stationed in Cyprus-and
it was
reported as such by the press around the globe.

15. I am grateful to the Government of the United
Kingdom, which made available a helicopter to pick
me up from Paphos, transfer me to the United Kingdom
bases, and from there by plane to Malta and London.
I am also grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and to the Commander of the
United National
Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP)
for the interest which they showed for
my safety. My presence in this room of the Security
Council was made possible thanks to the help given
me by the United Kingdom Government
and the
representatives of the Secretary-General
whose keen
concern for me and for the critical situation which
developed in Cyprus moves every fibre of my heart.

21. The coup caused much bloodshed and took a
great toll of human lives. It was faced with the
determined resistance of the legal security forces and
the resistance of the Greek people of Cyprus. I can
say with certainty that the resistance and the reaction
of the Greek Cypriot people against the conspirators
will not end until there is a restoration of their freedom
.and democratic rights. The Cypriot people will never
bow to dictatorship, even though for the moment the
brutal force of the armoured cars and tanks may have
prevailed.

16. I do not know as yet all the details of the Cyprus
crisis caused by the Greek military regime. I am afraid
that the number of casualties is large ‘and that the
material destruction is heavy. What is, however, our
primary concern at present is the endingofthe tragedy.
3

22. After the coup the agents of the Greek rbgime
in Cyprus appointed a well-known gunman, Nicos
Sampson, as President, who in turn appointed as
ministers known eiements and supporters of the terrorist organization ,EOKA-B.

be any progress in the talks while the policy on
Cyprus of the rkgime in Athens has been doublefaced? It was agreed .by all the parties concerned
that the talks were taking place on the basis of
independence. The rhgime of Athens also agreed to
that, and time and again the Greek Ministry of Foreign
Affairs declared that the position of Greece on this
issue was clear. If that was the case, why did the
military rkgime of Greece create and support the
terrorist organization EOKA-B, whose purpose was
stated to be the union of Cyprus with Greece and
whose members called themselves “unionists”?

23. It may be alleged that what took place in Cyprus
is a revolution and that a Government was established
based on revolutionary law. This is not the case. No
revolution
took place in Cyprus which could be
considered as an internal matter. It was an invasion
which violated the independence and the sovereignty
of the Republic. And the invasion is continuing so long
as there are Greek officers in Cyprus. The results of
this invasion will be catastrophic for Cyprus if there
is no return to constitutional
normality and if democratic freedoms are not restored.

29. Inside the camps of the National Giard, the
Greek officers continually charged that while enosis
was feasible, its realization was undermined by me.
When reminded that Greece had made its position
clear on this and that it supported independence,
their reply was that no attention should be given to
the words of diplomats. In such circumstances how
was it possible for the talks to arrive at a positive
result? The double-faced policy of the Greek rigime
was one of the main obstacles to the progress of the
talks.

24. For the purpose of misleading world public
opiniori, the military rigime of Greece announced
yesterday the gradual replacement of the Greek officers
of the National Guard. But the issue is not their
replacement; the issue is their withdrawal. The gesture
of replacement has the meaning of an admission that
the Greek oflicers now serving in the National Guard
were those who carried out the coup. Those officers
‘did not, however, act on their own initiative but upon
instructions from Athens, and their replacements will
also follow instructions from the Athens rkgime. Thus
the National Guard will always remain an instrument
of the Greek military rbgime, and I am certain that
the members of the Security Council understand this
ploy.

30. In the circumstances that have now been created
in Cyprus, I cannot foresee the prospects of the talks.
I would rather say that there are no prospects at all.
An agreement that may be reached by the talks would
be devoid of any value because there is no elected
leadership to deal with the matter. The coup d’Ctat
of the military rt5gime of Greece constitutes an arrest
of the progress of the talks towards a solution. Moreover, it will be a continuous source of anomaly in
Cyprus, the repercussions.of which will be very grave
and far-reaching, if this situation is permitted to
continue even for a short time.

25. It may be said that it was the Cyprus Government
which invited the Greek officers to staff the National
Guard. I regret to say that it was a mistake on my
part to bestow upon them so much trust and confidence. They abused that trust and confidence and,
instead of helping in the defence of the island’s
independence,
sovereignty and territorial
integrity,
they themselves became the aggressors.

3 1. I appeal to the members of the Security Council
to do their utmost to put an end to the anomalous
situation which was created by the coup of Athens.
I call upon the Council to use all the ways and means
at its disposal so that the constitutional order in Cyprus
and the democratic rights of the people of Cyprus
can be reinstated without delay:

26. I am obliged to say that the policy of the military
rigime in Greece towards Cyprus, and particularly
towards the Greek Cypriots, has been insincere. I
wish to stress that it was a policy of duplicity.
27. For some time talks were going on between the
Greek and Turkish Cypriots in search of a peaceful
solution to the Cyprus problem, which on many
occasions has occupied the time of the Security
Council and the General Assembly. The representative
of the Secretary-General and two constitutional experts
from Greece and Turkey have been attending the
talks. The Security Council has repeatedly -renewed,
twice yearly, the mandate of the Peace-keeping Force
in Cyprus, expressing every time hope for ,a speedy
solution of the problem.

32. As I have already stated, the events in Cyprus
do not constitute an internal matter of the Greeks
of Cyprus. The Turks of Cyprus are also affected.
The coup of the Greek junta is an invasion, and from
its consequences the whole people of Cyprus suffers,
both Greeks and Turks. The United Nations has a
peace-keeping force’ stationed in Cyprus. It is not
possible for the role of that peace-keeping force to
be effective under conditions of a military coup. The
Security Council should call upon the military regime
of Greece to withdraw from Cyprus the Greek officers
serving in the -National Guard, and to put an end
to its invasion of Cyprus.

28. It cannot be said that up to now the-progress of
the talks has been satisfactory. But how could there

33. I think that, with what I have plactd
you, I have given a picture of the situation.
4

before
I have

in Cyprus, as well as the Greek Ambassador to Cyprus
were all in Athens for consultations on the tenor of
Makarios’ letter many days before the outbreak of
the coup. It should, however, be noted that from
the very beginning all communications,
by telex or
otherwise, between Athens and the Greek Embassy
in Nicosia were, till yesterday at least, cut off. This
fact constitutes by itself the best proof, if proof were
needed, that the Cypriot armed forces had been
acting on their own, in full secrecy, and were
reluctant to share with anybody either the progress
of their operations or their ultimate goals. These
are the true facts. All the rest is pure fabrication,
ludicruous
innuendoes
or deliberate
distortions
unworthy of refutation.

no doubt that an appropriate decision of the Security
Council will put an end to the invasion and restore
the violated independence of Cyprus and the democratic rights of the Cypriot people.
34. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
froth Spanish):
I shall suspend this meeting for a few moments while
the Secretary-General and I escort ,His Beatitude from
the chamber.
President Makarios
Council chamber.

was escorted from the Security

35. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
The next name is that of the representative of Greece,
on whom I now call.
s

.

40. I was therefore sincerely appalled by certain
hasty and arbitrary, to say the least, assessments
made during last Tuesday’s meeting [f779th meeting]
by some of the participants. Allow me, in turn, to
make some brief answering remarks.

36. Mr. PANAYOTACOS
(Greece): Mr. President,
I should like first to thank you for making my speech
possible. My presence today in this forum is quite
an accidental one, pending the arrival of a new
Permanent Representative.
I feel, however, particularly happy to be once more among old friends and
colleagues, despite the fact that this happens under
My personal
extremely
painful
circumstances.
experience, however, as a former Ambassador to
Cyprus, entitles me to give you with increased
authority certain facts that led to this untoward
situation, as well as a first-hand expose on the background of what is happening today in this strifetom island.

41. The preposterous
accusations against Greek
offtcers formulated by, of all people, Mr. Rossides
-whose personal status as a representative remains,
incidentally, still doubtful-aused
me a deep feeling
of sadness, because I no longer recognized the
fiery patriot of the 1950s and 1960s I had known and
used to admire. Before making accusations, he should
at least respect the memory of those Greek offricers
who shed their blood during the events of 1964 for
the survival of Cyprus’s independence.
Has he
forgotten that it was a Greek air officer who saved
Makarios’ life in the assassination attempt by one of
his closest collaborators? Has -he buried in oblivion
the .fact that for years the Greek officers suffered
patiently and silently nameless insults, humiliations
and even obscenities on the part of leftist proMakarios elements and other paramilitary
stooges?
Maybe Mr. Rossides’ memory is weakening and
needs some refreshing. I deem it futile, however, to
indulge in further eIaboration of facts well known to
all Cypriots, facts that would make the dead Greek
officers turn in their graves.

37. To begin with, I should like to reiterate the
offtcial stand of the Greek Government with regard
to the recent events in Cyprus, as it is clearly stated
in a letter addressed by the Greek Prime. Minister
to the Secretary-General and dated 16 July [S/11337].
38. I furthermore wish to stress the contents of a
statement made by Foreign Minister Kypraios, which
reads as follows:
“The recent events in Cyprus are an internal
affair of an independent country, Member of the
United Nations. Greece in this case respects the
strict rule of non-intervention
in others’ internal
affairs. The Greek policy on Cyprus remains
unchanged, consisting of the safeguarding of the
independence, territorial integrity and unity of the
Republic of Cyprus. The Greek Govemment,places
much importance on the continuation of reinforced
intercommunal
talks and expresses the hope that
all parties concerned will exercise restraint following
the recent events in the island.”

.
42. To insinuate, on the other hand, that a. handful
of Greek offtcers was able to annihilate in a few hours
Makarios’ powerful military machinery and overcome
his alleged vast popular support does not seem to
make any sense. After all, he was the man who had
repeatedly boasted that he had outlived 13 Greek
Governments
and could outlive many more. The
representative of the USSR has also carelessly spoken
of “a gross interference by external forces”. That
brought back to my memory a similar statement
made six years ago at this very table by the ten
Soviet representative, who also contended, in almost
the same wording, that his Government had irrefutable
evidence of external interference in Czechoslovakia’s
internal affairs.

39. In view of this crystal-clear. attitude, I flatly
and unreservedly reject as utterly groundless the
vicious allegations of any so-called direct involvement
of the Greek Government in the military coup that
led to the ousting of Makarios. Actually, the Commander-in-chief
of the National
Guard, General
Denissis, the Commander of the Greek contingent
5

43. And, last but not least, my friend and dear
colleague the Turkish representative,
Mr. Olcay,
referred in his statement to a so-called Greek intervention. Should I remind him, in turn, of the Turkish
air bombardments
of civilians in 1964? He furthermore mentioned the “presence and illegal activity
of Greek forces in Cyprus”. Could he really let his
audience believe that the hundreds, if not thousands,
of Turkish officers now training the Turkish Cypriot
forces and neutralizing
all political opponents of
DenktaS, such as the well-known lawyer Berberoglou,
are in Cyprus for their health or acting legally?
On my part, I can assure him, anyway, once more,
that no threat whatsoever--either
to the national
status of Cyprus or to the rights guaranteed to the
Turkish community-exists
except in the imagination of those who by their preposterous accusations
against the Greek officers are trying to cover up
their real schemes and goals.

people by professing enosis every time he needed a
booster for his declining popularity, believing that he
could fool all the people all the time-an unscrupulous
demagogue and a great showman, a master in grand
stands such as the one you have just seen, but
always running a one-man show, surrounded by
puppets and yes-men. He abhorred opposition as
well as competition.
Until the -end of December 1971
he stubbornly declined to accept U Thant’s formula
for the enlarged intercommunal
talks, obsessed by
the fear that Greece and Turkey might have made a
secret deal in order to sell out Cyprus.
48. In February 1972 he turned a deaf ear to Athens’
last advice for the formation of a Government of
national unity. In reply, he created and armed his
own paramilitary units of Praetorians instead-namely,
a bunch of SS zealots. He persecuted his political
opponents and torture was used systematically against
them as a means of extorting confessions, according
to a recent official survey. They were also excluded
from political life and all public offices.

44. -As regards today’s statement by Makarios, I
reserve my comments until the legitimate representatives of the Republic of Cyprus, who are arriving
in New York tonight, are given the opportunity
to
express their views.

49. Countless
political
murders,
including
the
assassination of Makarios’
No. 2 man Georgadji,
have been perpetrated, if not with his blessing at
least with a display on his part of indifference and
apathy. Piled-up hatred escalated throughout
the
years. Even his closest friends felt frustrated and
thrown away like squeezed lemons, to use Georgadji’s
last words before his assassination. It is also worth
noting that the man who overthrew him, Nicos
Sampson, a former EOKA freedom fighter, was also
among his friends. His newspaper Mnhi was subsidized
by the Makarios-controlled
monastery of Kykkos,
the real Bank of Cyprus. But he also became gradually disillusioned,
like so many others before him,
by Makarios’ Machiavellian
manipulations.

45. Turning now to the very essence of the problem
created by the present situation in Cyprus, I believe
that one should bear in mind certain facts that explain
the true reasons that led to the revolutionary initiative
of the National Guard forces. In fact, the recent events
in Cyprus recall the English proverb, “Old sins cast
long shadows”. In the aftermath of Cyprus’s independence, Makarios started promoting the personality cult and the pursuit of grandeur. Combining
the mentalities of Caesar and the Pope, he identified
himself with Cyprus, as Louis XIV did with France,
and ultimately became the victim of his own errors,
ambitions and illusions. True, he outlived 13 Greek
Governments,
but he ultimately
also outlived his
own usefulness, in the same pattern that has sealed
the fate of many other prominent political leaders
of ex-colonial countries, such as Nkrumah, Ben Bella,
Obote and others.

50. True, Makarios, thanks to his personal magnetism, had succeeded in keeping large crowds under
his spell. True also, he was charismatic.
But his
ultimate downfall became unavoidable for the simple
reason that, as Richard
Morris,
the Columbia
University
historian,
has so aptly pointed out,
“Perhaps our century has a surfeit of charismatic
leaders; today we could do with honest ones”.

46. He was at odds with all Greek Premiers-not
only with the junta-including
Karamanlis, Venizelos
(who would never consent to talk to him), Papandreou,
Paraskevopoulos,
Stefanopoulos
and others. He
systematically and arrogantly ignored the wise advice
and admonitions
of the Ethnic Centre. Contemptuously disregarding the written warnings by former
Foreign Minister Averoff, he insisted on proposing
the 13 points for the amendment
of the Zurich
Constitution,
thus opening Aeolus’ bags, which resulted in the tragic clashes of December 1963 and
the de facto partition of the island by the so-called
green line.

5 1. The PRESIDENT
(in terprefu tion from Spanish):
I call upon the representative of Turkey.
52. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): So much of what has
been said up to now, including today, tempts me
to use the formula “we told you so”-which
usually
has a rather unpleasant connotation-that
I really
have to exert all my efforts to refrain from using
it. I shall try to confine my present statement to
some general remarks designed to clarify Turkey’s
legal position.

47. Inconsistent in character, on the one hand he
whole-heartedly
supported independence
and, on
the other hand, he often misled the simple Cypriot

53. Turkey continues to view the situation on the
island as very grave. The developments of the past
6

-.

of the Council’ may be allowed to make such a
suggestion-that
whatever resolution is adopted by
the Council should reflect the fact that the constitutional structure had been jeopardized
for some
time and that what is happening now is a further
disruption of the situation, to which this august body
will try to find a solution.

four days have certainly not alleviated the deep
concern felt in Turkey. On the contrary, everything
seems to indicate a worsening of the situation.
54. In Cyprus itself, as has been demonstrated and
continues to be demonstrated
at today’s meeting,
there seems to be a problem of legitimacies.
The
Greek Cypriot
administration
under Archbishop
Makarios has, in our view, its legitimacy to the extent
that it has conformed to the Constitution of the State
established and guaranteed by international treaties.
The coup seems to have eliminated every appearance
of legitimacy on the Greek Cypriot side. As I had
occasion to state at the last meeting of the Council,
in this context and in the present circumstances
the only legitimate constitutional institution right now
in Cyprus seems to be the Turkish administration
under the Vice-President of Cyprus.

59. I know I said that I would not yield to the temptation to say “we told you so”, but I feel that I
should do so to this extent: I would remind the Council
that on many occasions Turkish representatives sitting
where I am sitting now-we seem not really to have
changed our place-tried
to draw the attention of
the Council and of the Secretariat of the United
Nations to the illegal importation of arms and personnel
into the island of Cyprus. In respect of the arms that
have been illegally imported in the past-under
whatever pretence and whatever heading-I
should like
to express the hope that those armaments that have
been in UNFICYP
custody will remain in UNFICYP
custody, as agreed before.

55. As is well known, Turkey has special responsibilities under international
agreements. These apply
to the constitutional
structure and the international
status of Cyprus. It is, in our view, the duty of the
world communityto
restore the status quo ante. For
its part, Turkey considers it its duty to make use of
the rights conferred on it by international treaties.

60. It will be remembered that the cessation of such
acts and the withdrawal at a certain stage of all the
Greek personnel on the island whose presence was
in excess and therefore in violation of the provisions
of international
agreements were among the main
points of the understanding
reached between the
parties in order to ease the 1967 crisis. Today I must
note with regret that the coup was master-minded
and carried out by precisely those foreign elements
which were mentioned at that time and whose presence
in Cyprus was neither initiated by nor the result of
any invitation or indication of ‘approval from the
Turkish Government or by the Turkish community
in Cyprus-one
of the two communities constituting
the population of the island. That fact seems now to
be established beyond any reasonable doubt by the
evidence that we have just heard from no less a person
than his Beatitude the Archbishop.

56. I hope that any resolution adopted by the Council
will take cognizance of the international
treaties
which gave birth to Cyprus and whose violation led
to what is known as the Cyprus conflict,. which for
more than 10 years has occupied the Council at least
every six months.
57. To illustrate what I mean I would say that it is
not a new fact in the international arena to see Governments overthrown-and
the word “overthrown”
itself
usually implies the use of force. Yet not one of those
incidents is considered or discussed by the Security
Council. Why, then, are we discussing the problem
of Cyprus with regard to a change of government-a
change of government by force, it is true, but still a
mere change of government? The only reason why the
developments in Cyprus are before the Council is their
international
character. The reason is that these
developments concern Turkey, Greece and Cyprus in
a conflict pertaining to the internationally
established
and guaranteed status of the Turkish and Greek
communities of the island, within the framework of
a Constitution
recognizing their partnership in the
defence of the independence, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the island.

61. I should like to associate myself with what was
said by the Archbishop on the following point. The
question of withdrawal versus replacement of the
Greek officers of the National Guard has a certain
importance from my country’s point of view also.
Hence, I should like to say that the goodwill of
Athens will not be shown if the 650 Greek officers
are maintained, there being merely a change of the
individuals constituting this body and no change in
their numbers and their role on the island.

58. I should like to state, again within this framework, that the constitutional
structure of the island
was not disrupted for the first time a week ago; the
most recent events do not constitute the only disruption of the island’s Constitution.
Indeed, the
Security Council was seized of the matter as the result
of a long-standing situation in which the constitutional
structure had been disrupted. That is why we would
suggest-to the extent that a State that is not a member

62. That is ail I wish to say at this stage. I thank
you, Mr. President, for having given me this opportunity to speak.
63.. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table
and to make a statement.
7

<

Y
.

64. Mr. PETRIC
(Yugoslavia):
Mr. President,
permit me to thank you and the other members of the
Security Council for allowing the Yugoslav delegation to participate in the consideration of this very
important and urgent matter now before the Council.
65. It is a great honour for us to welcome the President of the Republic of Cyprus, Archbishop Makarios.
His presence here today, and his convincing and
deeply moving address will, -1 am sure, greatly
strengthen the ‘efforts in this Council that are aimed
at assisting his suffering country to resist aggression and preserve its sovereignty and independence.
His appeal, we are convinced, cannot and must not
remain unanswered. It is our firm belief that through
action by the international community-the
Security
Council in particular-the
constitutional
rights of
President Makarios
and his Government
will be
restored, that the democratic forces in Cyprus and in
the world will triumph over the forces of reaction
and foreign intervention and that we shall soon be
able to welcome his return to Cyprus and his resumption of the noble task of maintaining his country as
an independent,
multinational
and non-aligned
community, a task that President Makarios has carried
out for years with unparalleled devotion and success.
66.’ The views of my country concerning the events
in Cyprus have already been made abundantly clear.
The brutal armed attack, organized from abroad and
aimed at forcibly overthrowing
the President of
Cyprus, Archbishop Makarios, and the legitimate
Government of the Republic of Cyprus, has provoked
the profound indignation and bitterness of the Govemment of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and of the entire Yugoslav public. The statements
by my Government
on 15 July and by President
Tito on 16 July express in very clear terms the
feelings of all the Yugoslav peoples.
67. The armed intervention,
which is being carried
out with the direct participation
of officers of the
Greek armed forces, represents the most flagrant.
assault on the independence, sovereignty and integrity
of the Republic of Cyprus, its Government and President Makarios. It is an open and armed interference
in the internal affairs of a sovereign, independent
‘and non-aligned country which has for ‘a number of
years, under the leadership of President Makarios;
struggled, together with the non-aligned and other
peace-loving countries, for peace and international
co-operation, for implementation
of the principles of
the policy of non-alignment and for the right of each
people to decide its own destiny. This intervention,
for which the Government
of Greece bears full
responsibility,
is a ruthless violation of the basic
principles of international law and of the Charter of
the United Nations.
68. The Yugoslav peoples and their Government
followed with keen sympathy and supported the
liberation
struggle waged by the Cypriot people

against colonialism and are well acquainted with the
tireless efforts of President Makarios to preserve the
freedom, independence and integrity of Cyprus. That
is why we find especially revolting the fact that the
prrtschists had directed their criminal action to the
liquidation
of President Makarios,
symbol of that
struggle, outstanding tighter for equal and democratic
relations in the world and veteran champion of the
policy of non-alignment
since the very first day of
his country’s independence.
69. The puts& protagonists and those behind them
are making the positive development
of relations
between the two’communities
on the island impossible. Their criminal action ‘involves the peoples of
Cyprus in new and .grave hardships, while also
generating the possibility
of a renewal of mutual
bloodshed.
Consequently
it threatens peace and
security most directly, especially in the Mediterranean
and in Europe, and injects new elements of tension
into this important and sensitive region of the world.
70. For all these reasons, my Government considers
it indispensable that urgent action be taken by the
Security Council. It is indeed regrettable that the
Council did not act decisively at its first meeting on
this question, on the afternoon of 16 July, in spite
of the urgency, the clearness of the case and the
specific proposals made by the representative
of
Cyprus, Ambassador Rossides.
71. The Security Council today faces one of its
most difftcult tests. The eyes of the entire international
community
are directed towards it and the vast
majority of Member States hope for just, decisive
and effective action by it. The Council must, therefore, without delay, take the necessary steps to
bring an immediate end to the Greek intervention
in the independent Republic of Cyprus. Condemnation of the putschists and their supporters, a demand
for the immediate
withdrawal of Greek military
interventionists and full support for President Makarios
and the legitimate Government of Cyprus in resuming
the task of preserving the independence and territorial
integrity of the island-such
a decision of the Council
is imperative if normalization
of the situation and
consequently the preservation of peace and security
on Cyprus, in the region and beyond are to be
achieved. Such a decision should be carried out with
by every means at the Council’s disposal.
72. In conclusion, -1 should like to .point out that
President Makarios and the legitimate Government of
Cyprus enjoy the support of non-aligned and other
progressive and peace-loving countries in the world
-that
is, the great majority of Members of our
Organization.
That was clearly expressed in the
statement made by the representatives of non-aligned
countries on 16 July in Geneva, in which they pledged
their full support to President Makarios and his
legitimate Government and their struggle to preserve

the independence;sovereignty
of the Republic of Cyprus.

and territorial

integrity

Government. Imposing a foreign will cannot help but
lead to tension and conflict, and this runs counter to
the positive course of de’tenre taking place in the world,
including Europe, the Balkans and the Mediterranean
area.

73. At today’s meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau
of the non-aligned countries in New York the following
statement was agreed upon, and I have been given
permission to read it to the Council:

79. Deeply attached to the principle that all people
are masters in their own houses and that they and
only they are rulers of their destinies, public opinion
in Romania most resolutely disapproves the coup
d’etat organized by foreign military forces stationed
on the territory of Cyprus.

“The Co-ordinating
Bureau of the non-aligned
countries donounces the blatant attempt to oust
the President and legitimate Government of nonaligned Cyprus through the armed intervention of
external forces. Non-aligned countries have always
condemned
all forms of external interference.
Consequently,
they consider the intervention
in
Cyprus as a gross violation of the basic principles
of international
law and of the United Nations
Charter, which constitutes a grave threat to intemational peace and security since it poses a threat
to the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity
and non-alignment of Cyprus.

80. The act of force committed
a few days ago,
which seriously endangers the independence of the
Republic of Cyprus, places in jeopardy the very
existence of a State and belongs to an era in which
relations among States were based on force, on the
right of the most powerful, and on the exploitation
of some peoples by others.
81. The foreign military interference in the internal
affairs of Cyprus, a State Member of the United
Nations, flagrantly transgresses the elementary principles of the Charter and the recognized rules of
international law: first of all, non-use of force and noninterference in internal affairs. This intervention
threatens both the democratic gains of a sovereign
people, the Cypriot people, and the peace and security
of the peoples in the Mediterranean area and Europe,
who are making special efforts to build a new system
of security on the old continent and in the area of the
Mediterranean sea.

“The Co-ordinating Bureau therefore now calls
for the speedy end of Greek intervention
in
Cyprus, the withdrawal of Greek officers and other
Greek military personnel, and the restoration of the
constitutional
rights of the President of Cyprus,
Makarios, and his Government, so that the people
of Cyprus can again freely exercise their democratic rights and liberties.”
74. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpreturiun from Spanish):
I now invite the representative of Romania to take a
place at the Council table and to make a statement..

82. Romania,
which has been developing broad
relations of co-operation
and friendship with the
Republic of Cyprus, expresses its full support for the
legal Government of President Makarios and reasserts
its solidarity with the fight of the Cypriot people for
the defence of its independence and sovereignty and
its homeland’s territorial integrity.

75. Mr. DUMA (Romania): Mr. President, allow me,
first of all, to express my gratitude to you and to
the members of the Security Council for having granted
me the opportunity
of stating the position of the
Romanian Government
on the events now taking
place in Cyprus, of which the Romanian people have
learned with feelings of deep anxiety and indignation.

83. Starting from the interests of international peace
and security, Romania demands that an end be put to
the interference of a foreign militia, that the request
of the legitimate head of the State of Cyprus for
the withdrawal of the Greek military from the island
be met and that constitutional
order be restored in
Cyprus.

76. In the opinion of the Romanian delegation, and
as stated by the legitimate head of the Cypriot State,
President Makarios, as well as by other delegations
in the Council, these events have serious international
implications and demand firm action by the Organization and, first of all, by the Security Council.
77. As we know, consistent with its policy, Romania
resolutely declares itself against every act of force and
every form of intervention in the internal affairs of
other States, for strict observance of the principles,
of national independence and sovereignty, and far the
right of all peoples to develop freely and independently
and to decide their own destiny in keeping with their
interests, without any outside interference.

84. The Romanian Government considers that the
United Nations should act with all its power to defend
the independence and ‘sovereignty of the Republic
of Cyprus.
85. In keeping with the provisions of the Charter,
it is the duty of the Security Council to take urgent
and efftcient measures with a view to re-establishing
constitutional
order in Cyprus. In this way, the
Council will meet the Cypriot people’s aspirations for
the development of their country on the road of democracy and progress, and will make an effective

78. No State, under any circumstances, in any form,
or for any reason, should be allowed to impose its.
will upon another State, another people or another
9

contribution
in support of their fight to defend the
independence and sovereignty of their homeland and
to live freely and independently,
without any outside
intervention.

91. This intervention
also poses a threat to the
constitutional
arrangements
established and ‘guaranteed by international
treaties. Furtheimore,
it
constitutes a violation
of the legitimate ,rights of
the people of Cyprus, a violation of their Constitution,
and poses a possible threat to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment
of Cyprus.

86. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
I now invite the representative of India to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

92. In our opinion, it is necessary to re-establish the
conditions envisaged in the constitutional
arrangements and international
treaties that led to the
establishment of an independent Republic of Cyprus.
It is the responsibility of the world community to do
this and to ensure that external armed intervention
is eliminated from the political life of Cyprus once
and for all.

87. Mr. JAIPAL
(India): Mr. President, may I
express to you, and through you to the Council, the
gratitude of my delegation for giving us an opportunity
to state our views on the situation in Cyprus, which is
now engaging the attention of the Council.
88. When one recalls the long history of the struggle
of the people of Cyprus for their independence
from colonial rule, one cannot fail to be impressed by
the fact that it was the Government of Greece which
first brought before the General Assembly, in 1954,
an item concerning the application of the “principle
of equal rights and self-determination
of peoples in
the case of the population of Cyprus”. Some 20 years
have passed since then, and today we find in Cyprus
a situation which involves primarily the violation of
this fundamental principle of self-determination.

93. We observe that in his letter of 2 July 1974 the
President of Cyprus had requested the withdrawal of
all foreign military personnel. It has been claimed that
the National Guard was under the sole control of the
Government of Cyprus. If that was the position, there
was no excuse for not immediately
withdrawing, at
the request of the Government of Cyprus, all foreign
military personnel in the National Guard. The very
fact that this. was not done and that the request of
the President of Cyprus was not acted upon by itself
constitutes foreign intervention.
Subsequently that
intervention
has gone to the length of ousting by
force the legitimate Government of Cyprus..

89. Cyprus became an independent country in 1960
and was admitted to the United Nations. Cyprus
became a party to the Treaty of Guarantee’ of 1960;
which provided for certain unique constitutional
arrangements and guarantees involving Great Britain,
Turkey and Greece. Later the Security Council
adopted resolution 186 (1964) which established a
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus. As
a result of those historical developments the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus
came to be guaranteed multilaterally
and its constitutional arrangements also came to be an essential
factor in the stability and peace of the region. Anything which upsets the delicate political. balance
implicit in these arrangements is bound to create a
situation of the utmost gravity for world peace.

94. It is our hope that the Security Council will try
to restore the slotus quo before the armed intervention
took place, and in this regard the co-operation of all
the parties to the Treaty of 1960 is necessary as a
matter of legal obligation. We should like to see also
a speedy restoration of normal conditions in which the
people of Cyprus can once again freely exercise their
democratic rights and liberties under the constitutional
arrangements already established and guaranteed by
international treaties.
95. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translation
from
Russian):
Today the
Security Council has heard an important statement by
the head of the Cypriot State about what has actually
happened recently in Cyprus and who is behind the
coup which the Greek officers of the National Guard
are attempting in the Republic of Cyprus.

90. Today we find this delicate balance upset by
an unwarranted act of intervention.
According to
President Makarios, the Greek officers of the Cyprus
National Guard spearheaded this armed intervention
against the constitutionally
established Government
of Cyprus. This fact alone-that
is, the fact of foreign
military officers becoming involved in the internal
affairs of Cyprus-converts
what might have been
an internal problem into an international
problem.
There is no doubt that the intervention of the Greek
officers of the National
Guard is tantamount
to
technical external intervention. This has indeed created
a chain reaction which might now well pose a threat
to world peace.
’ United

Nations,

Treaty

Series,

vol.

,96. The statement by the lawful President of the
Republic
of Cyprus, his Beatitude
Archbishop
Makarios, leaves absolutely no doubt on this score.
I think that even those members of the Security
Council who at the preceding meeting tried to maintain
that they were not sufficiently clear about what is
happening in Cyprus can agree with this.
97. The facts described in detail here by President
Makarios are perfectly obvious and completely proven:
facts of direct and flagrant interference by outside

382, p. 3.

10

i
fi

forces aimed at the overthrow of the legitimate Government of the Republic of Cyprus, headed by the
President, Archbishop Makarios, who was elected to
that offtce as a result of the free expression of the
people’s will.

Another telegram. received from Mr. Iosifides, on
behalf of the American Committee for Democracy
and Freedom in Greece, states that there is no doubt
at all that: “the overthrow of the lawful Government
of the Republic of Cyprus was planned and carried
out by officers of the Greek army”. As the telegram
stresses, this is an act of armed aggression “against
a sovereign State and is a clear violation of the United
Nations Charter”.

98. The anti-Government
conspiracy and mutiny in
Cyprus were staged by Greek offtcers stationed in
Cyprus who were sent there by the Greek Govemment and who obey orders from Athens. In addition
to the Greek offtcers of the National Guard, officers
and soldiers of the ELDYK Greek national contingent,
stationed on the island in accordance with the
international
agreements of 1960, are openly participating in the mutiny. In particular, they took part
in the storming of the presidential palace in Nicosia
on 15 July and in the seizure of the airport. The strike
force of the anti-Government
putsch consists of
Greek offricers, and also Greek terrorist organizations
which have emerged from underground and whose
close link with Athens had previously been confirmed
many times. President Makarios spoke convincingly
here of this link.

103. The attempts of the Greek Government
to
conceal its involvement
in this criminal act-in the
armed puts& aimed at the forcible overthrow of the
legitimate Government of the Republic of Cyprus,
headed by President Makarios-and
to portray the
events taking place inCyprus as the result of an internal
struggle are utterly and completely unfounded and
cannot delude anyone. Indeed the vain efforts of the
representative of the Greek regime here to portray
these events as a “revolution’*
are merely laughable.
104. The attempts made by the representative of
Greece to distract the Security Council’s attention
from the question under discussion with the aid of
slanderous inventions, the question concerning the
flagrant interference by Greece in the internal affairs
of Cyprus, simply show that he perhaps finds it difficult, if not impossible, to refute the incontrovertible
facts of his Government’s
interference in the affairs
of Cyprus. If we needed any additional proof that it
is in fact the Greek military who stand behind the
conspirators and direct them, today’s statement by
the Greek representative has provided it.

99. The intervention
by the Greek military
has
created a threat to the independence of the Republic
of Cyprus and to international
peace and security in
the eastern Mediterranean region. Arrogantly flouting
the principles of the Charter, external forces have over
a long period deliberately and for far-reaching ends
purposely exacerbated the domestic situation in
Cyprus and then proceeded to embark on flagrant
military interference from outside in the internal
affairs of this sovereign State Member of the United
Nations.

105. It is a generally recognized fact that the conspiracy in Cyprus was staged by the Greek officers
stationed there, who were sent to Cyprus by the
Greek Government and who obey orders from Greece.

100. The Soviet people resolutely condemns the
Fascistplrtsch carried out in Cyprus with the assistance
of the Greek military, and expresses support for the
democratic and-patriotic forces of the country which
are waging the struggle against the conspirators and
the mutineers.

106. In the history of the last few decades there has
scarcely been any instance in which the world public
and press have been so unanimous as they have been
in this instance in condemning what has happened
recently in Cyprus. Even the Western press has been
forced to recognize that an armed pursclz has taken
place in Cyprus, ordered by the military clique in
Athens. Thus, The Times of London of 17 July wrote
in a leading article:
“The Greek Government
denies the allegation [its involvement
in the intervention in Cyprus], but as long as the Greek officers
remain in Cyprus the denial will hardly be convincing.”

101. The events in Cyprus are attracting the attention
of the world public and press, which are expressing
great concern and alarm about these developments.
The Soviet people understand this alarm, and we
share it.
102. I must report.that the Soviet Mission has been
receiving
telegrams
from various organizations,
including
United
States organizations,
resolutely
condemning the military pursch in Cyprus. Thus, a
group of eminent persons from United States universities, including Harvard, Boston University, Tufts,
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and others,
declare in their telegram:

107. It is also true that perhaps never before in the
whole history of the United Nations has any Government found itself in such deep political isolation as
the Government of Greece-which
stands behind the
organizers of the coup in Cyprus-does
today. And
this is not surprising. In the eyes of the whole world,
the Fascist regime in Athens has engaged in the most
flagrant interference in the internal affairs of a
sovereign State, thereby arrogantly flouting the principles of the Charter and the elementary rules of
international law.

“Cyprus has been subjected to aggression on the
part of the Greek junta. We call for United Nations
intervention aimed at an immediate cease-fire and
the protection of the lawful Government of President
Makarios.”
11

108. The Security Council also cannot fail to be concerned about the agency and press reports that the
perpetrators of the puts& are now inflicting bloody
reprisals on the patriots of Cyprus-those
who continue to remain true to the principles of democracy
and who uphold the legitimate Government of Cyprus,
headed by President Makarios. The perpetrators of
the pufsch plotted the villanous murder of President
Makarios and spread provocative rumours about his
death in order to disorganize the resistance forces.
They did not even stop at criminal acts threatening
the lives and security of diplomatic representatives in
Nicosia. As is already known to members of the
Council, during the last few days the Soviet Embassy
in Nicosia, the residence of the Ambassador and the
homes of staff of the Soviet Embassy were subjected
to deliberate fire from automatic weapons and machine
guns. It was later learnt that the diplomatic missions
of other countries too, including the Embassy of the
Syrian Arab Republic and the residence of its military
attache, have also been under attack.

cannot be stifled. The neonle of CVDNS have Droved
this by their long struggle for independence against
all attempts to suppress their will.
112.. The statement by the Soviet Government of
17 July clearly sets forth the position of principle
of the Soviet Union on the item we are discussing
today. It stresses, inter &a, that:
“The Soviet Union, loyal to the Leninist principles
of foreign policy, has always been and always will
be on the side of the Cypriot people in their struggle
for the right to decide their own fate themselves.
It has supported and will continue to support the
independent existence of Cyprus as a sovereign
State. It is quite understandable that this consistent
position of the Soviet Union should meet with the
support and approval of the peoples of the world.
“The Government of the USSR considers that
all States which cherish the peace and freedom of
peoples should raise their voices in defence of the
legitimate Government of the Republic of Cyprus,
headed by President Makarios, and in favour of
the immediate cessation of foreign military interference in the internal affairs of Cyprus. The first
step should be the immediate removal from Cyprus
of all Greek military personnel.” [see S/11340]

109. The criminal elements that provoked the bloody
events in Cyprus, and the Government of Greece
supporting them, will not succeed in evading responsibility for these criminal acts.
110. The view is now prevailing throughout the world
that the coup d’e’tat in Cyprus was actually planned
by certain circles in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) which obviously cannot tolerate the
independent existence of the Republic of Cyprus,
pursuing an independent foreign policy, a policy of
non-alignment.
There are grounds for endorsing that
opinion. This conclusion must be drawn from the
position taken by the representatives of certain NATO
countries when the Council considered the question
of the situation created in Cyprus as a result of outside intervention. Those present here will recall that
at the last meeting of the Council it proved impossible
to adopt effective measures to halt the intervention
and support the legitimate Government
of Cyprus
because the representatives of certain NATO countries
objected to this. Clearly, this is connivance with the
putsch-and,
even more, support for it in any
form-which
would constitute interference in the
internal affairs of the Republic of Cyprus, since President Makarios remains the lawfully elected President
of Cyprus and his Government continues to enjoy
the loyal support of the Greek and Turkish communities.

113. Speaking yesterday, 18 July, at a dinner given
in honour of a Party-Government
delegation from
the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen, Mr. N. V.
Podgomy,
the President of the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet of the USSR, declared that the Soviet
Union fully sides with the people of Cyprus, who are
struggling for their freedom and independence. He
stressed that the policy of peace and of easing
international
tension is not to the liking of the
reactionary circles which are attempting to regain their
lost positions, to weaken the national liberation
movement and to strike a blow at the progressive
achievements of the people. The latest evidence of
this, as Mr. Podgomy pointed out, is to be. found in
the tragic events in Cyprus resulting from the armed
coup organized by the Greek military and certain
NATO circles which are supporting it against the
legitimate
Government
of the country headed by
President Makarios. Mr. Podgomy, on behalf of the
Soviet Union, firmly demanded that this flagrant
interference from outside in the internal affairs of
the sovereign Republic of Cyprus be ended immediately.

111. The vital interests of all Cypriots urgently
require the immediate ending of foreign interference
in the internal affairs of the Republic and the halting
of the dangerous game being played with the fate of
Cyprus by the NATO military and its Greek agents.
This is also required in the interests of strengthening
peace in the eastern Mediterranean
region. We have
no doubt that the Cypriot people will yet have their
say. The striving of that valiant people-however
small in number-for
freedom and independence

114. As the Soviet delegation has already declared,
the Security Council, as the principal organ of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security, should, in view of the seriousness
of the situation which has arisen, urgently-I
stress,
urgently-take
the necessary decisive steps iaimed at
the immediate ending of the armed interference of the
Greek military in the internal affairs of the Republic
of Cyprus, and at the immediate withdrawal of the
12

Greek soldiers now on its territory. TiMe will not wait.
The President of the Republic of Cyprus, Archbishop
Makarios, who is here, is looking to us for help,
and Cypriots-both
Greek and Turkish-are
looking
to us for help. The United Nations cannot and must
not remain indifferent to the fate of the sovereignty,
freedom and independence of the Republic of Cyprus,
a State Member of the United Nations. If the Security
Council and the States which are members of the
Council respect the lofty principles and purposes of
the Charter not in word but in deed, they not only
should but must resolutely champion the cause of
Cyprus. It is essential that the criminal actions of
those who have infringed
the sovereignty
and
independence of this State and those who are conniving with the perpetrators
of the puts&
and
supporting them should be resolutely condemned
and stopped.

we all have an obligation to ask ourselves what is
the most useful contribution we can make to avoid
conflict and to stabilize peace.
121. We have listened with great attentiveness to
the words of Archbishop Makarios. We join in the
sense of relief that all of us feel that he is able to
be with us today and to express his views so eloquently.
My Government looks forward to welcoming President
Makarios in Washington to discuss with him what
additional steps can be taken to resolve this crisis
and to help end the agony of the Cypriot people.
122. Let there be no misunderstanding
about the
attitude of the United States Government
in ‘this
situation. As I stated in the Council on Tuesday,
the United States Government continues to support the
independence,
the sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of Cyprus and the existing constitutional
arrangements.

115. Mr. CHUANG
Yen (China) (translation from
Cyprus is a third world country in the
Middle East and Mediterranean
region. The Chinese
Government and people are seriously concerned about
the present situation in Cyprus.

Chinese):

123. Further, I should like to emphasize a fundamental point: the United States does not consider
enosis, or union between Greece and Cyprus, as an
acceptable solution of the Cyprus problem. The
United States continues to believe in the future of a
free and independent Cyprus as a sovereign nation
capable of making its own decisions in full equality
with the rest of the independent countries of the
world. We do not consider military intervention by
any party, for any reason, to be justified in the present
situation.

116. The people of Cyprus have a glorious revolutionary tradition of fighting against imperialism. They
waged a prolonged heroic struggle to win national
independence,
safeguard State sovereignty
and
territorial integrity and oppose colonialism and imperialism, and finally independence was achieved.
In this struggle, Archbishop
Makarios played an
outstanding role, which we highly admire. Since
independence,
under the leadership of President
Makarios,
Cyprus has pursued a policy of nonalignment, resolutely opposed imperialism
and colonialism,
and made useful contributions
towards
supporting the just struggle of the third world countries
and peoples.

124. In our view, the first and very important step
is that all interested parties continue to exercise the
utmost restraint and good judgement to prevent this
crisis from taking further unfortunate turns. In particular, the United States Government is firmly opposed
to any attempt to bring about a military solution to
the present problem. Such attempts would severely,
perhaps irretrievably, set back the negotiating process
which alone can bring about the peaceful and constitutional solution we all desire. Therefore, we most
earnestly appeal to all the Governments concerned
to resist the temptation to settle this issue by force.
We ask them instead to pursue the much harder but
wiser course of negotiation.

117. The Chinese Government has always held that
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Cyprus should be respected by all countries. We
are firmly opposed to aggression and subversion by
any outside force against a sovereign State. The
question of Cyprus should be settled by the people
of Cyprus themselves.
118. At the present time, it is of particular importance
to maintain vigilance against the super-Powers taking
advantage of the situation in Cyprus to meddle and
fish in troubled waters.

125. Having said that, however, I am sure that all of
us around this table will recognize that there are many
critical uncertainties in the present situation. We are
gratified to note that the fighting on the island
apparently has ceased. Yet the threat, of’ military
action in that area remains a grim prospect.

119. The Chinese Government and people support
the third world countries and peoples.as well as the
people of the rest of the world in their solidarity
with the just struggle of the people of Cyprus.

126. I note with considerable interest that the representative of the Soviet Union is impressed by the
fact that United States citizens have sent messages
to his Embassy expressing their view on this crisis.
I am not surprised that he is impressed. United States
citizens have the right to communicate with anyone
regardless of the point of view they wish to express.

120. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): We
are gathered at a moment when peace is clearly
threatened in the eastern Mediterranean.
I believe
that as responsible members of the Security Council
13

127. We are all aware of the special treaty provisions
which govern the relationships of the Governments
concerned in Cyprus and the historically
unique
constitutional arrangements which were established to
provide an acceptable basis of association between
.the Greek and Turkish communities in Cyprus.

matter how difficult
may seem.

or insurmountable

the deadlock

133. My Government has had some experience in
bridging differences which have defied solution in
that part of the world. Let us not at this stage permit
over-hasty actions in another crisis in that important
region to complicate and delay efforts in process
outside this chamber. Together we can achieve what
cannot be achieved alone. Let us give peace a
chance.

128. Given the forcible overthrow of the existing
Government,
it is quite understandable that strong
emotions are widely felt about how to resolve this
problem. It is also quite natural that many members
feel compelled to pronounce themselves quickly on
some of the very complicated issues involved.

134. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): This has, I
think for all of us, been a unique and a moving day.
Rarely indeed can any one of us have participated in
an occasion so poignant and so full of emotion. It is
therefore doubly regrettable that the representative
of the Soviet Union should have chosen this particular issue to engage in propaganda that would have
been more apt 10 or 15 years ago.
1

129. At the same time, the Security Council does
have very definite responsibilities
which we must
always keep clearly in mind. Our obligation is first
and foremost to contribute to a peaceful resolution
of disputes.
130.- Thus, in considering what action we should
take, we should ask ourselves precisely what it is
that we are trying to achieve. What we clearly
should not be seeking is pronouncements
which
serve only propaganda purposes or would be without
practical effect or which, because of their nature,
would serve to inflame an already aggravated situation.

135. I listened with great interest, as I always do,
to the representative of the Soviet Union: He talked
about NATO involvement. He talked about the NATO
Powers’ obstructiveness
being responsible for the
failure of the Security Council to act last Tuesday.
Let me deal with those two canclrds now.

131. For example, one suggestion, proposed in
informal consultations, is to have the Council demand
that Greece remove its officers in the Cypriot National
Guard. At this point I merely suggest that if such a
proposal is pursued, members of the Council should
carefully weigh the implications.
Would it perhaps
lead to an even more unstable situation? What would
be the prospects of compliance with such an appeal?
I raise those questions without foreshadowing or
prejudicing my Government’s
ultimate position on
this matter. And, lest there be any misunderstanding
about the general attitude of the United States, my
Government has always opposed intervention in the
internal affairs of one country by another, and to the
extent that this may be the case in Cyprus, I repeat:
we deplore it.

136. As far as the failure of the Council to act is
concerned, I expressed the view last Tuesday-and
I was joined by some’ other colleagues around this
table-that
we needed facts. We did last Tuesday.
I also expressed the opinion that if President Makarios
was coming to the Council we should hear him before
adopting a resolution. It is perhaps noteworthyLand
I might remind the representative of the Soviet Union
of this fact-that
this afternoon President Makarios
indeed himself thanked the Council for not proceeding
to a resolution until after he had been given an
opportunity of addressing the Council.
137. On the second point raised by the representative
of the Soviet Union-NATO
involvement behind the
coup-1 might remind him that, as we have heard from
President Makarios this afternoon, it was a NATO
Power, the United Kingdom, which actively participated in making it possible for President Makarios
to leave the island of Cyprus at all. Had it not been
for that NATO Power, the United Kingdom, as President Makarios himself said this afternoon, it is
extremely unlikely
that we would have had the
opportunity of hearing him. With great respect to the
representative of the Soviet Union, I must say that
it is a strange form of involvement
by the United
Kingdom in a plot-if indeed that is the allegation-if
one of the first acts of involvement is to remove from
his position of vulnerability
the very person that we
are supposed to be engaged in overthrowing. I was
tempted at one stage to say to the representative of
the Soviet Union, in good humour, and with goodwill,
that he should not believe everything he reads in
Prowi~~, but since he quoted The Times of London

132. We believe that the Council is unanimous in
its view that the Cyprus crisis demands a peaceful
and constitutional
solution. But what we need to
search for, of course, before we pronounce wisely
is the best way to achieve this result. In our view,
it can be accomplished
only through discussions
among the parties which are themselves directly
involved. These discussions are already under way,
Intensive consultations
have been taking place in
London between the United Kingdom and Turkish
Governments and a representative of my own Government. Other consultations are taking place urgently
in the area. Under these circumstances the United
States considers it would be a serious error to rush
to judgement on an issue of this gravity. We have
an obligation to peace, to statesmanship, to allow
enough time for peaceful resolution of this crisis-no
14

in the course of his speech I feel that there is some
cause for qualified optimism, at any rate, as far as he
personally is concerned.
138. I take the floor this afternoon merely so that I
may perhaps be permitted to clarify some of the positions which have been ascribed to the United Kingdom
in the last few days. We have head this afternoon
from the President of Cyprus-and
may I say how
delighted we were in the United Kingdom that we
were able to assist him in leaving the island and to
give him such assistance as we have been able to
since-a version of this week’s events in Cyprus in
which he made serious and far-reaching allegations
against the Government of Greece. He said that the
actions of that Government had amounted to a direct
involvement by Greece in the affairs of an independent
nation, Cyprus. I think this does need to be considered
by the international
community and I think it does
need to be answered.
139. As the Council will know, there have been
extensive discussions this week involving the United
Kingdom Government and the Turkish Government,
as two of the guarantors of the 1960 Cyprus settlement. The latest position is that an invitation has
been extended by the Government
of the United
Kingdom to the Government of Greece for talks in
London on Sunday. We see this as an opportunity
for us to express directly to the Government of Greece
my Government’s views and concern about the situation in Cyprus. In particular we would intend to discuss
with it and others concerned how the National Guard
should be offtcered in the future and indeed whether
the system of providing security in Cyprus should be
modified. As the Council will appreciate, this is a
matter of direct concern and responsibility
to the
Government of the United Kingdom as one of the
guarantors of the 1960 agreement. I hope very much
that the Greek Government will be able to come to
London on Sunday and that such talks as then take
place will be helpful.
140. The announcement yesterday by the Government of Greece of the replacement of the officers
was, in our view, a helpful step: As one of our Ministers
said in the House of Commons this morning, it means
that the officers who led the coup in Cyprus will be
withdrawn from the island. The withdrawal will start
in the next few days, and we see that as significant
progress, but we also see it as only the first step towards
a solution of the problem.
141. May I perhaps, too, clarify my Government’s
position as far as President Makarios himself is concerned. In the House of Commons this morning the
Minister of State of the Foreign Office, when asked
the question whether he would confirm that in the view
of Her Majesty’s Government the elected leader of
Cyprus was still President Makarios, used these words:
“I am happy to confirm that the elected and the proper
leader of Cyprus is President Makarios.” That remains

our position, and we would therefore wish to see him
back in his rightful place. He came to us today, in
our view, as the elected head of the Cyprus Government and as such he is the only head of Cyprus that
it is proper, in our view, for the United Nations to
hear.
142. Against that background, what does the Council
now proceed to do? First of all, may I follow the
representative of the United States in urging restraint.
If indeed talks are to take place, as we very much
hope they will take place in London on Sunday, and
if those talks are to be fruitful, it does mean that they
must be given an opportunity for success, and in turn
that means that those most directly concerned with the
Cyprus situation must exercise extreme, perhaps
even extraordinary,
restraint in the next few days.
It seems to me to be in everyone’s interest that there
should be a peaceful settlement of the present dispute.
Restraint at the moment is the precursor of that
peaceful settlement, and the lack of restraint at this
particular time, 1 believe, would jeopardize
that
opportunity.
143. Mr. JANKOWITSCH
(Austria): Mr. President,
as this is the first time that my delegation has taken
the floor under your presidency, let me offer you my
delegation’s congratulations and good wishes. We had
hoped that this month of yours would be one of peace
and constructive endeavours to strengthen peace.
However, your wisdom, experience and diplomatic
skill will be a special asset to the Council in the face
of the dramatic and tragic events the Council now
faces.
144. These events and this situation have been
described by the man and leader who, for so many
years, for so many decades indeed, was the symbol
of the freedom and independence of Cyprus, Archbishop Makarios. We have listened to his statement
with the utmost attention and it is hard not to be
deeply impressed and indeed moved by it. That the
President of Cyprus has decided to address the Council
in person is a most unusual event and projects right
into this chamber the dramatic turn the grave events
of recent days have taken.
145. The Council and the international
community
as such are now faced with a full account of the facts,
which will deserve our and the international
community’s most serious consideration,
146. Only a few weeks ago, when the Council
renewed the mandate of the United Nations Force
in Cyprus for the twentieth time, marking a decade
. of United Nations involvement in the peace-keeping
on Cyprus, all those who spoke here, including the
representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece, had
voiced their hope, and I might even say their contidence, that the solution for the problems besetting
the Republic of Cyprus for such a long time might
be within our grasp. At a time when we all seemed

determined to combine our forces, in the United
Nations and elsewhere, to assist the communities on
the island to take definite steps towards ‘a lasting
settlement, the events of recent days can only be
regarded as a severe blow to the achievement of
our common and long-standing objective: the establishment of peace, security and stability in Cyprus and
thus in the whole area of the eastern Mediterranean.

150. It is obvious, therefore, that the present situation
is a highly explosive ,one, not only for Cyprus itself
but possibly for the peace and stability of the whole
area of the eastern Mediterranean.
Therefore, we feel
it to be a duty .of the Security Council to act,
under the Charter as well as in accordance with the
special responsibilities
of the Organization for the
island, laid down in resolution 186 (1964) and many
subsequent pronouncements.

147. Austria, which more than ‘once in its history
has paid a heavy price for its freedom and independence, has always been deeply committed
to the
principle
of the sovereignty,
independence
and
territorial integrity of all States of the international
community.’ This is particularly important and valid
in the case of Cyprus, a young nation never removed
from the threat of outside interference in its internal
affairs. The deep interest and sympathy that Austria
and the Austrian people have always felt for Cyprus
and the Cypriot people is built not least on common
allegiance to values cherished by our two peoples
and arising out of the common history of the European
nations.

151. We feel that action by the Council is required,
action in conjunction with all other constructive efforts.
This action is required to remove a dangerous threat
to peace and international
security and a threat of
further military action in the area. Action by the
Council is required to protect the constitutional
structure of the island against irreparable damage.
Action by the Council is also required, however-and,
we feel, above all-to
protect the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus from
all foreign interference and to allow the people of
Cyprus, both its communities,
to decide freely, in
exercise of their sovereignty, about the future of
their Republic, this Republic which has become such
an indispensable element for peace and stability in
the area.

148. Austria has never failed, in its spirit of friendship, to provide Cyprus, in the hour of need, with
such assistance as was required to permit peaceful
development in the island. Austria was thus among
the first countries to provide contingents to the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force iu Cyprus. It is needless
to say, therefore, that the violent overthrow of the
elected and constitutional
Government of President
Makarios by military means, the overthrow of the
elected leader of a democratic country, has caused
deep concern in Austria.

152. We are confident that all members of the Council, with the help of all other interested parties, will
wish to join in such a constructive endeavour, and
that this readiness can be expressed as speedily as
possible. My delegation stands ready to join with
others in such an effort.
153. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE
(Australia): Mr. President, let me say first of all how pleased my delegation
is to be serving here under your skilful presidency
for the second time. I should like, also, to pay tribute
to the able guidance of our proceedings during the
month of June by your predecessor, Ambassador
El Hassen of Mauritania.

149. I should like to read, in an unofftcial English
translation, a statement which was issued yesterday
by the Austrian Press Agency:
“The Federal Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of
Austria is following the events in the Republic of
Cyprus with deep concern. Without wishing to
prejudice further developments
or the results of
deliberations
of the matter within the (United
Nations and other appropriate international forums,
the events in Cyprus give rise to consternation,
and it must be emphasized that any interference
from outside-Austria
itself having been in 1938
a victim of such intervention-would
have to be
considered as jeopardizing the international equilibrium and as constituting a serious threat to nations
living together in peace. Should it indeed be possible
to overthrow the Governments of sovereign States
by outside intervention, a process of demoralization
is bound to develop in international affairs. Hope
is being expressed, therefore, in the Austrian Foreign
Ministry that al1 States, irrespective of allegiance
to military alliances or social system, will not lose
sight of this aspect in considering the events in
Cyprus.”

154. We have all listened with the closest attention
to the eloquent and moving appeal made to the Council
this afternoon by Archbishop Makarios in his capacity
as President of Cyprus. I am quite sure thatall Council
members will feel the greatest sympathy ,for him in
the tribulations that he has endured in recent days.
Notwithstanding
these tribulations
and despite his
forced departure from his country, Australia still
regards him-and
I say this unequivocally and in the
words of my Prime Minister in the Australian Parliament three days ago-as the President of Cyprus,
the head of the Constitutional
Government of that
country, and its only legitimate head. The Government
and people of Australia also respect him as the head
of State of a fellow member of the Commonwealth
re-elected
unopposed
as : President
of nations,
16 months ago, and in fact the senior head;of Govemment among all Commonwealth countries..
155. His presence here at this time only serves to
emphasize the gravity of the situation that the United
16

Nations, and particularly the Council, has come face
to face with through the past few days. It is a situation
that has given rise to deep concern in Australia, which
has always supported and continues to support the
sovereign independence and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus.

state of affairs ‘established
its Constitution”.

by the Basic Articles

of

161. In terms of commitment by the Government of
Cyprus, it is a responsibility that President Makarios
for his part has discharged successfully for 14 years.
Who is there better than President Makarios to carry
forward the task of unifying the peoples of Cyprus
by constitutional
means and leading his country to
a prosperous future in which it can stand on its own
feet, free of outside interference in its internal affairs?

156. My Government has been providing a police
contingent to the United Nations Force in Cyprus
since its establishment in 1964. We have fully supported
the efforts of the Secretary-General
and his Special
Representative to bring about stability and harmony
in the relations between the’ Greek and Turkish
communities on the island.
.‘.

162. In the background of the present disruption of
constitutional order in Cyprus, as-we must all be aware,
lies the danger of wider international
conflict-as
other speakers have rightly reminded us. This can only
mean that the Council, while registering its strong
disapproval of what has happened and calling for an
end to Greek military interference in Cyprus, must
appeal for the utmost restraint everywhere and the
avoidance of any action which might aggravate this
highly volatile situation, while in the meantime the
process of negotiation
goes forward through the
statesmanship of those Governments
most closely
concerned, including those Governments
which I
mentioned earlier.

157. We have, of course, always been aware of the
acute tensions existing not only between the two
communities
but also within the Greek Cypriot
community.
But we had believed-even
within the
past few weeks-that
there was reason to hope that
the promised resumption of talks between the community leaders there gave some prospect of movement
towards a relaxation of these stresses. It might be
said, therefore, that the violent events that began on
the morning of 15 July caused us shock more than
surprise. There seemed no reason for this to happen
at this particular time-unless
it arose from the request
of President Makarios on 2 July for the removal of
the Greek officers of the National Guard of Cyprus.

163. The
PRESIDENT
Spanish):
the next speaker

(interpretution
from
is the representative of

Cyprus, on whom I now call.

158. It is clear that those officers cannot escape
the primary responsibility for the violence and bloodshed that have taken place and have shaken the whole
fabric of the constitutional
structure that was no
painstakingly created for Cyprus in 1959 and brought
into force in 1960.

164. Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus): I wish, in the first
place, to thank all the members of the Security Council
for their very constructive statements and for realizing
the importance of this meeting, not only for Cyprus,
but also for the world. This is a critical period in the
progress of the world. Today’s meeting is reminiscent
of another occasion, when a small country went to
the League of Nations and asked for support against
a threat of force directed at its independence, freedom
and territorial integrity. Unfortunately,
nothing was
done in that case; but I hope that that lesson will
lead the Council to take a different attitude in the
case of Cyprus-not
because it is Cyprus, but because
we now live in a world that has had the experience
of the Second World War-and not to treat the cause
of Cyprus, as presented by Archbishop Makarios,
in the same way as the League of Nations treated
the cause of Ethiopia, as presented then by Haile

159. In the light of the categorical denial by the
Government of Greece itself of any complicity in the
events of the past week and in the light of its reafftrmation of its respect for the sovereign independence
and the integrity of Cyprus, it is to be regretted, to
say the least, that the Government of Greece did not
respond immediately and favourably to the President’s
request of 2 July, and furthermore that it ,has not seen
fit-so
far as my delegation is aware-to
express
disapproval of the kind of leadership that its military
offricers have evidently been providing to the National
Guard of Cyprus.

Selassie.

160. My delegation has noted and feels bound to
underline a statement by the United Kingdom Foreign
and Commonwealth
Secretary in the House of
Commons on 17 July that the Government of Greece
bears a heavy responsibility for the situation in Cyprus
under the firm commitments it entered into under the
Treaty of Guarantee of 1960. It is a responsibility
shared with the Governments of the United Kingdom
and Turkey, and also with the Government of Cyprus,
under which the parties have undertaken to recognise
and guarantee the independence, territorial integrity
and security of the Republic of Cyprus, and also

165. I was heartened to hear all the statements, but
the statement by the representative of Austria in particular reminded me of an occasion during the Second
World War when his country, which had the closest
relations with Germany, ties of friendship and blood,
was placed by the regime in Germany-not
by the
German people, not by the German nation, but by
the particular regime at the time-in
the same position
as Cyprus has been placed in today.
166. This is a most tragic situation: a threat to the
independence, sovereignty and freedom of the people
17

of Cyprus, their national identity, their own historic
tradition as a Greek island through the ages, an island
with its own history and tradition. It struggles for
freedom, only to find itself in the position of complaining against a threat to its independence, sovereignty and freedom by a regime-1
say a “regime”,
not “another country” -now ruling in another country
with which it has the closest relations.

but still a country in its own right, a State Member
the United Nations.

of

172. This is not the only case of people of the same
ethnic character and origin constituting
more than
one State. There are the Arab States of the Middle
East. They are exactly the same. They have the
same ethnic origin, the same ideals-everything.
They
happen to be separate States, but that does not in any
way detract from their national identity or their
ethnic origin. So, in the case of Cyprus, its independence should not be attacked from any side. This, I
think, should be borne in mind by all, and I am very
happy to see the support given from all sides in the
Council to the independence, sovereignty ;an territorial integrity of Cyprus. And, directly connected
with it, there have emerged from the statements of
all members that have spoken today the recognition
and support of Archbishop Makarios as the unifying
force in Cyprus-as
the continuing
President of
putsches,
CYPrw whatever forces and artificial
engineered from outside, may have tried to effect.

167. Now, my colleague the representative
of
Greece, Mr. Panayotacos, honoured me by referring
to me, and I would not consider it appropriate not
to mention him, because that would show great disregard. The fact is that I must first answer his
position.
168. As to his position on all that the President of
Cyprus put before this Council, and the proofs that
he brought forward about the direct implication
of
the regime in Greece in this brutal attack on Cyprus,
this attack that not only has caused so much loss of
life and such destruction of property and of freedom,
but also threatens the ideals of the island-and
I
hope the island will survive this threat against its
national
ideals-it
is not necessary to answer
Ambassador Panayotacos,
who simply dismissed
the charges of Archbishop Makarios as “mere fabrication and distortion”.
The speeches made by the
members of the Council are in themselves an answer;
an answer from me is not needed.

173. I do not want to take the time of the Council
if it is to proceed to a resolution tonight. If it is
going to adjourn, I may have something more to say.
Perhaps, before finishing my statement tonight, I
might refer to the charge made by the representative
of Greece that human rights have been violated in
Cyprus. I would remind him and the Council that in
spite of the great difficulties caused by outside intervention-and
even though the President, Archbishop
Makarios, as he has said, knew of the situation, of
the criminal acts instigated from outside, and of the
violence in the island-President
Makarios did not
interfere with the rights of the citizens of Cyprus.
There was freedom of the press until the last moment;
and, in spite of licence in the papers, never was there
any suppression of that freedom of the press. No
martial law was imposed; no emergency was called;
no arbitrary military courts passed judgements or
inflicted punishment.
Everything was done in the
regular constitutional
way. How can one accuse
Cyprus, and the President of Cyprus, of ill-treatment
and torture in prisons? Why should that take place?
It could take place in any regime that imposes martial
law and other such measures. I do not want to enter
into what happens in Greece under the present regime;
it is not my business to do that; I hope everything is
all right. But in Cyprus there has been no violation
of human rights and, as the President has declared,
when this matter was brought to his attention while
he was President, he invited a parliamentary committee
to investigate those charges. I wish that were done
in other countries where violations of human rights
are repeatedly referred to and reported.

169. It is the unanimous conviction of the international community that the military puisch in Cyprus
was engineered, ordered and executed by the military
regime of Greece. It is regrettable-very
regrettablebut it is truth and a reality we cannot overlook. This
has been emphatically expressed by the world press
all over the globe. It is an extraordinary thing that
all agree. From whatever part of the globe they
come-West,
East, aligned and non-aligned alike,
and whatever their ideology-they
are all agreed on
that, so why should I answer? As I say, I do so out
of regard for him.
170. It has also been emphatically expressed in other
important international bodies, such as the Permanent
Council of NATO in Brussels, the group of nonaligned countries in Geneva and the European
Common
Market Executive
Commission,
among
others, and also by almost all Governments. Consequently, the international issue of outside intervention
in the present case is already stated, and aggression
against Cyprus is beyond dispute.
171. Mr. Panayotacos also referred-and
I thank
him for it-to
my fervent patriotism
in the 1950s
and the 1960s. Well, I would say that that same
patriotism, more enhanced in a heart bleeding from
the agony and suffering imposed on Cyprus, is now
what urges me to come to this Council and, at my
age, fight again for the rights of the Cypriot people-as
a people, as a country, as a nation, as part of a nation,

174. It is needless for me to answer such charges.
The important thing now is, how is Cyprus to recover
from these wounds-wounds
inflicted, regrettably,
lamentably, from that source? How? Not by words;
it has to be done in an effective way. Therefore, we
18

look forward to the resolution that the Council will
adopt-a resolution that will be constructive, that will
restore to Cyprus the rights of its people that have
been trampled upon, the democratic rights that have
been respected in Cyprus all along but which have
now been so ruthlessly crushed by the use of the
tanks to which the Archbishop referred. As to the2
provenance -where did they come from, what marks
did they bear, by whom were they driven?

I

175. It would be a terrible example that would have
a most demoralizing
effect upon the peoples of all
nations if this situation were left unchanged and the
people of Cyprus remained under the dictatorship of
a projected regime from Athens. The position has to
be normalized, and that cannot be done unless there
is a strong, constructive and effective resolution of
the Security Council, to which my President and the
people of Cyprus as a whole, of whatever ethnic
I
origin, look forward.

182. Today we heard a detailed statement by the
President of that country. We received confirmational
of the facts of foreign interference’ in the interna
affairs of Cyprus directly from the head of State. What
prevents the Council from taking appropriate measures
now, immediately, at this very meeting? In the opinion
of the Soviet delegation, there is nothing to prevent
us from taking such action.

176. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of S6viet Socialist
Republics) (translation from Russian): I have asked
to speak in order to make a few brief comments on
the statements by the representative of the United
Kingdom.

183.

The

Spanish):

from
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
I call on the representative of Turkey.

184;. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I wish to make a few
remarks, ‘and I shall try to keep them very brief.

177. First of all, I should like to recall that in speaking
of certain representatives of certain NATO countries
I did not mention by name our colleague, the United
Kingdom representative.
If he takes these critical
remarks as directed at him, that is his own affair. We
take note of it. However, I should like to suggest to
him that, when’next certain circles are criticized for
certain acts, he should not hasten to raise his hand
and state that he is being criticized.

185. I shall not dwell on the lapsus linguae of
Mr. Rossides when he called Cyprus .a Greek island
in the Mediterranean. It is characteristic and therefore
not unexpected., We Turks of both Turkey and Cyprus
are used to it.
186. Today we are living through what might
seriously be called a Greek tragedy: a drama of
Greeks, not a word ‘being said about the plight of
the Turks. I would not call that a characteristic attitude
of the Security Council; certainly not. But, there has
always been a tendency to consider that one of the
elements of the population is more worthy of the care
of the Council than the other. I hope that will not be so
in future.

178. Secondly, in. denying any involvement
of
NATO countries in the events in Cyprus, the’representative of the United Kingdom apparently forgot
that Greece, which, as has been precisely established,
is the organizer of the intervention in Cyprus and the
guiding force behind the military coup, is a member
of NATO. Perhaps the representative of the United
Kingdom knows something that I am unaware of,
namely, that Greece has been excluded from NATO?
‘I have not heard this piece of news.

187. I want to make a remark of a very general
nature just as a kind- of future reference for all the
members who have spoken of the people of Cyprus.
There is no people of Cyprus. One can speak only of
the population of Cyprus, and in making this statement
I am merely quoting Archbishop Makarios. The rights
of the two communities must be considered separately
and on a level of equality with no imposition on the
weaker community.,

179. Thirdly, speaking seriously, the Soviet delega-’
tion is greatly concerned at the attempts of certain
representatives of certain NATO countries who have
been continuing even today to delay the adoption by
the Council of effective measures aimed at halting
foreign military intervention in the internal affairs of
the Republic of Cyprus, achieving the withdrawal
of the Greek military personnel who organized the
putsch and, thereby, restoring democratic
rule in
Cyprus and the Government
headed by President
Makarios.

188. It was in that context-and
I am’now answering
a remark by my friend Mr. Panayotacos of Greecethat in 1964, when the defenceless Turkish community
‘was attacked by the Greek Cypriot armed units, with
civilian Greek Cypriots at that time ghatered as in a
corrida to assist in the kill, that Turkish air force planes
had recourse to a police action aimed at restoring the

180. We have already stated that under the Charter
the Council is obliged to take immediate and effective
measures.
19

i-.

181’. There have been reference
here. to talks
between the interested parties be& held somewhere
else. These references cannot be s&en as a pretext
for the Council not to take appropciate action for its
part. Today we are discussing the dation’in
Cyprus
in connexion with the appeal ma& by the legitimate
Government of the Republic of C-s
and by President Makarios’in
person, and we e obliged to take
our own measures. We must take mopriate
steps to
respond to this appeal by the legit&uate Government
and must put an end to foreign llricitary interference
in the affairs of a sovereign Stare Member of the
..
United Nations.

rights of the Tnr~l.
community and putting an end
to the slaughter & that community. That is in reply
to. what. was saidmut
a bombardment by the Turkish
air force.
189. Now to ker :the record straight, again in reply
to the represent- & e of Greece, I should like to say
.this: if the Turk&& community,
which has no outlet
in Cyprus, s_uccee&d-as ciaimed by my dear friend
Mr. PauayoQcos-in
receiving thousands of officers
from Tnricey for the training of its fighters, I leave
it to the members of the Council to imagine the possible
number of Greek officers from Greece which might
be introduced into an island where all the means of
communication
and all the coastline were and are
under their entire control, and with the entire Greek
administration .at their beck and call.
190. The
PRESIDENT
(interpretation.
from
Spanish): I call on the representative of Cyprus.
191. Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus): I am very sorry to
have to take a little more of the Council’s time.
192. My friend and colleague Mr. Olcay took exception to my statement that Cyprus was a Greek island.
I was speakingZabout Cyprus as a unit in history. The
3,000-year-old history of Cyprus cannot be denied. I
am sure that Mr. Olcay, a man of learning, cannot
deny the history of Cyprus, cannot deny-that all through
the ages it has been predominantly
Greek. That is true
of its culture, its civilization-and
examples of this
can be seen in the rich collection in the New York
Metropolitan
Museum of Art; indeed they occupy a
very prominant place there.
193. The historv of a countrv cannot be denied. It
.is there. There could be no -point in Mr. Olcay’s
denying the history of Cyprus. As I have said, it is a
3,000-year-old history. It dates back to a period long
before there was any Turkish presence in Cyprus.
194. Now, of course, there is an 18 per cent minority
of Turkish Cypriots. That is most welcome. There is
an advantage to variety. It is not necessary to be
solidly one people. There are common interests that
far surpass any difficulties that have been artificially
created in Cyprus. We would look forward to living
not only in. peace and co-operation
but in amity
with the Turkish eommunity of Cyprus. If there is no
outside intervention,
the two communities
can live
in peace, mutual respect and mutual co-operation,

with full participation
aspect of life.

by the Turkish Cypriots in every

195. -That is the ideal situation, and it is not at all
hindered by the history of Cyprus. The history is
.theie. The present realities are also there. The two do
not conflict at all. Hence, I see no reason why there
should be any dispute between Mr. Olcay and me on
this issue.
’ 196. The PRESIDENT
Cinter~retation’
from
Spanish): I call on the representativk of Turkey:
197. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I hope we are not going
to enter into- one of those ritual Rossides-Olcay,
Olcay-Rossides exchanges. I merely wish to,say that
despite all the historical elements in the statement
by Mr. Rossides, the historical argument-especially
when it goes back thousands of years--could be terribly dangerous in our modem world. Therefore, the
less said about thousands of years of history, the better.
198. We should try to stick to the present, and in
my view, if we do so we can hardly call Cyprus a
Greek island. That is what Turkey has been striving
to explain for the past 15 years in this and other forums
of the United Nations.
199. In fact, that is why we are here today. We want
people to know that Cypri~s is not, should not be and
will not be a Greek island.
200. I wish to make just one other comment. The
relationship between the two communities,
though it
is to be hoped that it will become better in the future.
through adequate constitutional measures, is far from
being a relationship that can give the Turks the con&
dence that would allow them to consider themselves
free and equal citizens, which they should have been
under the Constitution
that gave birth to Cyprus.
We are striving towards that ideal, but I must say
that, especially in the past 10 years, we have not
achieved much progress in that respect.
201. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Spanish): A draft resolution [S/f 13461 which is the
result of consultations carried out among members
of the Council has been circulated. Members of the
Council may wish to study this text, and I would hope
that it can be put to the vote at our next meeting.
The meeting rose at 6..50 p.m..

,
..I

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
pubhcations
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMRNT

SE PROCURER

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to United
Nations,
Safes

LBS ,PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Lea publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et 1~s agences
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informer-wus
aup&
de votre
libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
XAX

HOJIY~HTE,

Ha~anua
smzax

H3AAHHSI

Oprauwsauwu
I

arewcmax

eo

BarneM

K~~~AOYI

raractwee

HaqnR,

Cexqm

no npoaaxce
,

COMO

CONSEGUIR

OPI-AHSi

3A4BR

06zea~~eun~rx

HasuR

acex

uupa.

pationax

ktmi rmum~e
HJALAHR.

PIJBLICACIONRS

OE’bEAHHEHHbIX

noac~o
Haaonme

no anpecy:
Hhm-‘tI@c

DE LAS

m*

HAUHH

xyne~b

a ~u~aun.r~

cnpasm
Opraasfsasas3
Xer3eaa.

NACIONES

uara-

06 rmAaaHax
06-6enwmirthm

a

UNIDAS

Las ptiblicaciones
de Ias Naciones
Unidas
estsn en venta en libmrias
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
ConsuIte
a au librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,‘Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Lifho

in United

Nations,

New York

00400

74;82001-ApriI1983-2,200
