asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6829

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6829th meeting
Tuesday, 11 September 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wittig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone
Ninth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (S/2012/679)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-50357 (E)

*1250357*

S/PV.6829

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: At the outset, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Ambassador Gérard Araud,
Permanent Representative of France, and his team
for their services to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August 2012. I am sure that
I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Araud, his Deputy
Permanent Representative, Martin Briens, and his
delegation for the great skill and leadership with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
Ninth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (S/2012/679)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Sierra Leone to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Jens Toyberg-Frandzen,
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Guillermo Rishchynski,
chairperson of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Canada, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/679, which contains the ninth
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.
I now give the floor to Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen.
Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen: I would like to thank
you, Sir, for the opportunity to provide a briefing on

2

the latest developments in Sierra Leone, pursuant
to the ninth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) (S/2012/679), which has been
submitted for the Council’s consideration.
As detailed in the report, Sierra Leone continues to
make steady progress in consolidating its achievements
of the past decade. As Council members are aware,
the joint Government and Peacebuilding Commission
progress report on the Agenda for Change has been
issued. It highlights the country’s success in the
implementation of the Government’s priorities, in
particular in the areas of infrastructure development,
the provision of health services, and the energy and
agriculture sectors. Planning for a successor development
strategy, known as the Agenda for Prosperity, is under
way. At the same time, the challenges of unemployment,
especially among the youth, high living costs and
related economic difficulties still persist, requiring a
more long-term approach and sustained investment.
With regard to political developments, the main
focus during the past six months has continued to be
on the preparations for the 17 November presidential,
parliamentary and local council elections. With
technical assistance from the United Nations, major
electoral arrangements, particularly the biometric voter
registration exercise, were successfully concluded.
Others, including the procurement of sensitive
materials and communication links between regional
tallying centres and the Commission’s head offices in
Freetown are ongoing. The nomination of candidates
for the various elective positions will commence on
12 September, to be followed by a political campaign
period from 17 October to 15 November.
Overall, preparations for the elections have
proceeded satisfactorily, albeit with some challenges.
In recognition of the complexity of conducting
four elections — presidential, parliamentary, local
council and mayoral — on the same date throughout
the country, the National Electoral Commission has
planned an extensive voter education programme
using ward electoral and education committees that
are comprised of local community representatives. The
programme, which will also be supplemented by civil
society organizations, is crucial to ensuring greater
participation in the electoral process.
Since the completion of the report before the
Council, on 6 September Parliament endorsed the
revised nomination fees, which require presidential
12-50357

S/PV.6829

candidates to pay 100 million leones, equivalent to
$23,250; parliamentary candidates to pay 10 million
leones, equivalent to $2,325; local council chairs to pay
5 million leones, equivalent to $1,167; and local council
councilors to pay 2 million leones. The previous rates
for the 2002 and 2007 elections were 1 million leones
for presidential candidates and 100,000 leones for other
elective positions.

Commission, in the upcoming elections. At present,
UNIPSIL, in collaboration with the Political Parties
Registration Commission and the National Commission
for Democracy, is supporting the wider dissemination
of the Declaration and monitoring its implementation.
We continue to urge Sierra Leone’s political parties
and all major stakeholders to fully implement the
commitments they have made under the Declaration.

Almost all political parties, as well as civil society
groups and the National Human Rights Commission,
strongly criticized the proposals for the substantial
increase in nomination fees. Women’s groups in
particular have pointed out that the increased fees will
prevent women from participating in the elections.
Throughout that process, and given the importance of
the concerns raised, I have encouraged all the political
parties and the National Electoral Commission to
engage in dialogue and to use the democratic processes
to resolve their differences.

Providing an enabling security environment at all
stages of the electoral process and in the immediate
post-election period will be equally indispensible. In
that regard, the role of Sierra Leone’s security agencies,
in particular the Sierra Leone Police, remains critical.
The training of the police and provision of the necessary
logistics are well under way. However, recent incidents
involving the use of force by the police in response
to disturbances and other situations in various parts
of the country have caused concern. We welcome the
measures taken by the Government of Sierra Leone
to investigate the circumstances that led to the use of
lethal force, and stress the need to ensure respect for
the rule of law and professional conduct by all during
the electoral period and beyond. The establishment
of the independent police complaints mechanism, as
envisaged in the 2009 joint communiqué, would also
contribute to that end.

Although the official campaign date is now set
to begin on 17 October, the country is already in an
election mode, with political parties, in particular the
two major parties — the All People’s Congress (APC)
and the Sierra Leone People’s Party (SLPP) — engaged
in extensive tours of the country to mobilize support.
All those political activities are so far proceeding in
an orderly manner and without incident. We welcome
that positive trend and at the same time believe that
continued attention should be given to the following
four areas: promoting constructive dialogue and mutual
trust among the political actors, in particular the two
major political parties, the APC and the SLPP; ensuring
confidence in the security sector, especially in the
Sierra Leone Police; improving communication and
dialogue between the National Electoral Commission
and the political parties; and managing the role of the
media.
With regard to political dialogue, I am pleased to
report that as a manifestation of national ownership of
the political process, and in response to the Security
Council’s call made in its last presidential statement
on Sierra Leone (S/PRST/2012/11), all 10 registered
political parties and other major stakeholders have
signed the Declaration of 18 May 2012, committing
themselves to free, fair and peaceful elections. The
Declaration outlines the roles and responsibilities of
all the key players, including the political parties, the
media, security agencies, civil society and relevant
national institutions, such as the National Electoral

12-50357

Notwithstanding the authority vested in the
National Electoral Commission by Sierra Leone’s
Constitution, the Commission and the political parties
should continue to collaborate and address any concerns
through open dialogue and in a constructive spirit. In
that regard, efforts are under way, with the support of
UNIPSIL, to strengthen the Political Parties Liaison
Committee, comprised of representatives from all the
political parties, the Commission, the Political Parties
Registration Commission and other major actors, to
serve as a fonun for consultations and dialogue in order
to resolve any matters regarding the electoral process.
The Sierra Leone media has an important
contribution to make in ensuring free, fair and
peaceful elections by providing objective and balanced
information to the population. In that regard, the
Independent Media Commission should play a more
active role in working with the media to discourage
divisive and inflammatory reporting that could lead
to political tension and violence. Others, in particular
the Sierra Leone Association of Journalists and the
Guild of Editors, should also educate and guide their
memberships on their roles and responsibilities. As to

3

S/PV.6829

the Serra Leone Broadcasting Corporation (SLBC), I
am pleased to report the recent adoption of guidelines,
which were signed by all political parties and the SLBC.
The guidelines provide for equitable airtime and access
for all political parties to SLBC programmes.
We are pleased to note that, during the past six
months and since the adoption of the Declaration of
18 May 2012, there have been no incidents of political
violence in the country. The political parties and other
stakeholders continue to uphold their commitment
to credible and peaceful elections. However, as
the elections draw closer, the intensity of political
competition, in particular between the two major
political parties — the APC and the SLPP — is expected
to increase and tensions are expected to rise. However,
with the prevailing spirit of dialogue and constructive
engagement among Sierra Leone’s political actors, we
are confident that such tensions will be managed and
violence prevented. In that regard, we are encouraged
by the level of commitment and active engagement of
all segments of Sierra Leone society in the electoral
process. The non-State actors project implemented by
UNIPSIL, with the assistance of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund, supports the efforts of key
stakeholders, such as political parties, youth and women
groups, tradition leaders and media, in promoting
non-violence and political participation.
The successful conduct of elections will
demonstrate the maturity of Sierra Leone’s political
leadership and institutions, as well as the consolidation
of the democratic process in the country. Once the
elections are concluded, the immediate focus should
be on addressing any potential post-elections issues
through dialogue and on ensuring a smooth transition
of the elected Government. UNIPSIL stands ready
to continue providing the necessary assistance in
that respect, working with all stakeholders towards
promoting national cohesion and reconciliation.
However, consolidating and sustaining Sierra Leone’s
achievements would require continued progress in
tackling the root causes, including those identified in
the report of Sierra Leone’s Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. In that regard, with Sierra Leoneans taking
the lead, the continued support of the international
community, including the United Nations, will still
be needed for some time to come. With that in mind,
UNIPSIL and the United Nations country team will
continue to assist the Government of Sierra Leone as
long as it is deemed appropriate.

4

In concluding, I wish to take this opportunity to
thank President Koroma and his Government for the
continued cooperation and support for the work of the
United Nations in Sierra Leone. I would also like to
thank the Council for its sustained interest in Sierra
Leone, as demonstrated in its recent mission to the
country. Last but not least, I wish to acknowledge the
very important role that the Sierra Leone configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission continues to play
under the able chairmanship of Ambassador Gullerimo
Rischynski in supporting peace consolidation efforts in
the country, including the work of UNIPSIL.
The President: I thank Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen for
his briefing.
I now give
Mr. Rishchynski.

the

floor

to

His

Excellency

Mr. Rishchynski (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for this opportunity to express the opinions of
the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and its States members. In response to the
Security Council’s letter of 6 September, I intend to
focus my remarks on the path forward for Sierra Leone
and the anticipated contribution of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).
Sierra Leone faces an important moment in
its history. The elections scheduled for November
represent a crucial test and are widely viewed as a core
benchmark for peace consolidation. The Peacebuilding
Commission has monitored developments over the past
year, including through regular contact with Freetown
and by inviting the Chair of the National Electoral
Commission to New York to brief on preparations. As
Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen has just outlined in greater detail,
the necessary logistical and financial arrangements
are largely in place. There is good reason to expect
technically sound and well-managed elections.
(spoke in English)
But the greatest challenge is political. All national
stakeholders must fulfil their responsibility to create an
environment conducive to successful elections. In each
of the Commission’s previous visits, interlocutors have
raised concerns about persistent tensions between the
major political parties, the role of unprofessional media
willing to exacerbate political divides, and the risk that
irresponsible actors will encourage young people to
engage in politically-motivated violence. The United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra

12-50357

S/PV.6829

Leone (UNIPSIL) deserves great credit for addressing
these challenges, particularly by following up on the
2009 joint communiqué, supporting non-State actors,
and facilitating the Declaration agreed by political
parties in May. These efforts have helped to establish a
common understanding of the parameters of legitimate
electoral competition, and it is now up to Sierra
Leoneans to exercise their democratic rights and accept
the resulting outcome.
With respect to the PBC, we intend to travel to
Freetown in late October to take stock of the situation and
engage with all relevant stakeholders, with a particular
focus on the political parties, civil society and media.
While there, we intend to stress the need to maintain
open, inclusive dialogue and to abide by outstanding
commitments made in the 2009 joint communiqué and
the political Declaration of May 2012. We shall share
the conclusions of that visit with the Security Council
upon our return, including with respect to any areas
requiring the attention of the international community.
While elections will remain the primary focus in the
near future, Sierra Leone also stands poised to transition
out of the immediate peacebuilding phase. This will
involve a number of important processes. A successor
to the Agenda for Change is under development by the
Government, the United Nations presence is likely to
change significantly, and Sierra Leone is piloting the
New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States. Given this
context, I would like to offer three general points that
merit consideration during the post-elections period.
(spoke in French)
First, several of the outstanding peacebuilding
challenges are long-term in nature. Addressing youth
unemployment, fighting corruption and combating
transnational crime will take sustained effort over a
substantial period of time. Progress in these areas will
also depend on developments outside Sierra Leone,
both in terms of the global economy and with respect to
the transnational threats plaguing West Africa. Even as
Sierra Leone increasingly prioritizes socio-economic
development, these issues must continue to be addressed.
In that regard, it is promising that the Agenda for
Prosperity will likely include pillars on employment,
natural resources management and governance. It will
also be especially important to ensure sustained support
for those areas of UNIPSIL’s current engagement that
will require continuing attention in the context of a
reconfigured United Nations presence in Sierra Leone.

12-50357

(spoke in English)
Secondly, as the configuration’s consideration
of the second joint progress report on the Agenda for
Change has demonstrated, Sierra Leone has developed a
clear, coordinated and nationally owned approach. The
United Nations has played a key role in helping to align
international actors behind the single national strategy.
It can and should continue to play that role, even as
strategic priorities and institutional arrangements
evolve.
Thirdly, transitions inevitably risk producing
strategic and funding gaps. The Peacebuilding
Commission could, and stands ready, to play a potentially
useful role by helping to ensure overall coordination.
Sustained multilateral and bilateral assistance will be
especially important in the period before revenues from
the extractive sector reinforce Sierra Leone’s budget
position. The configuration intends to engage more
extensively with those issues in the coming months.
Let me conclude by noting that much has been
invested and much gained in Sierra Leone in the
past years. The forthcoming elections and transition
period present risks, but also constitute an opportunity
to further consolidate peace, deepen democratic
governance and lay the foundations for a prosperous
future. Sierra Leoneans have demonstrated tremendous
determination in rebuilding their country after a
devastating civil war. The international community
needs to continue to standi shoulder to shoulder with
them in the years to come.
The President: I thank Mr. Rishchynski for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Sierra
Leone.
Mr. Touray (Sierra Leone): While congratulating
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of September and
thanking you for giving my delegation an opportunity
to contribute to today’s briefing on the situation in
Sierra Leone, I should like, on behalf of His Excellency
President Ernest Bai Koroma, the Government and
the people of Sierra Leone, to convey our profound
appreciation for the continued support and unfailing
interest of the Security Council, the wider membership
of the United Nations and our international partners in
consolidating our hard-won peace and security.

5

S/PV.6829

We wish to express our sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his ninth report (S/2012/679)
on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL),
which covers the period 1 March to 31 August. The
report meticulously highlights the progress made
and the remaining challenges in our efforts at peace
consolidation and transition to a more developmentoriented phase. We note with profound appreciation
the instructive review provodied courtesy of Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General Jens ToybergFrandzen, which critically focused on the upcoming
elections and issues of interest and concern in the postelection phase in Sierra Leone.
We also express our sincere thanks and appreciation
to the members of the Sierra Leone configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) through its
Chair, Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski of Canada,
for the unremitting commitment and strong support
they continue to demonstrate in the pursuit of peace
and security in Sierra Leone. We note with particular
interest Mr. Rishchynski’s rundown on the preparations
for the conduct of the elections on 17 November and
the necessary support required of UNIPSIL and the
agencies and programmes before and during the postelection transition, as well as his views on future support
to Sierra Leone’s political and economic priorities. We
are quite in agreement with the facts set forth in his
briefing.
The end of the conflict in 2002 marked the
collective resolve of the people of Sierra Leone to bring
an end to 11 years of nightmare, and their preference for
peace, security and development. Since then, with the
support of the Security Council, the United Nations in
general and international partners, remarkable progress
has been made in charting a path for a peaceful, secure,
democratic Sierra Leone and its future prosperity. As
we commend all of us and relevant stakeholders for the
gains made, some of which are quite irreversible, it is
crucial that together we continue to tackle the remaining
challenges in order to further advance and consolidate
comprehensively our peacebuilding priorities.
Key among them is the increasing need to address
the economic, social and governance challenges to
match the growing expectations of Sierra Leoneans.
As already stated by the Chair of the configuration,
several of those challenges are long-term in nature and
will require sustained effort over a substantial period

6

of time, since much depends on the global economic
situation and the overall subregional security climate.
As we continue to make steady progress in
addressing the three risks areas of youth unemployment,
corruption and illicit drug trafficking and organized
crime identified in our Agenda for Change and endorsed
by the Sierra Leone PBC configuration, we are equally
committed to making progress in strengthening our
health care, energy, education, agriculture and transport
infrastructure. Those areas, when fully developed,
will catalyse prospects for job creation, address key
peacebuilding priorities and put Sierra Leone on the path
to sustainability and resilience. Fostering partnership
with the international community to achieve the highly
interlinked and desirable goals of peace, security
and development remains a primary concern of the
Government and the people of Sierra Leone.
The Government will continue to demonstrate
strong political leadership in dealing with issues
of political violence in whatever shape or form and
irrespective of party affiliation, and, through due
process, will continue to ensure that perpetrators of
violence are brought to justice, as was evident in the
conviction of those involved in the political violence in
Freetown in Janurary. In that regard, the Government
released a white paper on the report of the ShearsMoses Commission of Inquiry on the political violence
of March 2009 and continues to make progress in
addressing its recommendations, including working
with all national stakeholders and international
partners to establish an independent police complaints
committee and strengthening the Independent Media
Commission to improve its monitoring procedures over
media matters and actors.
President Koroma continues to constantly engage
all stakeholders, with a view to encouraging and
promoting political dialogue towards the attainment
of a collective commitment to peaceful, free, fair,
transparent and credible elections. In that regard, we call
to the Council’s attention the signing by all 10 registered
political parties and other relevant stakeholders of the
“Declaration on the 2012 elections”, on 18 May — a
code of conduct for the elections aimed at ensuring
peaceful and violence-free elections. That is ample
demonstration of the commitment of the Government
and the people of Sierra Leone to peaceful, free, fair
and credible elections with the hope that the results will
be accepted by all.

12-50357

S/PV.6829

We therefore continue to urge the Security Council
and the United Nations in general, as well as our
international partners, to maintain their full support
for the ongoing electoral process. The presidential,
parliamentary and local council elections scheduled
for 17 November 2012, as has been noted, remain a
crucial test for the consolidation of peace, security and
democracy in Sierra Leone. Continued commitment
and support from international partners to assist the
Government in strengthening key national democratic
institutions such as the Political Parties Registration
Commission, the Independent Media Commission,
the National Commission for Democracy, the National
Electoral Commission, the Human Rights Commission
of Sierra Leone and the Sierra Leone Broadcasting
Corporation, remains of primary significance.
I am confident in reporting to the Council that
preparations for the presidential, parliamentary and
local elections are on course and at an advanced stage,
with the National Electoral Commission continuing to
demonstrate transparency and credibility throughout
the process. At the invitation of the Sierra Leone
Configuration, the Chair of the National Electoral
Commission gave a comprehensive briefing to
members of the Configuration in New York in June on
the preparations for the elections.
Recent activities aimed at improving the electoral
climate have included the presidential assent by His
Excellency Mr. Ernest Bai Koroma to the Public
Elections Law, which consolidates all existing electoral
legislation into a single document; the appointment
of a new Chair of the Political Parties Registration
Commission after the death of the incumbent, in order
to enhance the Commission’s capacity to be actively
functional in the discharge of its mandate; and the
inauguration of the electoral courts to deal with electoral
offences and related matters in order to ensure due
process, as well as support for the machinery of justice
through UNIPSIL’s collaboration with Government in
the training of judges, prosecutors, police investigators
and paralegal staff. To provide equal access to air time
and programmes of the Sierra Leone Broadcasting
Corporation, an elections guideline prepared by the
Corporation was adopted by all political parties on
9 August and followed by the establishment of an
elections unit to focus specifically on elections matters.
In line with the recommendations of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission aimed at addressing the root
causes of conflict in Sierra Leone, the Government is

12-50357

continuing to collaborate with all national stakeholders
and the United Nations in promoting the drafting and
enactment of the gender equality bill, so as to enhance
women’s participation in the decision-making process.
The Government is also continuing to strengthen its
efforts to make progress towards the education of the girl
child and the provision of free health care to pregnant
women, lactating mothers and children under 5 years of
age. Furthermore, with support from the Peacebuilding
Fund and the International Organization for Migration,
the National Commission for Social Action commenced
a new round of payments of reparations to the remaining
victims of the 11-year conflict.
The Agenda for Change and the United Nations
Joint Vision aligned with it continue to provide a
strong partnership link between Sierra Leone and
the United Nations, as well as the donor community.
Its implementation has so far had a great impact
on peacebuilding. Sierra Leone today is considered
a best practice in donor coordination as well as a
peacebuilding success story. In that regard, we stress
the need for the international community to continue to
invest in success, in the spirit of the New Deal arrived
at in Busan on aid effectiveness, and to recognize
the need for special attention to be paid to countries
emerging from conflict — Sierra Leone being one of
the pilot countries. The preparation of the successor
development framework to the Agenda for Change,
anchored in the New Deal and entitled Agenda for
Prosperity, is well under way, and some of its key
elements will be highlighted during the presentation
of the second joint progress report on the Agenda for
Change at the Sierra Leone Configuration meeting to
be held soon.
The Chair of the Sierra Leone Configuration,
Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski, visited Sierra
Leone in January. His report and the briefing by
the Configuration underscored the progress made
in addressing key peacebuilding priorities and the
need for enduring support, particularly in the area of
youth unemployment and empowerment, building the
capacity of the police, and the need for strong privatesector growth, which could translate into more tangible
peace dividends and sustainable peace consolidation.
At an open briefing by the Security Council team after
its visit to Sierra Leone in May, similar sentiments were
also expressed on the progress made and the need for
support to address the present challenges.

7

S/PV.6829

We commend the support of the United Nations and
international partners for the work of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone and hail the judgement passed against
Mr. Charles Taylor by the Court for crimes against
humanity and violations of international humanitarian
law committed in Sierra Leone during the course of
the conflict. We therefore urge the United Nations and
international partners to continue to support the Court
towards the completion of its work.
Let me conclude by welcoming the new
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jens Toyberg-Frandzen, and assuring him of
the Government’s interest and of its readiness and
willingness to cooperate with him in order to ensure
a successful outcome of his mission in Sierra Leone. I
am sure that by now he must be convinced that Sierra
Leoneans are very friendly, hospitable and ordinarily
peaceful. We also express thanks and appreciation to
the staff of UNIPSIL, United Nations agencies and
programmes in Sierra Leone, and all our international
partners for their unreserved commitment to achieving
Sierra Leone’s peacebuilding objectives along with our
development transformation goals.
As in the previous general elections held in 2002
and 2007, we look forward once again to peaceful, free,
fair and credible elections acceptable to all.

Before closing, I should like to make some
comments on the issue of nomination fees, as raised
in the briefing by the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General. I should like to put on record the
fact that first, the decision was taken by an independent
body — the National Electoral Commission — and
that secondly, due process was ensured, as it was
discussed and debated in Parliament, and the ayes had
it. Thirdly, it should perhaps be brought to the attention
of the Council that it is a known factor that some of the
political parties had to levy nearly 50 million leones for
an aspirant to be a presidential candidate for the next
elections — that is asking for hundreds of millions for
the national presidential elections for each candidate.
Furthermore, it is a known factor that some other
parties have tried to introduce mechanisms aimed at
more or less spreading out the burden of that fee by
ensuring that they get it out of the fees contributed to
the parties by aspirants, out of which proceeds they will
bond the nomination fee for the successful aspirant who
becomes the candidate. So mechanisms are to be put in
place by the parties themselves to make sure that the
burden is spread out and that no one member bears it
alone.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on this subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

8

12-50357
