S/2019/825

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 October 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 16 October 2019 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
Further to the letter dated 26 August 2019 from Ambassador Joanna Wronecka,
I have the honour to confirm that the members of the Security Council have agreed
to send a mission to Africa (Ethiopia and South Sudan) from 19 to 23 October 2019.
While in Addis Ababa, the members of the Council will, inter alia, hold the thirteenth
annual joint consultative meeting with the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union. The Council members have agreed on the terms of reference of the mission to
South Sudan (see annex).
The mission to South Sudan will be co-led by Ambassador Kelly Craft (United
States of America) and myself, and I will continue to lead the mission to Ethiopia.
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission will be as follows:
Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium)
Ambassador Haitao Wu (China)
Ambassador Kacou Houadja Léon Adom (Côte d’Ivoire)
Ambassador José Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea)
Ambassador Nicolas de Rivière (France)
Ambassador Christoph Heusgen (Germany)
Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani (Indonesia)
Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi (Kuwait)
Mr. Paul Fernando Duclos Parodi (Peru)
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka (Poland)
Ambassador Dmitry Polyanskiy (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Jerry Matthews Matjila (South Africa)
Ambassador Jonathan Guy Allen (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland)
Ms. Elaine French (United States of America)
I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated
as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
President of the Security Council

19-17866 (E)

311019

*1917866*

S/2019/825

Annex
Terms of reference of the Security Council mission to South
Sudan, 19 to 23 October 2019
1.
The Security Council will carry out its mission to South Sudan in October 2019.
The mission will travel to Juba and will be co-led by South Africa and the United
States of America.
2.

The objectives of the mission are as follows:

(a) To demonstrate the Security Council’s support for the peace process in
South Sudan and to urge parties to the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan to resolve outstanding issues in order to
allow for the peaceful formation of a Revitalized Transitional Government of
National Unity;
(b) To express support for the efforts of regional organizations and actors
working to facilitate the peace process, as well as the efforts of the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism and the
reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission;
(c) To reinforce the messages contained in Council resolution 2459 (2019)
and the statement by the President of the Council dated 8 October 2019
(S/PRST/2019/11);
(d) To observe and support the efforts of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) to implement its mandate in line with resolution 2459 (2019) and
other related Council resolutions;
(e) To highlight the urgent need to improve the dire humanitarian, human
rights and economic situation in South Sudan;
(f) To reiterate the Council’s consistent call upon the Government of South
Sudan to comply with the obligations set out in the Status of Forces Agreement
between the United Nations and the Government of the Republic of South Sudan
concerning the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and to immediately cease
obstructing UNMISS in the performance of its mandate;
(g) To demonstrate the Council’s support for the people of South Sudan and
reaffirm its strong commitment to the sovereignty, indepe ndence, territorial integrity
and national unity of South Sudan.
3.

The mission will seek to achieve these objectives through meetings with:
(a)

The signatories to the Revitalized Agreement, including:

(i)

The Government of South Sudan;

(ii)

Representatives of opposition political parties;

(iii) Key stakeholder groups, including those representing women and youth;
(b)

Representatives of UNMISS;

(c)

Members of civil society and non-governmental organizations;

(d)

Regional actors and members of regional organizations.

4.
The mission will seek to achieve its objectives through a visit to a training
facility for the unified military or a protection of civilians site.
5.
The mission will seek to implement lessons learned from previous missions of
the Security Council.
2/2

19-17866
