A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/119
16 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 97
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/50/619)]
50/119.

Economic and technical cooperation among
developing countries and a United Nations
conference on South-South cooperation

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 33/134 of 19 December 1978, in which it
endorsed the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for Promoting and Implementing
Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries, 1/ and 46/159 of
19 December 1991 on technical cooperation among developing countries, as well
as its other relevant resolutions on economic and technical cooperation among
developing countries,
Reaffirming also its resolution 49/96 of 19 December 1994 on a United
Nations conference on South-South cooperation,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1992/41 of 30 July
1992, in which the Council called upon all parties in the development effort
to make concerted, planned and vigorous endeavours to benefit from utilization
of the capacities of developing countries by giving their full support and
first consideration to the use of the modality of technical cooperation among
developing countries,
Taking note of the decisions and recommendations contained in the Final
Document of the Eleventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of the

1/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical Cooperation
among Developing Countries, Buenos Aires, 30 August-12 September 1978 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.II.A.11 and corrigendum), chap. I.
96-76681

/...

A/RES/50/119
Page 2

Non-Aligned Countries, 2/ held at Cartagena de Indias, Colombia, from 18 to
20 October 1995,
Bearing in mind the Ministerial Declaration of the Group of 77, 3/
adopted at the nineteenth annual meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of the Group of 77, held in New York on 29 September 1995, which emphasized
the importance of South-South cooperation, particularly the convening of a
United Nations conference on South-South cooperation no later than 1997,
Reaffirming that South-South cooperation constitutes an important
element of international cooperation for development as well as an essential
basis for national and collective self-reliance and a means of promoting the
integration of developing countries into the world economy,
Reaffirming also that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for,
but is complementary to, North-South cooperation,
Noting with satisfaction the increase in economic and technical
cooperation among developing countries reported by both developing countries
and the United Nations development system,
Recognizing the need for the international community to support the
developing countries in optimizing opportunities for expanding South-South
cooperation,
Welcoming the report on new directions for technical cooperation among
developing countries, 4/ prepared in response to its resolution 49/96, whose
recommendations were endorsed by the High-level Committee on the Review of
Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries at its ninth session, 5/
and subsequently endorsed by the Economic and Social Council,
Noting with satisfaction the launching of the South Centre as an
intergovernmental organization, and its important contribution to the
promotion and strengthening of South-South cooperation,
Recognizing that recent advances in communications technology have
created new opportunities for South-South cooperation,
Taking note of the report of the Intergovernmental Meeting of Experts on
South-South Cooperation, 6/ convened by the Secretary-General in New York
from 31 July to 4 August 1995, and of the reports of the Standing Committee on
Economic Cooperation among Developing Countries of the United Nations

2/

See A/50/752-S/1995/1035, annex III.

3/

A/50/518, annex.

4/

TCDC/9/3.

5/

See A/50/39, annex I, decision 9/2.

6/

A/AC.246/3.
/...

A/RES/50/119
Page 3

Conference on Trade and Development 7/ and of the High-level Committee on
the Review of Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries on the work of
its ninth session, 8/ at which substantive issues were presented and
practical modalities for strengthening South-South economic and technical
cooperation at the global level were recommended,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the state of
South-South cooperation 9/ and its supplement entitled State of South-South
Cooperation: Statistical Pocket Book and Index of Cooperation
Organizations, 10/ which provide a comprehensive and systematic overview
and analysis of South-South cooperation worldwide and of United Nations system
support for such cooperation;
2.
Endorses the recommendations contained in the report on new
directions for technical cooperation among developing countries, 4/ which
among other things call for the adoption of a more strategic orientation for
technical cooperation among developing countries focusing on priority issues,
such as trade and investment, debt, the environment, poverty alleviation,
production and employment, and macroeconomic policy coordination, as well as
education, health, the transfer of technology and rural development, which are
likely to have a major development impact on a large number of developing
countries;
3.
Welcomes the decision of the Executive Board of the United Nations
Development Programme and of the United Nations Population Fund to increase
the allocation of resources for technical cooperation among developing
countries during the next programming cycle of the United Nations Development
Programme;
4.
Calls upon all Governments and relevant United Nations
organizations, including the multilateral financial institutions, to consider
increasing allocations for economic and technical cooperation among developing
countries and to identify new funding modalities to promote South-South
cooperation such as triangular cooperation and private sector funding;
5.
Invites the United Nations Development Programme to establish a
voluntary trust fund for the promotion of South-South cooperation and invites
all countries to contribute to the fund;
6.
Calls upon the developing countries and their institutions to
increase joint efforts in technology cooperation, broader technological
development such as encompasses scientific and technological management
capabilities and information networks that are demand-oriented and involve
participation by users of technology or by those involved in the process of
technological development, infrastructure and human resources development;

7/

TD/B/42(1)/7 and TD/B/CN.3/16.

8/

See A/50/39.

9/

A/50/340 and Add.1.

10/

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.II.D.18.
/...

A/RES/50/119
Page 4

7.
Welcomes the decision of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development to address at its ninth session the issue of new approaches to
South-South economic cooperation, as well as the role and potential impact on
development of regional economic groupings in the globalizing and liberalizing
world economy;
8.
Invites, in this context, the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, at its ninth session, to be held in South Africa, to consider
strengthening economic and technical cooperation among developing countries as
a strategy for promoting growth and development and for ensuring the effective
integration of the developing countries into the world economy, and to
formulate concrete policy recommendations in this regard;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to present to the General Assembly,
on a biennial basis, a report entitled "State of South-South cooperation"
containing a comprehensive overview and analysis of South-South economic and
technical cooperation worldwide and international support in this regard,
including quantitative data and indicators on all aspects of South-South
cooperation as well as recommendations for strengthening such cooperation,
keeping in view the importance of the proposal to convene a United Nations
conference on South-South cooperation;
10.
Invites all other organs, organizations and agencies of the United
Nations system, in particular the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development and the regional commissions, to provide analytical and empirical
material for the preparation of the above-mentioned report;
11.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-second
session the sub-item entitled "Economic and technical cooperation among
developing countries".
96th plenary meeting
20 December 1995
