VI.

41/153.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Regional arrangements for the promotion and
protection of human rights in the Asían and
Pacifi.c region

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions, in particular resolution 39/116 of 14 December 1984, on regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights
in the Asian region,
Recognizing that regional arrangements make a major
contribution to the promotion and protection of human
rights and that non-governmental organizations may have
a valuable role to play in this process,
Bearing in mind that intergovernmental arrangements
for the promotion and protection of human rights have
been established in other regions,
Noting with appreciation the report of the Seminar on
National, Local and Regional Arrangements for the Promotion and Protection ofHuman Rights in the Asian Region, held at Colombo from 21 June to 2 July 1982, 149 and
the comments on the report of the Seminar received from
the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific and from States members of the Commission, 150
Welcoming the designation of the Social Development
Division of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia
and the Pacific as a regional human rights focal point,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution
1986/57 of 13 March 1986,31
l. Takes note ofthe note by the Secretary-General; 151
2. Requests the Secretary-General to assist and encourage the Executive Secretary of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific to pursue the establishment of a depository centre for United Nations
human rights materials within the Commission at Bangkok, the function of which would include the collection,
processing and dissemination of such materials in the
Asian and Pacific region;
3. Renews its invitation to States members of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
that have not yet done so to communicate to the Secretary-General as soon as possible their comments on the report of the Seminar on National, Local and Regional Arrangements for the Promotion and Protection of Human
Rights in the Asian Region and, in particular, to address
themselves to the conclusions and recommendations in
the report concerning the development of regional arrangements in Asia and the Pacific;
4. Invites the Secretary-General to finalize as expeditiously as possible preparations for a training course, to be
held in the Asian and Pacific region, on the teaching ofhuman rights;
5. Takes note of the efforts of United Nations development agencies in the Asian and Pacific region to ·promote
the human rights dimension more actively and systematically in their development activities and invites them to
pursue those efforts;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a further
report to the General Assembly at its forty-third session,
through the Economic and Social Council, incorporating
information on progress achieved in the implementation
of the present resolution;

97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/154.

Regional arrangements for the promotion and
protection of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3Ul27 of 16 December 1977,
33/167 of 20 December 1978, 34/171 of 17 December
1979, 35/197 of 15 December 1980, 36/154 of 16 December 1981, 37 /171 and 37 /172 of 17 December 1982, 38/97
of 16 December 1983 and 39/115 and 39/116 of
14 December 1984 concerning regional arrangements for
the promotion and protection of human rights,
Recalling that, in its resolution 39/115, the General Assembly invited the Secretary-General to submit to the Assembly at its forty-first session a report on the state of regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of
human rights and to include therein the results of action
taken in pursuance of that resolution,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolutions 1985/26 of 11 March 1985 30 and 1986/52 of
13 March 1986 31 concerning advisory services in the field
of human rights,
Taking note a/so of Commission on Human Rights resolutions 1985/48 of 14 March 1985 30 and 1986/57 of
13 March 1986 31 concerning regional arrangements for
the promotion and protection of human rights in the
Asian-Pacific region,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights, 152 as well as the addendum thereto
on the state of signatures and ratifications of the African
Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, the American
Convention on Human Rights and the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and Protocols thereto, or accessions to those
instruments, 153
Noting with satisfaction the progress achieved in the promotion and protection of human rights at the regional
leve! and, in particular, the recent entry into force, on
21 October 1986, of the African Charter on Human and
Peoples' Rights,
Reaffirming that regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights may make a major
contribution to the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms and that the exchange ofinformation and experience in this field among the regions,
within the United Nations system, may be improved,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Notes with interest that contacts, of various kinds,
between representatives of regional bodies and United Nations bodies entrusted with the promotion of human
rights, with a view to exchanging information and experience in this field, have become a regular practice and have
been further strengthened through advisory services and
technical assistance activities;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to consider the possibility of encouraging these developments;

149 A/37 /422, annex.

º See A/39/l 74-E/1984/38 and Add. l and E/CN.4/1986/19.

15

111

A/41/!80-E/1986/20

203

----------------7. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its forty-third session.

152 A/41/274.

1;.1 A/41/274/Add

l

204

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

4. Endorses the recommendations of the Commission
on Human Rights in its resolution 1986/52 that Governments in need of technical assistance in the field of human
rights should be encouraged:
(a) To make use ofthe possibility offered by the United
Nations of organizing, under the programme of advisory
services in the field of human rights, information and/or
training courses at the national leve! for appropriate government personnel on the application of international human rights standards and the experience of relevant international organs;
(b) To avail themselves of the advisory services of experts in the field of human rights, for example for drafting
basic legal texts in conformity with international conventions on human rights;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue to pay special attention to the most appropriate ways
of assisting, at their request, countries of the different regions under the programme of advisory services and to
make, where necessary, the relevant recommendations;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-third session a report on the
state of regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights and to include therein the results
of action taken in pursuance of the present resolution;
7. Decides to consider this question further at its fortythird session.

in this field, on the Charter ofthe United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and
other relevant international instruments and to refrain
from activities that are inconsistent with this international
legal framework;
2. Considers that such co-operation should make an effective and practical contribution to the urgent task of preventing mass and flagrant violations of human rights, to
the promotion ofhuman rights and fundamental freedoms
for al! and to the strengthening of international peace and
security;
3. Emphasizes that co-operation in the field of human
rights should be guided by justice and equality, with due
respect for the dignity of al! people without any disci:imination;
4. Notes the important place that the promotion and
protection of human rights has secured on the international agenda and in relations between States;
5. Invites al! States to communicate to the SecretaryGeneral their views on means and methods of strengthening international co-operation in the field of human rights;
6 Decides to consider this question at its forty-second
session under the item entitled "Report of the Economic
and Social Council".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41/155.

Strengthening of international co-operation in
the field of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the purposes of the United Nations inelude the achievement of international co-operation in
solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Desirous of achieving further progress in international
co-operation in the field of promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Considering that such international co-operation should
be based on the principies embodied in the Universal Declaration ofHuman Rights, 2 the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, 22 the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 22 and other relevant international instruments,
Deeply convinced that such co-operation should be based
on a profound understanding of the economic, social and
cultural realities and the variety of problems existing in
different societies,
Emphasizing the necessity for the international community to continue its efforts to take practical measures to
prevent mass and flagrant violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms affected by situations that jeopardize international peace and security, such as apartheid, ali
forms of racial discrimination, colonialism, foreign occupation and domination, aggression and threats against national sovereignty, national unity and territorial integrity,
as well as the refusal to recognize the fundamental rights
of peoples to self-determination,
1. Calls upon al! Member States to base their activities
for the protection and promotion of human rights, including the development of further international co-operation

41/156.

Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Guatemala

The General Assembly,
Reiterating that the Governments of ali Member States
have an obligation to promote and protect human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject, including resolution 40/140 of 13 December 1985, in which it
decided to continue its consideration of the situation of
human rights and fundamental freedoms in Guatemala at
its forty-first session,
Recalling a/so the previous resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights on the subject, and taking note of
Commission resolution 1986/62 of 13 March 1986, 31
1. Welcomes the process of democratization and return to constitutionality, which are fundamental steps
towards complete and effective enjoyment ofhuman rights
and fundamental freedoms, and encourages the Government of Guatemala to continue to take measures for the
effective implementation of the Constitution and other
laws aimed at safeguarding these rights and freedoms;
2. Requests the Government of Guatemala to continue
co-operating with the Commission on Human Rights by
providing it with information about the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms, in particular in regard to the application of the new legal order for the protection of these rights and freedoms;
3. Recommends that the Commission on Human
Rights should continue to consider the situation ofhuman
rights and fundamental freedoms in Guatemala, in accordance with Commission resolution 1986/62, and decides
to continue its consideration of developments in that situation at its forty-second session.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
