S/2001/864

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 September 2001
English
Original: French

Note by the President of the Security Council
In accordance with the understanding reached at the 4370th meeting of the
Security Council, held on 12 September 2001, on the item entitled “Threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist acts”, the statements of the
representatives of Australia, Belgium (on behalf of the European Union), Brazil,
Cuba, Israel, Japan, New Zealand, Romania, Slovenia and Yugoslavia to the United
Nations are reproduced in annexes I to X to the present note.
The President of the Security Council wishes to express his gratitude to the
above-mentioned delegations for their understanding and cooperation.

01-53766 (E) 170901 170901

*0153766*

S/2001/864

Annex I
[Original: English]

Australia: statement by John Dauth LVO,
Permanent Representative
Australians were horrified to learn of the catastrophic terrorist attacks in New
York and Washington, D.C., on 11 September.
Australia feels revulsion and anger at the despicable and cowardly nature of
these acts, which clearly have caused so many deaths and injuries. Our nation
extends its deepest sympathy and condolences to the victims, their families and to
all Americans.
While destroyed buildings can be re-erected or replaced, it is impossible to
replace lost loved ones or fully repair shattered bodies and minds. The healing
process will continue for a long time to come.
Whatever the objectives of the terrorists may have been, any expectation they
had of winning wider support for their cause was misplaced. Their calculated and
callous disregard for innocent human lives ensures that.
We condemn what happened here as we unequivocally condemn terrorism in
all its forms, whatever the source, whatever the claimed motive and in whatever
country terrorism is perpetrated.
We must all band together as nations with a common commitment to peace,
security and stability to do all we can to bring the perpetrators to justice and find
new ways to deter and prevent other such cowardly terrorist acts.

2

S/2001/864

Annex II
[Original: English and French]

Belgium: statement by Jean de Ruyt, Permanent Representative
The Council of the European Union, meeting in special session today, in the
presence of the Secretary General of the Atlantic Alliance, expressed its horror at
yesterday’s terrorist attacks in the United States of America. The Council stressed
its complete solidarity with the Government of the United States and the American
people at this terrible time and extended its deepest sympathy to all the victims and
their families. We ask all Europeans to observe three minutes of silence Friday,
14 September at 12h00 and we also declare 14 September 2001 a day of mourning.
These horrendous acts are an attack not only on the United States but against
humanity itself and the values and freedoms we all share. The life and work of our
open and democratic societies will continue undeterred.
The Union utterly condemns the perpetrators and sponsors of these acts of
barbarism. The Union and its member States will spare no efforts to help identify,
bring to justice and punish those responsible: there will be no safe haven for
terrorists and their sponsors.
The Union will work closely with the United States and all partners to combat
international terrorism. All international organizations, particularly the United
Nations, must be engaged and all relevant international instruments, including on
the financing of terrorism, must be fully implemented.
The Community and its Member States have offered the United States all
possible assistance with search and rescue operations. Discussions are under way to
establish what help would be most useful.
Recalling the strong and enduring ties which exist between the European
Union and the United States, the Council has asked the Presidency to stay in close
contact with the Government of the United States in order to convey this message of
solidarity.

3

S/2001/864

Annex III
[Original: English]

Brazil: statement by Gelson Fonseca, Jr.,
Permanent Representative
The Brazilian delegation expresses its sympathy to the people and Government
of the United States of America in this extremely difficult moment. The news of the
terrorist attacks in New York and Washington, D.C., has caused commotion and
outrage in Brazil. We are deeply saddened by the tragic loss of life and by the
suffering of thousands of innocent victims and their families.
Brazil condemns in the strongest terms all forms of terrorism. We will continue
to support the joint cooperative efforts of the international community to eradicate
these intolerable practices which are utterly inconsistent with the building of an
international order based on the principles of justice. These repugnant and insane
terrorist acts violate the principles of democratic life, attempt to impose barbarism
as an instrument of political action, and represent a grievous assault on the
fundamental values of human coexistence.
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso conveyed yesterday in a letter to
President George W. Bush the solidarity of the Brazilian people in this tragic
moment. In a statement to the press, he recalled our unconditional repudiation of
these hideous crimes.
Brazil renews its determination to help find solutions capable of putting an end
to this escalation of irrational violence. We are convinced that the fight against
terrorism, its perpetrators and those who harbour and sponsor it requires effective
action within the multilateral framework. We support the prompt reaction of the
Security Council and its determination to combat by all means threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist acts. The international
community is challenged to redouble its efforts to bring to justice those responsible
for these heinous acts. This is a time for unity and resolve on the part of all States
and an occasion for upholding the values that inspired the creation of the United
Nations.

4

S/2001/864

Annex IV
[Original: Spanish]

Cuba: statement by Bruno Rodriguez Parrilla,
Permanent Representative
With reference to the tragic events that took place in New York and
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, 11 September, I have the honour to read the
following official statement made by the Government of the Republic of Cuba:
“The Government of the Republic of Cuba was grieved and saddened to
learn of the violent surprise attacks carried out this morning on civilian and
official facilities in the cities of New York and Washington, D.C., that have
claimed numerous victims.
“Cuba’s opposition to all terrorist acts is well known.
“We cannot forget that, for the past 40 years, our people have been the
victims of such acts organized from the territory of the United States of
America itself. Based on historical reasons and also on ethical principles, our
Government rejects and vehemently condemns the attacks on the
aforementioned facilities and expresses its sincerest condolences to the people
of the United States for the painful and unjustifiable loss of human lives
resulting from these attacks.
“In this hour of sorrow, our people declare their solidarity with the
people of the United States and express their complete readiness to cooperate,
within the limits of their modest means, with the health institutions and with
any other medical or humanitarian institution of that country in treating, caring
for and rehabilitating the victims of this morning’s events.”

5

S/2001/864

Annex V
[Original: English]

Israel: statement by Aaron Jacob, Deputy
Permanent Representative
The people and the Government of Israel express their deepest and most
profound condolences to the victims and families of yesterday’s heinous terrorist
attacks. The people of Israel were shocked and horrified by the enormity of this
crime and our hearts and prayers go out to the innocent people who lost their lives,
and to their friends and loved ones. The people of Israel stand shoulder to shoulder
in solidarity with the American people in this tragic hour. In an expression of our
deep sympathy and heartfelt compassion, Israel has declared today a national day of
mourning.
If anyone still harboured any illusions that terrorism was somehow isolated to
specific conflicts, that it could be ignored, that it did not pose a threat of
unimaginable proportions to innocent civilians worldwide — those illusions were
definitively shattered yesterday.
The acts of violent terrorism which the world witnessed are now burned into
our collective memory. They are a direct assault on democracy, an assault on
freedom, and constitute no less than an act of war on civilization itself. The
indiscriminate mass murder, on a scale never before seen, demonstrates in the
cruellest way that terrorism is indeed the new evil of our time.
Yesterday’s tragedy presents a profound challenge to the nations of the
world — how are we to combat a faceless evil? The countless victims of terrorist
atrocities and the citizens of the world demand an answer to this question. Our battle
to eradicate terrorism must be focused not only on those who perpetrate such crimes,
but also on those who provide them with the infrastructure on which their actions
depend.
Those States which provide active or tacit support for terrorist killers, provide
them with weapons, funds or refuge have declared themselves to be the enemies of
humankind. They are no less culpable than the terrorists themselves. As the
President of the United States stated in his address to the American people last
night, we must make no distinction between the terrorists and those who harbour
them.
To those States we must say, in a unified and unwavering voice, you will not
be tolerated. You are not welcome members in the community of nations. If you
place our liberty under attack, we will defend it. If you endanger the safety and
security of our people we will uphold them. States which yield to terrorism, which
provide the terrorists with the environment in which they can flourish and the
infrastructure and support they need to perpetrate their despicable crimes must be
dealt with aggressively and with unified resolve until they renounce terror, in word
and deed, and return to the fold of civilized nations.
To the family of free nations who are committed to the fight against terrorism
and devoted to protecting the moral values of free society and the security of their
citizens, yesterday’s acts of terror must be an awakening. We can be complacent no

6

S/2001/864

longer. We must realize that a terrorist attack against people anywhere is an attack
against people everywhere.
Our fight against terrorism must be unified, comprehensive and, above all,
uncompromising. It must include world leaders, religious leaders, teachers, families
and all members of civil society. Terrorists and their supporters must be brought to
justice and held fully accountable for their crimes. They must learn that they cannot
hide, they will not find refuge, they will not be allowed to trample our freedoms.
The principles of international law, and United Nations resolutions, which
condemn acts of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable, whatever their motive, must
be turned into a global call to action. For those who would have us believe that some
cause or some agenda can justify indiscriminate cold-blooded murder we must
answer that terrorism is defined by what one does, not what one does it for. It will
never be tolerated. We must fight it without exception, without hesitation and
without fear. Israel pledges itself to this battle together with all nations committed to
peace and to the eradication of the scourge of terrorism.
The people of the world look to their countries for protection from this great
evil — we cannot, we must not, let them down.

7

S/2001/864

Annex VI
[Original: English]

Japan: statement by Yukio Satoh, Permanent Representative
On behalf of the people and Government of Japan, I extend my profound
sympathy and condolences to the victims and their families, as well as to all the
people and the Government of the United States of America.
Japan deplores the heinous acts of terrorism that were perpetrated against the
United States on 11 September 2001. In the wake of the tragedy, Prime Minister
Koizumi stated that the series of despicable and cowardly acts which have claimed
the lives of untold numbers of innocent civilians in New York, Washington, D.C.,
and Pennsylvania cannot be tolerated. These acts must be considered not only as
attacks against the United States, but as crimes against humanity. In a spirit of
solidarity, the Prime Minister expressed his strong support for the United States.
The United Nations and Member States must cooperate in bringing the
perpetrators to justice. I assure you, Mr. President, that Japan will spare no effort in
joining international efforts to eliminate international terrorism in all its forms.

8

S/2001/864

Annex VII
[Original: English]

New Zealand: statement by Don MacKay,
Permanent Representative
The terrible events which unfolded in New York, Washington, D.C., and
Pennsylvania on 11 September have filled New Zealanders with shock and disbelief.
New Zealand’s Acting Prime Minister, the Honourable Jim Anderton has expressed
to President Bush the sense of outrage and pain the people of New Zealand share
with the American people and the international community over the loss of so many
innocent lives. May I also take this opportunity to convey the United States
delegation this morning our profound condolences and solidarity with them during
these difficult hours.
As the Acting Prime Minister told Parliament yesterday afternoon, “evil people
have conspired together to commit a cold and vicious act against humanity”. New
Zealand is committed to working with the international community to stamp out
terrorism and swiftly to bring terrorists to justice. Yesterday’s attacks were made not
only against the United States but were against all civilized nations and we must
work together to foil the aims of those who have done these things. We are totally
committed to this end.

9

S/2001/864

Annex VIII
[Original: English]

Romania: statement by Alexandru Niculescu,
Permanent Representative
We have witnessed with great concern and distress the terrorist attacks targeted
against important civilian, official and military objectives in our host country and
host city.
On behalf of the Government of Romania and the Romanian people, we
express our solidarity and deepest condolences to the families of the victims, to the
people and to the Government of the United States of America.
Romania firmly condemns terrorism as a means to achieve any political,
economic or social goals.
World peace cannot be secured through violence and fanaticism but through
dialogue and negotiation.
As a country sharing democratic values, Romania will stand along with the
United States and all other countries belonging to the democratic family in the
efforts to prevent and suppress terrorist acts by increased cooperation and to bring to
justice the perpetrators, organizers and sponsors of terrorist attacks.

10

S/2001/864

Annex IX
[Original: English]

Slovenia: statement by Ernest Petrič, Permanent Representative
Slovenia is shocked and horrified by yesterday’s terrorist attacks in New York,
Washington, D.C., and Pennsylvania. Slovenia strongly condemns these brutal
attacks that are not only aimed at the United States of America but also at the entire
free world, democracy and global security. Slovenia conveys its deepest sympathy
and condolences to the people and Government of the United States of America and
to the families of the victims who died in these tragic events beyond comprehension.
Slovenia applauds the heroic efforts of United States citizens in their fight to
recover from disaster.
Slovenia remains firmly committed to fight against terrorism. Slovenia
believes that terrorism in any form has no justification whatsoever. It is a criminal
activity. It is the most horrible, inhuman, despicable crime. Slovenia fully supports
the resolution adopted today by the Security Council. Slovenia is ready and willing
to contribute to the endeavours of the Security Council and international community
to stop and eradicate international terrorism that is endangering us all. We should all
stand together and united in our response. We have to bring those responsible for
these horrendous crimes to justice. Those who perpetrate or support acts of terrorism
act against the very heart and soul of what the United Nations stands for and indeed
do not belong to the international community which is based on principles of
freedom, democracy and justice.

11

S/2001/864

Annex X
[Original: English]

Yugoslavia: statement by Dejan Šahovič,
Permanent Representative
The unprecedented terrorist attacks of 11 September on New York and
Washington, D.C., have united the citizens of Yugoslavia in grief and shock over the
magnitude of losses suffered by the United States of America.
In its disbelief and condemnation of the appalling strikes on the United States,
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia stands with the rest of the peace-loving and
democratic world in its commitment to curb international terrorism. We also join
demands that those responsible for the cowardly attacks of 11 September be brought
to justice.
The tragedy that has befallen the United States has once again exposed
terrorism as the greatest evil of the modern world, a crime whose only victims are
innocent people, that must be stopped by urgent, resolute and unified actions of the
international community.
Expressing his deepest condolences to United States President George W.
Bush, President Vojislav Koštunica has stated that Yugoslavia and its people, as well
as the region as a whole, are painfully aware of this necessity on the basis of their
own bitter experience.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia unequivocally condemns terrorism in all
its forms, in whatever part of the world it may occur, and will fully support all
international efforts to suppress this greatest of dangers to the free world.

12
