United Nations

A/RES/61/173

General Assembly

Distr.: General
1 March 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 67 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2006
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/61/443/Add.2 and Corr.1)]

61/173. Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 which guarantees the
right to life, liberty and security of person, the relevant provisions of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 2 and other relevant human
rights conventions,
Having regard to the legal framework of the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions,
Welcoming the universal ratification of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949, 3 which alongside human rights law provide an important framework of
accountability in relation to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions during
armed conflict,
Mindful of all its resolutions on the subject of extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions and the resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights on the
subject,
Noting with deep concern that impunity continues to be a major cause of the
perpetuation of violations of human rights, including extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions,
Acknowledging that international human rights law and international
humanitarian law are complementary and not mutually exclusive,
Noting with deep concern the growing number of civilians and persons hors de
combat killed in situations of armed conflict and internal strife,
Acknowledging that extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions may under
certain circumstances amount to genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes,
as defined in international law, including in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, 4
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
4
Ibid., vol. 2187, No. 38544.
2

06-50481

A/RES/61/173

Affirming the obligation of States to prevent the abuse of persons deprived of
their liberty and to investigate and respond to deaths in custody,
Convinced of the need for effective action to prevent, combat and eliminate the
abhorrent practice of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, which
represent a flagrant violation of the right to life,
Strongly condemns once again all the extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
1.
executions that continue to occur throughout the world;
Demands that all States ensure that the practice of extrajudicial, summary
2.
or arbitrary executions is brought to an end and that they take effective action to
prevent, combat and eliminate the phenomenon in all its forms;
Reiterates the obligation of all States to conduct exhaustive and impartial
3.
investigations into all suspected cases of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions, to identify and bring to justice those responsible, while ensuring the
right of every person to a fair and public hearing by a competent, independent and
impartial tribunal established by law, to grant adequate compensation within a
reasonable time to the victims or their families, and to adopt all necessary measures,
including legal and judicial measures, to put an end to impunity and to prevent the
further occurrence of such executions, as recommended in the Principles on the
Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extralegal, Arbitrary and Summary
Executions; 5
4.
Calls upon all States in which the death penalty has not been abolished to
comply with their obligations under relevant provisions of international human
rights instruments, including in particular articles 6, 7 and 14 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights2 and articles 37 and 40 of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, 6 bearing in mind the safeguards and guarantees set out in
Economic and Social Council resolutions 1984/50 of 25 May 1984 and 1989/64 of
24 May 1989;
5.

Urges all States:

(a) To take all necessary and possible measures, in conformity with
international human rights law and international humanitarian law, to prevent loss of
life, in particular that of children, during public demonstrations, internal and
communal violence, civil unrest, public emergencies or armed conflicts, and to
ensure that the police, law enforcement agents, armed forces and other agents acting
on behalf of or with the consent or acquiescence of the State act with restraint and in
conformity with international humanitarian law and international human rights law,
including the principles of proportionality and necessity, and in this regard to ensure
that police and law enforcement officials are guided by the Code of Conduct for
Law Enforcement Officials 7 and the Basic Principles on the Use of Force and
Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials; 8

_______________
5

Economic and Social Council resolution 1989/65, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7
Resolution 34/169, annex.
8
See Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Havana, 27 August–7 September 1990: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B.
6

2

A/RES/61/173

(b) To ensure the effective protection of the right to life of all persons under
their jurisdiction and to investigate promptly and thoroughly all killings, including
those targeted at specific groups of persons, such as racially motivated violence
leading to the death of the victim, killings of members of national, ethnic, religious
or linguistic minorities, of refugees, internally displaced persons, migrants, street
children or members of indigenous communities, killings of persons for reasons
related to their activities as human rights defenders, lawyers, journalists or
demonstrators, killings committed in the name of passion or in the name of honour,
all killings committed for any discriminatory reason, including sexual orientation, as
well as all other cases where a person’s right to life has been violated, and to bring
those responsible to justice before a competent, independent and impartial judiciary
at the national or, where appropriate, international level, and to ensure that such
killings, including those committed by security forces, police and law enforcement
agents, paramilitary groups or private forces, are neither condoned nor sanctioned
by State officials or personnel;
Also urges all States to ensure that persons deprived of their liberty are
6.
treated humanely and with full respect for their human rights and to ensure that their
treatment, including judicial guarantees, and conditions conform to the Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners 9 and, where applicable, to the
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 19493 and the Additional Protocols thereto of
8 June 1977 10 in relation to all persons detained in armed conflict, as well as to
other pertinent international instruments;
7.
Welcomes the International Criminal Court as an important contribution
to ending impunity concerning extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and
the fact that one hundred and four States have already ratified or acceded to and a
further forty-one States have signed the Rome Statute of the Court,4 and calls upon
all those States that have not ratified or acceded to the Rome Statute to consider
doing so;
Encourages Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
8.
organizations to organize training programmes and to support projects with a view
to training or educating military forces, law enforcement officers and government
officials in human rights and humanitarian law issues connected with their work and
to include a gender and child rights perspective in such training, and appeals to the
international community and requests the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to support endeavours to that end;
Takes note of the interim report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human
9.
Rights Council on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions to the General
Assembly; 11
10. Commends the important role that the Special Rapporteur plays towards
the elimination of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and encourages
the Special Rapporteur to continue, within his mandate, to collect information from
all concerned, to respond effectively to reliable information that comes before him,
to follow up on communications and country visits and to seek the views and
comments of Governments and to reflect them, as appropriate, in his reports;
_______________
9
Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments, Volume I (First Part): Universal Instruments
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.XIV.4 (Vol. I, Part 1)), sect. J, No. 34.
10
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
11
See A/61/311.

3

A/RES/61/173

11. Acknowledges the important role of the Special Rapporteur in identifying
cases where extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary executions could amount to
genocide and crimes against humanity or war crimes, and urges him to collaborate
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and, as appropriate,
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, in
addressing situations of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions that are of
particularly serious concern or in which early action might prevent further
deterioration;
12. Welcomes the cooperation established between the Special Rapporteur
and other United Nations mechanisms and procedures in the field of human rights,
and encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue efforts in that regard;
13. Urges all States, in particular those that have not done so, to cooperate
with the Special Rapporteur so that his mandate can be carried out effectively,
including by favourably and rapidly responding to requests for visits, mindful that
country visits are one of the tools for the fulfilment of the mandate of the Special
Rapporteur, and by responding in a timely manner to communications and other
requests transmitted to them by the Special Rapporteur;
14. Expresses its appreciation to those States that have received the Special
Rapporteur and asks them to examine his recommendations carefully, invites them
to inform him of the actions taken on those recommendations, and requests other
States to cooperate in a similar way;
15. Again requests the Secretary-General to continue to use his best
endeavours in cases where the minimum standards of legal safeguards provided for
in articles 6, 9, 14 and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
appear not to have been respected;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with
adequate human, financial and material resources to enable him to carry out his
mandate effectively, including through country visits;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue, in close collaboration
with the High Commissioner, in conformity with the mandate of the High
Commissioner established by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/141 of
20 December 1993, to ensure that personnel specialized in human rights and
humanitarian law issues form part of United Nations missions, where appropriate, in
order to deal with serious violations of human rights, such as extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions;
18. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session a report on the situation worldwide in regard to extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions and his recommendations for more effective action
to combat this phenomenon.
81st plenary meeting
19 December 2006

4
