UNITED

NATIONS

-

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
THIRTIETH

UN b!BR 4 P!\’

YEAR

NOV 18 7283

CONTENTS

Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l821) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tribute to the memory of His Majesty King Faisal Bin Abdul Aziz of Saudi
Arabia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Expression of welcome to the representative of the United Republic of
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Emergency Force
(S/11670 and Corr.1 and 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SIPV. 1821

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to. a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been ‘applie‘d,’
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

’
’

.

.;
,

’

1821st MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 17 April 1975, at 4 p.m.
President: Mr. Louis de GUIRINGAUD (France).

particularly difficult matter, which Mr. Salazar
concluded with his customary distinction. We express
our heartfelt gratitude to both.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Swede, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America.

Expression of welcome to the representative
of the United Republic of Cameroon
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
May I be allowed, as the President and as the repre-.
sentative of France, to say how particularly pleased
I am to welcome among us the new representative
of the United Republic of Cameroon, Mr. Oyono.
I wish to congratulate him on his appointment to
this important post and assure him that he will find
among all members of the Council a willingness to
maintain with him the same friendly relations of
co-operation which they had with his predecessor, our
friend Mr. NjinC.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/lSZl)
1.
2.

Adoption of the agenda
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Emergency Force (S/l 1670 and Corr.1
and 2)
The meeting was called to qrder at 4.45 p.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Majesty King
F&al Bin Abdu! Aziz of Saudi Aiabia

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
Before turning to the agenda before the Council
today, as this is our frost meeting since the sudden
passing of His Majesty King Faisal of Saudi Arabia
I wish, on behalf of the Council, to express to the
representative of Saudi Arabia our feelings of profound
sadness at the tragic event which has brought
mourning to his country. His Majesty King Faisal
was in the forefront of the Arab world and held an
eminent position among the leaders of the world.
He will be long remembered for his wisdom, his
human qualities, and as a politician who has left
a profound imprint on contemporary events.

Tbe situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on tbe United Nations
Emergency Force (S/11670 and Ckr.1 and 2)
4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I should like to apologize to all members of the Security
Council for not having personally guided the important
and fruitful consultations that were held to prepare
the draft resolution [S/1167.5] which will shortly be
put to the vote. I thank all members for the friendly
and unreserved co-operation which they gave to my
deputy, Mr. Jacques Lecompt, during those consultations.

[On the proposal of the President, the members of
the Council observed a minute of silence.]

5. I must inform the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Egypt and Israel
requesting that they be invited to participate in the
Council’s debate, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and of the provisional rules of procedure. In
accordance with the usual practice, I intend, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives
of Egypt and Israel to participate, without the right
to vote, in the Council’s debate.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I should like to express the gratitude of the Council
to the retiring President-in fact, to the two outgoing
Presidents, since during the month of March the
Council was honoured by the presence in this Chair
of Mr. Gonzalo Facie, Minister for External Relations
of Costa Rica, who was succeeded by our friend
Mr. Fernando SaIazar. Mr. Facie, with all the
authority and skill which we had already recognized
in him last year, presided over our work on a

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdel
Meguid (Egypt) and Mr. Tekoah (Israel) took places
at the Security Council table.
1

6. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The Security Council has before it the report of the
Secretary-GeneraI on the United Nations Emergency
Force (UNEF), which was circulated on 12 April.
The Council has likewise received a draft resolution
which was prepared in the course of intensive consultations among all its members. Further, the members have agreed that the draft resolution should be
put to the vote before I call on the first speaker.

people, including the right to self-determination, and
the creation of their own statehood. These inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people have been confiied
only recently by the General Assembly in resolution
3236 (XXIX).
12. In this regard, the delegation of the USSR
would Iike to point out that in essence the fundamental
goal of today’s Security Council resolution to extend
the mandate of UNEF for an additional period of
time-three months this time-is to make use of
one more opportunity to achieve as quickly as
possible a genuine settlement of the Middle East
conflict. The attainment of this goal should be served
by the earliest possible resumption of the work of
the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East.
That Conference was specially convened to consider
the whole range of questions involved in a Middle
East settlement. It has the advantage that all questions
relating to a Middle East settlement would be
discussed not behind closed doors, but in the open-in
full view of Arab and world public opinion, and this
would make it much more difficult for the opponents of a just peace settlement to conduct their
manoeuvres.

7. In accordance with our agreement, I shall now
put to the vote draft resolution S/11675.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to
none.’
Two members (China and Iraq) did not participate
in the voting.
8. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I shall now call on those representatives whose
names are on the Iist of speakers.
9. Mr. OVINNIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President, permit me first of all to congratulate you upon
your assumption of the important post of President
of the Security Council. The Soviet delegation takes
particular pleasure in welcoming you as the representative of a friendly country with which the Soviet Union
enjoys durable ties of mutual understanding and
co-operation. Under your presidency, the Council
has adopted a resolution which should promote the
attainment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. I should Iike to take this opportunity to
assure you, Mr. President, that you can count on
the whole-hearted co-operation of the delegation of the
USSR in the performance of your important tasks.

13. The fundamental position of the Soviet Union
on the Middle East problem has repeatedly been
expounded in the Security Council. I should like to
take this opportunity to draw the attention of members of the Council to the statement by the General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Comrade Brezhnev,
at the Eleventh Congress of the Hungarian Socialist
Workers’ Party at Budapest on 18 March this year.
In that statement he said:
“The Soviet Union and other fraternal countries
have unfailingly and with the utmost persistence
and energy favoured the establishment of a genuinely
lasting and genuinely just peace in the Middle
East and have firmly advocated the most reliable
means of attaining that end: the earliest possible
resumption of the work of the forum especially
created for the purpose, the Geneva Conference.
It has been in favour of the solution of the fundamental problems: the liberation of all the Arab
territories occupied in 1967, the satisfaction of the
lawful rights of the Arab people of Palestine,
including the creation of its own statehood, and
it has favoured effectively guaranteeing to all
States in the Middle East a secure, independent
and free existence and development*‘.

10. I should Iike also to express my gratitude to
the Minister for External Relations of Costa Rica,
Mr. Facie, and the representative of Costa Rica in
the Security Council, Mr. Salazar, under whose
presidency the Council adopted a resolution on the
Cyprus question. The implementation of resolution
367 (1975) should promote a solution to the Cyprus
problem on the basis of the lofty principles and
purposes of the Charter.
11. The Security Council has just adopted a resolution aimed at a settlement of the Middle East
conflict on the basis of the immediate implementation
of Council resolution 338 (1973). We have to note
with regret that this fundamental resolution, aimed at
a just political settlement of the Middle East conflict,
has so far not been implemented. The reason for
this is clear to everyone. It lies in the stubborn
refusal of Israel to withdraw its troops from all the
Arab territories occupied in 1967. It ties in its refusal
to recognize the lawful national rights of the Palestinian

That Soviet Union position is shared by, among
others, many States members of the Security Council.
14. It is with a feeling of deep satisfaction that I
stress here the convergence of the positions of the
USSR and France on key questions in a solution
to the Middle East problem. In the Soviet-French
communique issued in connexion with the official
visit to the Soviet Union of the Foreign Minister
2

of France, Mr. Chirac, in March this vear.
I the
following is stated:
.

of Israel in discriminating against the UNEF contingents I have mentioned. If there is not a fundamental change in the situation, the Security Council
should hold a special discussion of this question.

“The Soviet Union and France believe that the
achievement of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East is possible only on condition that
Israeli troops are withdrawn from all the territories
occupied in 1967, that the lawful rights of the
Palestinian people, including its right to a national
home, are protected, and that the right of all the
States and peoples of the area to an independent
existence is ensured. In that regard the parties
express the hope that the Geneva Peace Conference
on the Middle East will resume its work as soon
as possible”.

1 8 . The USSR delegation once again draws attention
to the need for strict compliance with Council decisions that UNEF operations should be conducted
with the greatest possible economy. In that regard
we should like to express our satisfaction at the fact
that the Secretary-General, in paragraph 27 of his
report, notes in particular that “the Secretary-General
will continue to exert his best efforts to ensure that
the Force functions as economically as possible”.
19. To sum up, the Soviet delegation would like
once again to stress that the further extension of the
mandate of UNEF should be used for the earliest
possible attainment of a comprehensive settlement
of the Middle East problem.

1 5 . It is a pleasure for us to note also the convergence of the positions of the Soviet Union and Iraq
on the Middle East situation. In a joint Soviet-Iraqi
communique just signed in Moscow in connexion
with the visit of the Vice-President of the Revolutionary
Command Council of the Republic of Iraq, Mr. Saddam
Hussein, the following is stated:

20. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): I
should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
your Mission-particularly Mr. Lecompt-for leading
the consultations which have promoted the agreement
of the Council in renewing the mandate of UNEF.
The United States is pleased to join in this consensus
and to support the extension of the Force and its
mandate.

“The Soviet Union and the Republic of Iraq
state that a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East can be brought about only on condition
that all the occupied Arab territories are liberated
and that the lawful rights of the Arab people of
Palestine, including its right to self-determination,
are guaranteed”.

21. Once again I wish to offer my Government’s
appreciation to those countries which have supplied
and maintained contingents for UNEF, to the civilian
staff, to the observers of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization (UNTSO) in the field, and
particularly to the United Nations troops who contribute so directly to the continuous search for peace
in the area.

1 6 . Turning now directly to the operations of UNEF,
the USSR delegation would like once again to draw
attention to the following. First, we must point out
the abnormality of the situation in which such an
urgent and fundamental problem as that of the freedom
of movement of UNEF contingents in the area of
operation has not yet been solved. From the report
of the Secretary-General, it is clear that Israel, in
spite of Security Council decisions, is continuing its
discrimination against a number of contingents making
up UNEF. It is restricting their freedom of movement
on territories controlled by Israeli troops.

22. The Commander of UNEF, Lieutenant-General
Ensio Siilasvuo, deserves a special tribute from us all
for his exemplary and steadfast leadership of UNEF
since its inception. His example provides an enviable
model for any future United Nations peace-keeping
endeavours.

1 7 . As it emerged at yesterday’s unofticial consultations among the members of the Council, from the
answers of senior officials of the United Nations
Secretariat, the essence of the matter is that Israel’s
discrimination is directed against a majority-four out
of the seven contingents now making up UNEF.
These are the contingents of two African countries,
Ghana and Sentgal; the contingent of an Asian
country, Indonesia; and the contingent of a socialist
country, Poland. By such illegal actions Israel not
only is violating the spirit and letter of the relevant
Council decisions, but also is undermining the
effectiveness of the UNEF operations. The Soviet
delegation considers that the United Nations Secretariat and the UNEF Command should, on the basis
of the relevant Security Council decisions, take
energetic steps to put an end to the illegal actions

23. The Secretary-General and his Headquarters
staff also deserve our highest commendation for
continuing to perform such a difficult task so well.
The operational efficiency of the Force is borne out
by the latest report of the Secretary-General. The
most conclusive evidence of UNEF effectiveness
is that the situation has remained quiet and that
both sides have generally complied with the Egyptian
Israeli Agreement on Disengagement of Forces of
18 January 1974 [see S/11198] and have co-operated
with UNEF. In consequence there have been no
significant incidents since the preceding report of
12 October 1974 [S/11536/Add.f] of the SecretaryGeneral.
24. These United Nations peace-keeping troops are
essential not only in maintaining the lines of separa3

tion between Egypt and Israel and providing a
deterrent to renewed hostilities, but also in creating
a climate of trust and confidence upon which the
success of future negotiations depends. UNEF
Egyptian-Israeli Agreement on Disengagement are
both means to an end, not settlements themselves.
They are part of the process towards an over-all
peaceful solution through negotiations as envisaged
in Security Council resolutions 242 (1%7) and 338
(1973).

the unfortunate absence of a permanent settiement,
this is necessary in order to help to maintain the
prewnt calm in t-he area. We b&eve that this action
offers an exccl!ennt opportunity for the Security
Council to continue to assist efforts to establish a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East. I avail
myself of this opportunity to pay a sincere tribute
to the Governments which have supplied the contingents of UNEF at great sacrifice, and to the
Commander and the officers and men of the Force,
who have come from far-away countries to faee
danger in the cause of peace. And, of course, I
cannot fail to express my appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his devoted assistants for
their work in organizing, deploying and supplying
UNEF. Since the inception of the Force, the
Secretary-General has meticulously kept members of
the Council informed regarding its operations, and we
have read with great interest his report, which gives
a comprehensive account of the activities of UNEF
during the period from 13 October 1974 to 12 April
1975. On behalf of the Government of Japan, I wish
to express my sincere sympathy to the represenhtive of Canada over the deaths in the tine of duty
of three Canadian members of UNEF, as reported
by the Secretary-General. I should be grateful if he
would transmit our condolences to the Government
of Canada.

25. As a matter of principle, we would have
preferred an extension for a longer period of time.
But whether the mandate is extended for three or
six months, or even longer, we believe there is an
urgent need to move ahead in achieving a negotiated
settlement.
26. The last time the Council met to renew a
United Nations peace-keeping force in the Middle
East, I said that no one could doubt that the road
towards peace would be “long and difficult, that it
would try men’s patience and test their goodwill”
[1809rh meeting, pnru. 1451. This has proved all too
true. But the essential point is that we are still on
that road-the road towards a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. The United States is
determined to continue that search. As President Ford
said recently in his address to the joint session of
Congress:

30. It is the fervent hope of my delegation that the
extension of the mandate of the Force will help to
maintain the momentum for peace and help to provide
time for further negotiations. Every possible means
to this end must be utilized, and the continued
presence of UNEF should help provide time for
additional negotiations.

“The United States will move ahead on whatever
course looks most promising, either towards an
over-ah settlement or interim agreements, should
the parties desire them. We will not accept
stagnation or a stalemate, with ail its attendant
risks to peace and prosperity and to our relations
in and outside of the region.‘*

31. My delegation has taken note with regret of the
suspension of the efforts by Mr. Kissinger, the
Secretary of State of the United States, to achieve
a further disengagement of Egyptian and Israeli
forces under the programme for a so-called stepby-step settlement. This leads my deiegation to appeal
to the parties with all the greater urgency to continue
to display moderation, self-restraint and co-operatti
in every phase of the negotiating process and to
refrain from the use of force or any threat to use
it. In view of the continued instability in the Midd!e
East, the announcement of the decision by President
Sadat of Egypt to reopen the Suez Canal on 5 June
has special political significance. Let us hope that t-he
decision to open this great international waterway
will prove a step forward as a symbol of Egypt’s
confidence that the present cease-fire will be replaced
by a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

27. Renewal of UNEF today is an important
contribution towards continued movement in this
process. We are happy to join with the Council
in this action, and we pledge our best efforts in the
continued search for peace in the Middle East.
28. Mr. SAITO (Japan): Mr. President, as this is the
first Council meeting since you assumed the presidency, I wish to extend my sincere congratulations
to you. I feel confident that with your well-known
diplomatic capacity you will guide our deliberations
successfully during the remainder of your presidency.
I wish to pay a tribute also to the diplomatic gifts
of the Minister of External Relations of Costa Rica,
Mr. Gonzaio Facie and of the Deputy Minister of
External Relations, Mr. Fernando Salazar, the
representative of Costa Rica, who served in turn as
President of the Council in March.

32. In conclusion, my delegation sincerely hopes that
the coming three months will bring convincir%
signs that the obstacles which now block further
progress towards a peaceful settlement in the Middle
East will be overcome and that we can soon anticipti
at least the beginning of a breakthrough. Certainly

29. My delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution, which provides for the extension of the
mandate of UNEF for an additional three months,
ending on 24 July 1975. It is our conviction that, in
4

we entertain the realistic hope that the Council’s
action will improve the chances for peace.

to which the Italian delegation has given special
attention, the Secretary-General stresses this point.
With this conviction, my delegation has cast its vote
in favour of the resolution just adopted.

33. Mr. PLAJA (Italy): Mr. President, may I first
of all tell you how glad the whole Italian delegation
is to have you back with us to lead our debates,
on your return from the additional important duties
which had been entrusted to you, and to be able to
serve under your skilful guidance. In congratulating
you upon your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council, I should Iike to pay tribute to
Mr. Lecompt, who has given to the Council, during
the tenure of the presidency, the benefit of his we&
known qualities; he deserves special praise for leading
us to the adoption, with no dissenting voices, of
today’s resolution.

39, In previous meetings in which the Council
discussed UNEF, it was emphasized that, by
preserving calm in the area, UNEF is fulfilling the
function of providing time and opportunity for negotiations. The aim of this peace-keeping force, like any
other, is not to perpetuate a separation between the
parties -but to help to bring them closer together by
maintaining an atmosphere that will allow them to
express and translate into fact their desire to progress
along the road of peace. Indeed, in previous months
we have noted with satisfaction certain manifestations
of this desire in the Middle East. I should like to
make special mention here of a very recent one,
because of the special interest that Italy attached to
it. I refer to Egypt’s announcement that shortly
the Suez Canal will be reopened, a decision which
my Government hails with satisfaction and gratification.

34. I should not like to miss this opportunity to
repeat to the Minister of External Relations of Costa
Rica, Mr. Gonzalo Facie, and to the representative
of Costa Rica Mr. Salazar, the Italian delegation’s
congratulations and appreciation for the exemplary
manner in which they conducted our proceedings in
the month of March, which were demanding indeed.

40. The function and objective of UNEF as I
have described them are, in my view, stilI valid
today. But the fact that the Security Council is
renewing the mandate for three months, instead of
six months as in the past, testifies to a profound
sense of urgency. and underlines the disquieting
aspects of the situation. We must not allow our
disappointment at the failure of recent efforts to
become a source of encouragement for stalemate;
we must not let the disquieting aspects of the situation develop into an atmosphere of acute tension.
Rather, we must remind ourselves, particularly at
the present crucial time, that the renewal of the
mandate of UNEF cannot be considered a substitute
for the active search for a negotiated peace. The
extension of the mandate, albeit for a shorter period
than before, provides the parties with a further
opportunity to go forward along this path.. We must
all bend our efforts, each to the best of his ability,
to accelerate this quest for progress.

35. May. I also join you and the representative of
France, in welcoming today at our meeting our new
colleague, Mr. Oyono of the United Republic of
Cameroon.
36. Coming to the object of our debate, I should
like to stress how much Italy had hoped, and thought
it possible, that, when we came to renew the mandate
of UNEF, this would have been in a framework
different from that in which we find ourselves today.
In particular, we were confident that the last efforts
of the United States Secretary of State would lead
to progress in the relations between the parties such
as to further remove the dangers always inherent in
the state of uneasy calm prevailing in the area and
to bring the peoples in the Middle East closer to the
objective of a just and lasting peace.
37. The lack of success of these generous efforts,
to which, on behalf of the Italian Government, I
should like to pay a well-deserved tribute, is a subject
for regret and concern. We can already observe signs
of increasing tension which remind us that the situation
in the area continues to be potentially explosive. A
new readiness of the parties which would occasion
to these efforts to be resumed with favourable
prospects would constitute in my opinion a positive
element. Of course, I am looking in the same positive
perspective to the possibility of reconvening the
Geneva Conference. What is relevant is to pursue
the path of negotiations in search of progress for
agreement and peace.

41. Our task is therefore-to echo the statement
made recently by Italian Foreign Minister Rumor to
the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee-to renew our
efforts to encourage and help the parties directly
involved to overcome courageously and far-sightedly
the contradictions which have crystallized for too
long a situation which primarily is contrary to their
own basic interests. For its part, Italy will continue,
as it has always done, to work along these lines.
42. I am sure that we all share this feeling that we
must make urgent efforts to progress towards a globa!
peaceful solution of the Middle East conflict, knowing
full well that detente and international co-operation
are indivisible. This is, in the Italian delegation’s
view, the meaning of the specific reference made in
the resolution we have adopted to the implementation

38. In the present situation, however, I am sure that
none of us can have any doubts about the desirability-or rather the necessity--of extending the
mandate of UNEF. In his last report on the Force,
5

of Security Council resolution 338 (1973), which led
to the convening of the Geneva Conference and
which also, by recalling Security Council resolution 242 (1%7), repeats once again the bases on
which the peaceful solution must be achieved.

We are very grateful for the special effort which
we know that you have made to return here in time
to preside over this meeting of the Council after
a particularly long and arduous series of meetings
in Paris. I should also like to congratulate your
distinguished predecessors for the way in which
they handled their at times very difficult task during
the month of March.

43. In this respect I should also like to recall the
recent statements made in various forums by the
parties directly concerned and derive from them some
ground for optimism or at least hope. None of the
parties seems to want to break off the search for
a peaceful solution and, indeed, all of them indicate
their willingness to resume it, the framework and
conditions remaining open.

48. We also warmly welcome our new colleague,
and indeed our neighbour in the Council, Mr. Oyono,
representative of Cameroon.
49. My delegation voted for the resolution we have
just adopted because we share the view of the
Secretary-General that the continued presence of
UNEF remains essential at this crucial time. At
previous meetings of the Council we have made it
clear that we do not consider that UNEF should
become a substitute for a proper settlement in the
Middle East. The Force remains essential, however,
at the present time in order to provide the necessary
climate within which negotiations for a just and lasting
settlement can take place based on the full implementation of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973). But we do not have much time to
lose, and it is vital that these negotiations should
be pressed with new energy and resolution.

44. My delegation wishes to express the profound
hope that they will achieve without delay the meeting
of minds that will allow a renewed effort in the
peace-making progress and that the further report
which the Secretary-General will submit to us on the
completion of the presence of UNEF in the Sinai
for a further three months will reveal encouraging
developments.
45. I wish to conclude this statement, the first in
which my delegation has discussed the question of
UNEF in the Security Council, by commending the
action of UNEF fulfilling its delicate assignment in
difficult and exacting circumstances. It is an operation
conducted with efficiency and success on the
technical level as well. Questions and positions of
principle which in other forums are still subjects of
dispute are being resolved pragmatically in the
interests of peace.

50. We have followed with keen interest and,
I might add, with great admiration the efforts made
by the United States Secretary of State, Mr. Kissinger, to try to bring about a further disengagement
agreement between Israel and Egypt. We regret
very much that despite all his efforts-and no one
could have done more to try to bridge the gap-this
attempt has not met with success. The important
thing now, however, is not to look backward and
indulge in recriminations about who is to blame, but
to look forward and to try to find some way of
getting the negotiations going again. This is an issue
which affects us all, and we have the right and the
duty to ask the parties to consider all possible ways
that may be open to them to move the negotiations
forward so that the momentum may not be lost.

46. My country, which in another forum is striving
to make the most constructive contribution to the
elaboration of general norms for United Nations
peace-keeping operations, finds here a source of
optimism and encouragement. I am therefore pleased
to express our deepest appreciation of the role played
in this respect by the Secretary-General, to whom
special thanks are due for the precise and competent
reports with which he enables us to follow the activities
of UNEF in the field, and to express our appreciation
also to the United Nations Command, to the military
contingents and to the civilians engaged in the
operation. In particular, the technical efficiency, the
moral commitment and the unselfish personal sacrifices of all UNEF contingents are worthy of the
highest praise. We should like to convey our gratitude
to the troop-contributing countries which-with
sacrifices and, indeed, with grievous losses of their
nationals, concerning which my country expresses
deepest sympathy-are carrying out an operation of
such importance for the tranquillity of the area and
for the general affirmation of the peace-keeping role
of the United Nations.

51. As regards the position of my Government, I
should like to reaffirm the distinction which we continue to draw between the present Force and any
more permanent peace-keeping force that may be set
up in due course to guarantee a settlement in
accordance with resolution 242 (1967). I should also
like to repeat that we remain ready to play our part
in that latter force.
52. In conclusion, my delegation would like once
again to commend the Secretary-General and his staff,
the Commander and offtcers and men of UNEF and
all those who are responsible for the successful
operation of the Force. That the Secretary-General
is able to record in his excellent report that the situation in the UNEF area of operation has remained

47. Mr. MORETON (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I should like first to congratulate you personally
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
6

quiet during the period under review is in itself a
tribute to the work of the Force and all connected
with it. I should like to assure the Secretary-General
that we are very conscious of the great wisdom and
skill with which the Force is carrying out its task.
We owe them a debt of gratitude for what they are
doing in the cause of world peace and for the
benefit of us all.

the recovery of their lost territories and the restoration of their national rights. We believe that so long
as they persevere in unity and struggle, they are
sure to realize eventually their national aspirations and
win victory in their struggle, with the support and
assistance of the third world countries and all justiceupholding countries and peoples.
57. Mr. KANE (Mauritania) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, first of all, I should like
to say how pleased my delegation is to see you
presiding over the Security Council this month.
This satisfaction is all the more warranted since we
know from past experience that the meetings of the
Security Council held under your presidency have
always ended in important decisions which have not
only enhanced the prestige of the Organization but
also contributed to establishing an atmosphere of
peace in the world. I am already convinced that the
qualities of wisdom, culture, patience, courtesy
and experience for which you are known are a sure
guarantee of the success of the Council during this
month of April.

53. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from
Chinese): When the Security Council discussed and
adopted resolution 338 (1973) [f 747th meeting], the
Chinese delegation expounded its stand with regard
to the Middle East question and the said resolution
and did not participate in the vote on the resolution.
Moreover, the Chinese delegation has all along held
different views in principle on the question of the
dispatch of United Nations forces. For the same
reason, we have decided not to participate in the vote
on the draft resolution.
54. It can be seen that the situation in the Middle
East remains turbulent. There, on the one hand, the
struggle of the Arab and Palestinian peoples against
imperialism, hegemonism and Israeli Zionism is
developing in depth; on the other hand, the superPowers are engaged in ever fiercer contention and
rivalry, each for its own purpose of seizing oil and
strategically important positions. While talking
profusely about “detente” every day and crying
out for a solution of the Middle East question,
they actually want to maintain the situation of “no
war, no peace” so that they may undermine each
other’s foundation and expand their respective
spheres of influence.

58. The Security Council has just adopted the draft
resolution which my delegation supported. The
Council took this important decision because, we must
say, of the political courage and wisdom of the
Government of Egypt and its President. The decision
taken on 29 March by the Government of Egypt
according the Security Council Egypt’s agreement
to the three-month renewal of the UNEF mandate
is, beyond doubt, an additional proof of goodwill
which sheds a ray of light in the heavy skies of the
Middle East and at the same time dispels the legitimate
disquiet felt on the eve of the expiration of the
mandate of UNEF. The decision contained in
operative paragraph (b) of the resolution therefore
reflects a sincere act of faith on the part of a
Government which has always said that whenever
possible it prefers to use peaceful means to arrive
at a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
The tension which now prevails in the Middle East
can at any time bring about a new war with incalculable consequences which this time may be fatal,
not only for the region concerned but for all mankind.
Such an act of faith is certainly proof of wisdom
and moderation on the part of a people and Govemment which, when it was necessary, took up arms
to defend their freedom and dignity.

55. The super-Power aggression and contention will
only arouse the Arab peoples to even stronger
resistance. From their own historical experience,
the Arab and Palestinian peoples are coming to realize
even more profoundly that they can only rely on the
unity of their own peoples and their unremitting
struggles for a final solution of the Middle East
question and for the victory of the Arab and
Palestinian peoples’ cause of national liberation,
as in the case of the national liberation struggles
waged by the people in all other parts of the
world. Meanwhile, it is imperative to do away
with super-Power meddling and intervention and in
particular to maintain high vigilance against that
super-Power which chants “support to the national
liberation cause of the Arab peoples” while actually
trying hard to manipulate the situation, exploit the
contradictions and undermine the liberation cause of
the Arab peoples.

59. But the patience of the people of Egypt, their
moderation and their often expressed preference for
the language of peace to that of war-in a word,
their willingness to seek a solution through negotiation-has certain limits, particularly when the appeal
launched comes up against a wall of silence erected
by the Tel Aviv authorities, with whom it has been
impossible to negotiate so far.

56. The people of all countries always support
each other in their struggles for liberation. The
Chinese delegation wishes to reiterate that the Chinese
Government and people resolutely support the Arab
and Palestinian peoples in their just struggles against
imperialism, hegemonism and Israeli Zionism and for

60. It is certain, at any rate, that the status quo
which prevails in the Middle East at present cannot
7

last forever. It is the duty of the Security Council
to see to it that its decisions are complied with. Its
prestige depends on it, as does the future of the
United. Nations itself.

69. In fullilling its difficult task, UNEF represents
one of the most crucially important peace-keeping
operations ever undertaken by the United Nations,
and its is a great pleasure for me to convey in
this context my Government’s deep appreciation to the
Secretary-General, to the Headquarters staff here in
New York and to the Force Commander for their
outstanding services to the cause of peace.

61. Three months are available to the Security
Council, and this is a supplementary and final period
which can make possible a just and lasting settlement
of the situation in the Middle East, as long as the
wall of silence built by Israel yields and heed is paid
to the appeal of the Government of Egypt and the
international community.

70. It seems clear that most members of the Security
Council share our view that the continued presence
of UNEF remains very important and useful. It is
equally clear, however, that the existence of the
Force and the prevailing quiet in the area must not
lead to a relaxation in the search for peace.

62. Before concluding, I wish to pay tribute to
Mr. Lecompt, who presided over the unofficial
meetings of the Security Council with commendable
skill.

71. This time the Council has decided to prolong
the mandate of UNEF for a period of only three
months, not six months as on earlier occasions.
This shorter extension makes it all the more necessary
to intensify the search for a lasting solution to the
problems in the area. Ail the parties concerned must
now exert all efforts and goodwill in the search for
peace.

63. Mr. RYDBECK (Sweden): Fit, Mr. President,
I want to congratulate you personally on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We look forward very much towards working with
you and with the members under your wise guidance,
and we pledge you our full support and co-operation.
I also want to express our appreciation for the efficient
leadership given to us by Mr. Lecompt during our
informal consultations.

72. My Government regrets that the talks conducted
with the United States Secretary of State, Mr. Kissinger, as an intermediary did not lead to a successful
result. However, this must be seen as a temporary
setback. The momentum towards peace must be
maintained. The United Nations must encourage the
parties to make renewed efforts to find ways and
means for further negotiations in Geneva or elsewhere.
The latest round of talks, though not successful on
this occasion, has helped in shedding more. light on
the positions and on the problems of the two parties
in the UNEF area, thus facilitating the renewed
efforts to reach an agreement based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) that
must now follow.

64. My delegation also wants to express its great
appreciation for the skill, patience. and authority
that Mr. Gonzalo Facie, Minister for External
Relations of Costa Rica, displayed last month during
very difficult negotiations. We also express &thanks
also to our colleague Mr. Fernando Salazar.
65. I take this opportunity, too, to extend a warm
welcome to our new colleague, Mr. Oyono of the
United Republic of Cameroon.
66. The resolution just adopted by the Security
Council is short and simple, precise and clear, and
contains all the necessary elements for the continued
operations of UNEF.

73: The UNEF operation is based on the principle
of collective responsibility among the Members of the
United Nations and financed in accordance with
Article 17 of the Charter. The General AssembIy
is, therefore, the proper forum for a detailed dis
cussion and for decisions in regard to the financing
of the Force. For that reason I will limit my remarks
here to an expression of satisfaction at the fact that
the operations of UNEF, to judge from the report
of the Secretary-General, appear to have a reasonably
sound financial basis. The request of the Security
Council in its resolution 362 (1974) that the Force
should be maintained with maximum efficiency and
economy still stands, and we are fully confident that
the Secretary-General is acting accordingly. In this
context my delegation wants to stress how important
it is that the Members of the United Nations pay
their assessed part of the costs without undue deiay,
to make it possible for the Secretariat to honour all
-the obligations of the United Nations as_ they arise..

67. The task of UNEF has been well defined in
paragraph 29 of the report of the Secretary-General,
where he rightly stresses that UNEF is essential
not only in order to maintain quiet in the EgyptIsrael sector, but also to provide an atmosphere
conducive to further efforts towards the achievement
of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East,
and to assist in such further efforts, if required.
68. The Force did not only successfully establish
itself in the area at a time of serious tension and
prove able to control a highly dangerous situation.
The Force has also, through its continued~ existence
and service since the beginning of its operations,
contributed to the prevention of major military
incidents and to the relative calm in the area.
8

74. In the interest of efficiency and for important
reasons of principle it is necessary that the Force
should be able to function as one integrated unit
within the total area of opemtion. We express our
support for the Secretary-Cfeneral’s efforts to this
end and hope he will be able to register substantial
progress in this matter soon.

Middle East and to assist in such further efforts,
if .required.” I am sure it was with this conviction
that the Secretary-General was once again prompted
to recommend the renewal of the mandate of UNEF.
81.. It is the considered view of my delegation that
the measures we are now adopting are temporary in
nature. In fact, when the Security Council accepted
the principle of sending UNEF to the area, there
was a genuine expectation that its presence in the
area would create a climate conducive to further
efforts towards the achievement of just and lasting
peace.

75. The Security Council has been able to reach
a decision today without major differences among
the members of the Council. Sweden is convinced
&at this decision is an important and necessary one.
But it is still more important that the parties use the
narrowing time-span for constructive efforts in order
to regain lost momentum. It is our hope that at the
end of the three-month period ahead it will be possible
to register more substantial progress than has so
far been achieved after three periods of six months.

82. Since October 1973, when the Security Council
adopted resolution 341 (1973) establishing UNEF for
an initial period of six months, the expectations of
the Council have not been realized. The situation
in the area is far from satisfactory. Israel is still
entrenched in the Arab territories it forcibly occupied
in June 1967; and the provisions of resolution 338
(1973) have yet to be implemented.

76. Mr. CHALE (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation, I am taking
this opportunity to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. My delegation,
while promising to extend full co-operation to you in
the discharge of your responsibilities, remains
convinced that under your abfe leadership our
deliberations will be crowned with success.

83. The Security Council has renewed the mandate
of UNEF twice since its establishment in October
1973. But, it is sad to note, the situation still remains
fundamentally unstable, as is stated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. And the Secretary-General is of the
opinion that it will remain unstable so long as the
underlying problems are unresolved.

77. I should also like to congratulate the Minister
for External Reiations of Costa Rica and his representative, who competently and skilfully presided
over the Council during the month of March. I should
like also to welcome warmly our colleague, the
representative of the United Republic of Cameroon.

84. It is the hope of my delegation, therefore, that
the renewal of the mandate of UNEF for a period of
three more months-that is, until 24 July 1975--will
afford Israel this time an opportunity to implement
Council resolution 338 (1973), which, among other
things, calls for the implementation of resolution 242
(1967) “in all of its parts”. It was. precisely for
that reason that my delegation had no difficulty in
voting in favour of the draft resolution just adopted.

78. My delegation, together with the other nonaligned countries, participated in the preparation of
this draft resolution. We did so cognizant of the
prevailing state of tension in the Middle East. It is
our belief, therefore, that the d&t resolution we have
just adopted is aimed at reducing tension in the
area, thus paving the way to the final solution of
the cancerous problem in the Middle East.

85. I should like to end my intervention by reiterating
my -Government’s support for the Arab countries in
their efforts to recover all the Arab lands occupied
by Israel.

79. The resolution makes reference to the resolutions
concerning the Middle East problem adopted both
by the Security Council and by the General Assembly.
The overriding message of alI these resolutions is
the unequivocal call to Israel to withdraw from all the
Arab lands, it has been occupying since the June
1967 war. In our view, this is an essential and
important prerequisite before lasting peace returns to
the Middle East.

86. Mr. AL-SHAIKHLY (Iraq): In speaking for the
first time under your presidency, SC, 1 have great
pleasure in joining those who have already congratulated you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the current month. It
is especially gratifying for my delegation to see
presiding over the Council the distinguished representative of France, a country with which Iraq maintains
close and friendly relations, as exemplified by the
recent exchange of visits between high officials of
our Governments.

80. The Secretary-General, in paragraph 29 of his
report, observes: “... the situation in the area as
a whole remains fundamentally unstable... The
continued presence of UNEF at the present crucial
time is, in my opinion, eisential not only to maintain
quiet in the Egypt-Israel sector, but also to provide
an atmosphere conducive to further efforts towards
the achievement of a just and lasting peace in the

87. 1. should like also to pay a tribute to your
predecessors from Costa Rica, Mr. Facie, the
Minister for External Relations, and Mr. Salazar,
for their able guidance of the Council’s proceedings
9

during the month of March. May I also extend a warm
welcome to the new representative of the United
Republic of Cameroon, Mr. Oyono.

95. The elements which would allow such a lasting
and durable peace are clear. They include a complete
withdrawal by Israel from all the Arab territories
occupied since the June 1967 war, and the right of the
Palestinian people to a national home and to the
recovery of its legitimate rights. We expect that the
next three months, perhaps within the context of a full
and resumed Geneva Conference, will be used
constructively and that it will be possible for the
necessary steps for an over-all political solution to
be taken.

88. Iraq has on several occasions explained its
position regarding the establishment of UNEF and
the extension of its mandate. The recent-developments
in the area have tended to confirm our views on
the situation and to strengthen the grounds for our
apprehensions concerning the extension of the
mandate of UNEF.
89. Therefore, my delegation did not participate
in the voting on the draft resolution just adopted
by the Council, just as it did not participate in the
voting on previous resolutions on the subject.

%. The Secretary-General’s latest progress report on
the activities of UNEF indicates that UNEF is on
the whole functioning effectively and efficiently,
and that is not only to the credit of the SecretaryGeneral and the Commander of UNEF but also a
result of the excellent performance of the troops which
have been sent by various Member States. We wish
to express our appreciation to the troop-contributing
countries for the important contribution they are
making to the maintenance of peace in the area.

90. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): Mr. President, may
I first of all express my felicitations and those of my
delegation to you on your assumption of the post
of President of the Security Council for the month
of April. My delegation looks forward to co-operating
with you during the remainder of your period in
the Chair.

97. At the same time, my delegation notes with
regret the Secretary-General’s observation, in paragraph 16 of his report, that

91. I should like also to take this opportunity to
reiterate Guyana’s entire satisfaction with the manner
in which the Minister for External Relations,
Mr. Facie and Mr. Salazar of Costa Rica discharged
their duties in the post of President during the month
of March, especially in the most difficult negotiations
on the Cyprus question.

“The problem of restrictions on the freedom of
movement of personnel of certain contingents
still exists despite my efforts and those of the
Force Commander.”

92. I am most pleased also to extend a cordial
and brotherly welcome to the new representative of
the United Republic of Cameroon, Mr. Ferdinand
Leopold Oyono. We look forward to working
closely with him, particularly within the context of
the non-aligned group on the Council.

That situation is not a happy one. It continues
despite the Council’s decision in paragraph 4 of
resolution 362 (1974) that
‘6 . . . United Nations Emergency Force must be
able to function as an integral and efficient military
unit in the whole Egypt-Israel sector of operations
without differentiation regarding the United Nations
status of the various contingents.. .**

93. The draft resolution we have just adopted
extends the mandate of UNEF for a period of three
months-that is, until 24 July 1975. It is perhaps no
accident that the Council has deemed it fit on this
occasion to limit the extension of the mandate to
a three-month period instead of a six-month period,
as in previous resolutions. When the Force was
established, it was thought of as being an instrument which would contribute to the efforts to achieve
a just and lasting peace in the Middle East. It was
never contemplated, however, that the Force should
assume a quasi-permanent character so that its
presence could be used as an excuse to perpetuate
a no-peace, no-war situation, which can only be to
the advantage of the occupying Power.

The fact that there is no specific mention of that
point in the draft resolution just adopted does not, in
my delegation’s view, diminish its importance. We
would therefore ask the Secretary-General to pursue
his efforts to resolve this matter, which if not settled
in accordance with the Council’s decision will continue
as an act of discrimination against certain contingents
from Member States.
9& Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO (Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from
Russian): Mr. President, permit me first of all to
associate myself with the sincere congratulations
which have already been expressed to you, Mr. de
Guiringaud, and your country, France, upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
Permit me also to express our profound feelings and
deep respect to the Minister for External Relations
of Costa Rica, Mr. Facie, and the representative of

94. Resolution 338 (1973) called quite clearly for
immediate negotiations to start between the parties
concerned, under appropriate auspices, aimed at the
establishment of a just and durable peace in the
Middle East. But a year and a half after the adoption
of that resolution little progres, if any, has been
made towards that objective.
10

Costa Rica, Mr. Salazar, who conducted the proceedings of the Council last month.

104. In agreeing with this further extension of the
mandate of UNEF, our delegation would like to
express the hope that the work of the Geneva
Conference will be resumed as soon as possible, the
Conference whose task it has been to consider the
whole range of questions involved in a Middle East
settlement and to resolve the fundamental problems
of a just and lasting settlement of the protracted
Middle East crisis. This is in keeping with the vital
interests of all the peoples of the area. The elimination of the explosive situation in the Middle East
would be a new fundamental step in the spread of
international detente and would help to strengthen
international peace and security.

99. It is also a great pleasure for me to welcome
the newly appointed representative of the United
Republic of Cameroon, Mr. Oyono. I wish him
every success in his work in the Council.
100. The Byelorussian SSR agreed with the new
extension-this time for three months-of the mandate
of UNEF in the Middle East, in accordance with the
wish expressed by Egypt, and we voted in favour
of the draft resolution.
101. In connexion with the extension of the mandate
of UNEF, the Secretary-General presented his regular
report, which has been considered by the Security
Council, and this has been reflected in the decision
taken by the Council. In that connexion, the
Byelorussian SSR delegation would state that, as is
pointed out in paragraphs 16 and 20 of the report,
the problem of the movement of alI the contingents
of the Force has still not been resolved, and new
energetic efforts are necessary to put an end to the
discriminatory attitude of one of the parties towards
a majority of the contingents of the Force. Furthermore, our delegation considers it necessary to stress
that the United Nations Secretariat should observe
maximum economy in expenditures for the maintenance of these troops and comply with the relevant
provisions of Security Council resolution 362 (1974).

105. Mr. SALAZAR (Costa Rica) (interpretation
from Spanish): Mr. President, my delegation wishes
to congratulate you and say how pleased it is at
seeing you once again as President of the Security
Council. We wish to avail ourselves of this opportunity to renew the assurance of our confidence in
the discharge of your duties because we are sure
that your vast experience and your diplomatic skill
are a complete guarantee that the difficult mission
entrusted to you will be crowned with complete
success.
106. My delegation also wishes to express its
appreciation of the work accomplished by Mr. Lecompt of your delegation, Sir, and of the skill with
which he guided our consultations which led to the
draft resolution just adopted by the Council. I also
wish to associate my delegation with the welcome
which you, Mr. President, addressed to the new
representative of the United Republic of Cameroon,
our colleague Mr. Oyono.

102. The Byelorussian delegation continues to
believe that the extension of the mandate of UNEF
is not an end in itself. We have always opposed
the ambitions of certain forces to freeze and perpetuate
the situation in this area. The continuing aggression
of Israel, its attempts to -entrench itself in the
occupied territories and to legitimize by any ways or
means its occupation of considerable Arab territories
should be countered by firm demands that it abandon
this course, which is so dangerous to all countries
and peoples in that area, including Israel itself.

107. Now my delegation would like to refer to the
Secretary-General’s report on UNEF. The report
contains valuable and illustrative assessments of the
role of UNEF and gives us an over-all view of the
situation existing in that region of the Middle East
which my delegation received with genuine interest.
We congratulate the Secretary-General for having
supplied us with such valuable data. The SecretaryGeneral in paragraph 29 of his report states that:

103. We are convinced that, in the course of the
new three-month term for which the mandate of UNEF
has been extended, determined efforts should be undertaken to bring about a peaceful settlement of the
complex Middle East problem, which has arisen as
a result of Israel’s aggression against Arab countries.
For this it is necessary to ensure immediate
compliance with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. For a just and lasting settlement
in the Middle East it is necessary to bring about
the withdrawal of Israeli troops from all the Arab
territories they have occupied and to satisfy the
legitimate rights and aspirations of the Arab people
of Palestine, including its right to its own statehood,
and we must ensure that all States and peoples
of the Middle East enjoy a secure, independent and
free existence.

“The continued presence of UNEF at the present
crucial time is, in my opinion, essential not only
to maintain quiet in the Egypt-Israel sector, but
also to provide an atmosphere conducive to further
efforts towards the achievement of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East and to assist in such
further efforts, if required.”
108. Taking up the point of view of the SecretaryGeneral, my delegation considers that, in the present
situation, it is not only proper but indispensable
to the maintenance of an atmosphere conducive to
future negotiations that the mandate of UNEF be
renewed and, to contribute to this purpose, my
delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution,
11

the purpose of which is to extend the mandate
for an additional three months.

assumption of the lofty, difficult but inspiring post
of President of the Security Council. Your outstanding
qualities, along with your skill in conducting intemational affairs and your experience, will, I am sure,
enlighten and enrich us and be conducive to the
success of our work. To change the subject somewhat,
I take pleasure in noting that my debut in the Securiry
Council has taken place under the authority of a
representative of France, a country with which my
own country has very long-statrding and excellent
relations in every respect.

109. Yet my delegation must confess that it would
have felt happier had it been agreed &hat the new
extension would be for a period of six months, as
has been customary since the Egyptian-Israeli agreement on Disengagement of Forces was adopted on
18 January 1974. My delegation is concerned that
so short a period as three months will be insufficient
to provide the parties with an opportunity to arrive
at other arrangements which can replace that.

115. I should also like to take this opportunity to
express the gratitude of my delegation to the
Minister for External Relations and to the representative of Costa Rica, for the authority with which
they conducted the proceedings of the Security
Council in the month of March.

110. As the Secretary-General also states in patagraph 29 of his report: “Pending the conclusion of
an over-all settlement, the situation in the area as a
whole remains fundamentally unstable.” As a tribute
to truth, we must say that the Disengagement
Agreement between Egypt and Israel, as well as
other measures which are adopted in times of war,
such as a truce or a cease-fire, is a military .measure
which is temporarily adopted to prevent a new outbreak of hostilities but does not in itself provide
a solution to the substantive problem. Such an agreement must have as its purpose, together with restoring
tranquillity in the zone, the creation of a propitious
atmosphere so that the parties can negotiate a
permanent political solution.

116. I should like, too, to thank you, Mr. President,
and also my colleagues, for the kind words of welcome
which have been expressed to me. It is a pleasure
for me to be able to assure you of my whole-hearted
and faithful co-operation in the joint quest for
appropriate solutions to the various problems confronting the Organization.
117. The Security Council has just adopted the dr;d2
resolution calling for the renewal for a period of three
months-that is, until 24 July 1975-+f the mandate
of UNEF in the Middle East. The underlying reasons
for the need of this measure, its scope and its political
significance have been expressed unambiguously by
the Secretary-General in his excellent report to the
Council and by previous speakers.

111. We know the recent efforts of the Secretary
of State of the United States, Mr. Kissinger, which
unfortunately failed. And, of course, the world
received with relief the announcement that there may
be another opportunity for a dialogue between the
parties at Geneva. But as there is no certainty
about that meeting, the peremptory termination of
the UNEF mandate might in due course place the
parties in a dangerous situation.

118. Indeed, in the view of my delegation, in spite
of the apparent calm prevailing in the region, the
situation remains fundamentally tense, unstable and
potentially explosive, since no significant progress,
as far as we know, has been achieved with any
prospect of the establishment of a just and lasting
peace in accordance with the letter and spirit of the
decisions of the Council on the subject.

112. My delegation is not unaware of the complexity
of the problems of the Middle East, and is always
in,favour of solutions which can provide alternatives
to peace. The mandate of UNEF, while short, will,
we hope, be used so that at the end there will be
no threat of a new outbreak of hostilities, but, rather,
a new framework for understanding which the intemational community trusts the parties will arrive at.

119. This tension has increased because of the failttru
of the hopes aroused by certain initiatives to elect
a more substantial disengagement of the Israeli and
the Egyptian forces in the Sinai, something which
might have created an atmosphere conducive to a
comprehensive and final political settlement of the
Middle East crisis.

113. Finally, I wish to reiterate my gratitude to
those delegations which in the course of the debate
have referred to Costa Rica’s presidency of the
Security Council last month. We were deeply moved
to hear the kind words addressed both to the Minister
for External Relations of my country, Mr. Gonzalo
Facie, and to me.

120. In the present uncertain circumstances, my
delegation can only support the views expressed by
the Secretary-General in advocating a renewal of the
mandate of UNEF for a new period of limited
duration. This duration has just been set by the
Security Council at three months, which seems
reasonable to us. Indeed, the automatic renewal, of
the six months’ extension of the mandate of the
Force might have become a purely routine act which

114. Mr. OYONO (United Republic of Cameroon)

(interpretation from French): Mr. President, 1 should

like to say to you how great a pleasure it is for
me to be able to associate myself, on behalf of the
delegation of the United Republic of Cameroon,
with the congratulations extended to you upon your
12

-..

might have served to freeze the situation to the
prejudice of one of the parties and put off indefinitely
the prospect of any true negotiated peace in the
area.

involve by contingents supplied by the permanent
members of the Council. However, in present
circumstances we are convinced that UNEF has
fulfilled and continues to fulfil a useful mission
which serves the cause we defend here-namely,
the effort by peaceful means to reach a settlement
of the dispute. In this regard, we wish to pay a
tribute to the Commander, Lieutenant-General
Siilasvuo, and to the seven countries which agreed
to supply contingents whose devotion, effectiveness
and courage warrant our gratitude.
.‘

121. The essential concern of the Council, in adopting
a new resolution today, seems to me to be to
crystallize political will so that the parties directly
and indirectly concerned can in the course of the next
three months make decisive progress towards the
establishment of a just and lasting peace which will
safeguard the fundamental rights of all the peoples of
the Middle East in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, particularly
resolution 338 (1973). It is in this light that my
delegation unreservedly supported the text of the
resolution just adopted.

126. Two specific questions must once again receive
our consideration. On the one hand, we mu&
consider the financial aspects of the operation.
While the Secretary-General’s report notes that the
Force’s expenditures for the renewal of the mandate
will remain within the appropriations. authorized by
the General Assembly, in response to the concern
expressed several times by the Council, it nevertheless
points out the persistence of a major deficit because
of delays in the payment of many contributions. We
can but urge the rectification of a situation, which is
straining the already severely tried financial resources
of the Organization and which also lays an unfair
burden on countries that have supplied contingents.

122. In conclusion, I should like to extend once
again the warm congratulations of my delegation to
the Secretary-General for his clear and relevant report
to the Council and for his ceaseless personal efforts
to find a peaceful solution to the long Middle East
crisis. My delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to pay a welldeserved tribute to the
Commander of the Force, Lieutenant-General
Siilasvuo, and all his colleagues for the effectiveness
with which they have discharged their responsibilities
.in the field in sometimes di&uIt conditions.

127. On the other hand, there is the important
question of the freedom of movement of the contingents. Any impediment to this is contrary to the
provisions of the Charter. We must therefore
encourage the Secretary-General to pursue his efforts
to settle the question in the terms he has himself
spelled out in paragraph 16 of his report.

123. The PRESIDENT jinm-,wefuhmfiom French):
Since all members of the Council who had asked to
be allowed to explain their votes have now done so,
before 1 call upon others whose names are inscribed
on the list of speakers I should like in my capacity
as the representative of FRANCE briefly to state the
position of my country on the question before the
Council.
124. The affirmative vote of the French delegation
on the draft resolution submitted to the Council
follows, quite naturally, from our attitude since the
establishment of UNEF in the Middle East in October 1973. In the fundamentally unstable situation in
that region, which is mentioned by the SecretaryGeneral in his report, the presence of the Force
remains an essential element to ensure compliance
with the cease-fire. It also contributes to the prevention of any tension which might gravely jeopardize
the efforts intended to establish a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East and is therefore justified
by the pursuit of these efforts.

128. In conclusion, I should like to emphasize the
concern with which my country has folIowed recent
developments, or, more accurately, the recent absence
of favourable developments in the Middle East.
The failure of one procedure, with which we had
been in sympathy because of the interest in it shown
by the parties themselves, should not jeopardize all
other efforts that might lead to a settlement. More
than ever, time is running out: Council resolution 338
(1973) the immediate implementation of which we
have again advocated, calls for negotiations. The
framework already exists. As was stated in a joirit
communique by the Chairman of the Revolutionary
Council of the People’s Democratic Republic of
Algeria and the President of the French Republic:
“The need for a resumption, of the Geneva Couference after due preparation, is now felt.”

125. It is true that that presence is not in itself
a guarantee of success; nor, to the extent that its
objective is military, does it represent something
gained along the road to a political settlement. My
delegationbas in fact constantly recalled the distinction
we draw Getween a force guaranteeing the ceasefire-an emergency force-and a force whose role
it would be to maintain peace, which presupposes
a peace agreement. The latter, we believe, should

129. We must without further delay offer to the
.States and peoples of the region proof of renewed
efforts to help them find the way to a-just and lasting
peace, which in our opinion must be based on withdrawal from the occupied territories, taking into
account the right of the people of Palestine to have
their own homeland, and on recognition of the rights
of all the States of the region to live in peace
within secure, recognized and guaranteed borders.
13

130. And now, in my capacity as PRESIDENT
of the Security Council, I call upon the representative of Israel.

measure up to this task, and we are confident that
you will successfully conclude the deliberations of the
Council. I should also like most sincerely to congratulate your deputy, Mr. Lecompt, who, during
your absence, assisted in the results we are now
discussing. As to your great country, France, Egypt
enjoys the most excellent relations with it, and we
take great pleasure in this. We are pleased to pay
tribute, from this seat, to the international policy of
France, a wise policy faithful to its noble traditions.

131. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President, please
accept my delegation’s highest consideration and
best wishes for success in your distinguished office.
132. I should like to take this opportunity to express
to UNEF, its personnel and its Commander,
Lieutenant-General Ensio Siilasvno, as well as to the
Secretary-General, my Government’s appreciation
for the Iaudable manner in which the Force has been
discharging its duties.

[The speaker continued in Engiish.]
138. A year and a half has gone by since the Council
adopted resolution 340 (1973) on 25 October 1973,
by which it decided to establish the United Nations
Emergency Force to supervise the cease fire. This
was deemed part of a first step on, the road to a just
and durable peace in the Middle East. Since then,
the Force, with the consent and the active co-operation
of Egypt, has been performing its mandate as set
out in resolution 340 (1973).

133. The UNEF presence is an integral part of
the Egyptian-Israeli Agreement on Disengagement of
Forces concluded on 18 January 1974. The deployment of UNEF and the Force’s tasks have been
agreed upon between the parties and are stipulated
in the Agreement. It is evident that the extension
of the UNEF mandate is also a matter to be dealt
with by both parties. It was to be expected that, in the
spirit of the Agreement and on the basis of past
pratice, -the mandate would be extended for a further
period of six months. Israel proposed such an extension. However, the resolution just adopted renews
the mandate for three months only. This has been
done at the insistence of Egypt.

139. Now the Council has just voted to extend the
mandate of the Force for a further period of three
months, following the expiration of its present
mandate. Egypt, in spite of Israel’s negative and
obstructive attitude in all peace efforts, does not
object to the extension of the Force’s mandate
for another three months.

134. It is noteworthy that President Sadat should
consider it possible to deal with the question of the
renewal of the UNEF mandate unilaterally, to
determine at will that the mandate be limited to three
months, and even to threaten not to extend it at all.
Such a position reflects Egypt’s arbitrary attitude
towards the Agreement and indicates the defects in
the present provisions regarding UNEF. President
Sadat’s decision to curtail the duration of the UNEF
mandate and to limit it to three months demonstrates
once more how Arab Governments fail to comply
with their international obligations when they deem
compliance to be inconvenient to them.

140. President Sadat, on 29 March 1975, announced
that Egypt would accept the extension of the mandate
for a period of three months in order to allow for
a further opportunity in the process of achieving a
peaceful settlement of the Middle East problem.
Addressing the National -Assembly, President Sadat
stated:
“Some may expect from me an emotional reaction, ending the agreement over the Emergency
Force in Sinai, but I prefer action to reaction.
Hence I will allow the renewal of the United
Nations Emergency Force’s mandate for three
months only, instead of six, on the one hand,
because I do not wish to place the international
community before a sudden crisis, and, on the
other, because I want the whole world to know
that there are limits to time as well as patience.‘*

135. Israel will, of course, continue to observe the
Disengagement Agreement. Israel will continue to
seek understanding and peace in the region. It is
clear, however, that in future negotiations it will be
necessary to find a solid basis for the UNEF presence
and responsibilities. The Agreement in its present
form does not provide such a basis of stability and
credibility.
136. The PRESIDENT (interpre&.r?ionfi~m French):
I now call on the representative of Egypt.

The limitations on time and patience emanate from
Israeli disruption of the process of settlement, and
Israel’s intransigence has proven once more to be
the stumbling-block upon which all peace efforts
have faltered.

137. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, my first words are to
you and your great country. You have assumed the
presidency of the Security Council at a delicate
time-a responsible time--and you are bearing its
very heavy burden. But your exceptional qualities

141. It is quite obvious, unfortunately, that Israel
has not learned the lessons of the October war of
1973. Footdragging, procrastination and stalling on
the part of Israel will not serve the cause of peace.
Such tactics did not serve it before, and they cannot
serve it now. The Israeli Government still persists
14

in its adamant refusal to face up to the new realities
and the requirements of peace,and has as yet failed
to adopt a positive and realisitc attitude.

of all issues pertaining to the Middle East crisis
within the framework of the Geneva Conference.
147. During the recent talks, Egypt requested a
partial withdrawal of the Israeli forces in the Sinai
Desert, to include withdrawal east of the passes as
well as from the Abu Rhodeis oilfields. In return for
such withdrawal, Egypt was prepared, as stated by
my Foreign Minister on 24 March 1975, to pledge
to refrain from all military or paramilitary actions
within the duration of the validity of the Disengagement Agreement and contingent upon the continuation
of the efforts to bring about a just and lasting peace
in accordance with the letter and spirit of resolution 338 (1973) and all other relevant United
Nations resolutions.

142. We have just heard the representative of
Israel now. The position of Egypt on this problem
is, I am sure, very clear and unequivocal to you
all: we have been striving to achieve a just and
lasting peace, which can result only from the withdrawal of Israel from all Arab territories occupied
since 5 June 1967, and the restoration to the Palestinian
people of their legitimate rights, for experience has
proven that unless peace is just it cannot be durable.
143. Our desire for peace has been consistently
manifested in all peace efforts aimed at achieving
peaceful settlement of the Middle East conflict.
For example, it is well known that Egypt declared
on 15 January 1971, in its aide-memoire to Mr. Jarring,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
[see S/10083], that if Israel would give commitments
covering all its obligations under resolution 242
(1967) Egypt would be ready to enter into a peace
agreement with Israel, thereby ending the state of
belligerency-I emphasize thereby ending the state of
belligerency-and recognizing its right to live within
secure and recognized boundaries. In contrast,
Israel’s reply to Mr. Jarring on 26 February 1971
was totally in line with its present obstructive attitude
towards peace. The reply categorically stated that
Israel would not withdraw to the pre-5 June 1967
lines.

148. In a concrete attempt to salvage the Kissinger
mission, the Egyptian official spokesman issued the
following declaration on 19 March 1975--and I quote
the official text of the declaration so that it will appear
in the offtcial records of the Security Council:
“The approval by the Arab countries of Security
Council resolution 338 (1973) encompasses their
approval to terminate the state of belligerency
once a comprehensive settlement of the Middle
East crisis to establish a just peace is reached.
“Proceeding from this, the Arab countries do not
refuse to conclude a peace agreement with Israel
when this country becomes not only ready but
also potentially capable of facing up to the facts and
essentials of a just peace, and to fulfil its intemational obligations in accordance with Security
Council resolution 338 (1973).

144. That was in 1971. Four years later Israel is
still occupying Arab territories and remains unwilling
to give any public pledge or declaration of policy
regarding its willingness to relinquish the occupied
Arab territories. Moreover, it now insists, as a price
for a minimal and limited withdrawal from less than
a third of Egyptian territory, that Egypt should end
the state of war with Israel.

“It is therefore important, before this stage is
reached, to highlight the fact that any new disengagement agreement is but a basic and important step
on the road to peace. Such a new agreement would
generate and test the good will of the belligerent
parties on the basis of which a real peace could be
established.

145. In the face of such intransigence, Egypt remains
steadfast in its policy of restraint, moderation and
peace. The latest evidence-which was mentioned
today by some delegations in the Council-is our
decision to reopen the Suez Canal on 5 June of this
year, for the benefit of international navigation and
the prosperity of all countries. However, it would
be illusory to believe that Egypt would contemplate
the surrender of its legitimate sovereign rights with
regard to the restoration of its territorial integrity.

“During the new disengagement process, it would
be natural that the parties will not resort to the use
of force as long as the provisions of the Disengagement Agreement remain valid and respected by the
parties so that there could be progress towards
peace on all fronts.
“All this constitutes the true insignificance and
importance of the new move. The essentials of a
just and final peace must not be confused with agreements that pave the way for such a peace and which
are necessary to create the confidence that forms
the basis of a real peace.”

146. In the latest attempt at salvaging the momentum
towards peace, undertaken by the United States
Secretary of State, Mr. Kissinger, which was today
referred to by many delegations, Egypt spared no
efforts towards the success of his endeavours, in the
hope that the result would be a second limited
military agreement that would constitute a further
step forward on the road to peace, in preparation
for the achievement of a comprehensive settlement

That is the official announcement made by Egypt on
19 March to salvage the Kissinger mission. It failed.
15

149. On 3 April of this year President Sadat declared
to a delegation of United States Congressional representatives that to accept ending the state of belligerency under the current circumstances-as Israel
insisted-would amount to an invitation to Israel to
continue its illegal occupation of our territories.

the talks, but has only succeeded in adding to United
States displeasure.
“An authoritative source says that the map
published by the Israeli Embassy [in Washington)
on 27 March was never given to the American
delegation in Jemsalem*‘-i repeat: “was never
given to the American delegation in Jerusalem”.

150. Neither Egypt nor any other State Member of
the Organization can ever accept that. For, according
to the Charter and the norms of international law,
no Member of the United Nations could be asked
to undertake formally to surrender its right to recover
its usurped territory while remaining under a continuous illegal occupation. In short, a pledge of
peace can only correspond to an act of peace. It
cannot be made while the aggressor still occupies
the greater part of one’s land.

“The eleventh-hour offer that the Israelis say
they made to keep the talks going, therefore,
contained nothing precise for the Americans to
pass on to the Egyptians, the source says.”
154. I should like to turn to what was said a few
moments ago here, but first of all I shall address
myself to the Secretary-General’s report. In paragraph 29, the Secretary-General quite correctly
observes that “pending the completion of an over&
settlement, the situation in the area as a whole
remains fundamentally unstable”. Nothing could be
more true. But, I regret to say, paragraph 30 of the
same report transmits to the Council the Israeli
allegation--and we have just heard this allegation
again from the Israeli representative-that “UN-EF is
an integral part of the Disengagement Agreement of
18 January 1974”. Such an ahegation has no legal
validity and is not conducive to peace. I shall now
tell you why.

151. We have just heard the accusation from the
representative of Israel that Arabs do not respect
their obligations. We& the whole world has come to
realize Israel’s responsibility for the breakdown of
the latest Kissinger peace mission. The United States,
the initiator of the step-by-step approach, has itself
blamed Israel for its intransigence, which led to the
failure of this most recent peace attempt. President
Ford stated on 27 March I975 that Middle East
peace would have been better served if Israel had
been more flexible during the negotiations with Egypt
conducted by Secretary of State Kissinger.

155. The draft resoiution just adopted by the Council
is sufficient proof to the contrary of that Israeli
allegation. It decides once again to call upon the
parties concerned to implement immediately Security
CounciI resolution 338 (I973), UNEF is an integral
part of resolution 338 (1973-not of any other agreement. I repeat: UNEF is an integral part of resolution 338 (1973). That is our position. The establishment of UNEF on 25 October 1973, in accordance
with resolution 340 (1973), was a step aimed at
implementing paragraph 1 of resolution 338 (1973).

152. The news media in the-United States-in part,
as we aI1 know, traditionally sympathetic to the Israeli
viewpoint-have come out squarely in criticism of
Israel’s intransigence and shortsightedness. Thus, in
an editorial dated 1 April 1975, The Washington
Post wrote the following:
“Having turned the Egyptian disengagement offer
down, Israel must do something a good deal better
than sitting tight, sniping at Egypt and appealing
to the United States to do something to break the
-impasse. Israel has worked itself into a position
where it will be under increasing pressure to offer
a feasible and responsible proposal for peace,
one** -and this is The Washington-Post speaking“that goes beyond the tired slogans of its past
diplomacy and holds out some reasonable prospect
of satisfying all the principals in the Middle East
dispute.”

156. The legal framework from which all efforts
towards the maintenance of peace and the achievement
of a comprehensive settlement in the Middle East
derive is resoIution 338 (t973), which states:
[The speaker read out resolution 338 (1973).]

157. Then, Security Council resolution 340 (1973)
was adopted. Then, resolution 344 (1973) noted that
a peace conference on the Middle East was to begin
shortly at Geneva under the auspices of the United
Nations and expressed the hope that this conference
would make speedy progress towards the establishment of a just and durable peace in the Middle
East.

153. The Christian Science Monitor of 31 March
1975 reported the foIlowing from Washington:
“An Israeii effort to blame Egypt for the breakdown of step-by-step talks on a interim settlement
by releasing maps daiming to show both Israeli
and Egyptian maximum Sinai concessions has
further irritated American officials. Release of the
maps was part of a major effort by Israel to
offset Ford administration anger at what is seen
here [in Washington] as Israeli inflexibility during

158. Pursuant to efforts initiated at the Geneva
Peace Conference, and with the assistance of t&
United States Government, the Egyptian-Israeli
Agreement on Disengagement of Forces was signed
16

164. In the light of these legal considerations,
Israel cannot rely today on the presence of UNEF
as a means to perpetuate its illegal occupation of the
territory of a State Member of the United Nations
by deliberately undermining all efforts aimed at a
peaceful settlement.

on 18 January 1974. That this Agreement is of a purely
temporary military nature is self-evident. I should
like the Council to consult paragraph D of this Agreement, which specifically provides as follows:
“This Agreement is not regarded by Egypt and
Israel as a final peace agreement. It constitutes a
fust step toward a final, just and durable peace
according to the provisions of Security Council
resolution 338 (1973) and within the framework of
the Geneva Conference.”

165. Israel’s allegation that the presence of the
Force and the continuing validity of the Disengagement
Agreement are not dependent on the achievement
of further steps in the peace negotiations would lead
to the unacceptable result that both the Force and
the Agreement remain for an indefinite period so long
as Israel is not willing to carry out its obligations
under resolutions 338 (1973) and 242 (1%7). This
would be contrary to the fundamental principles of
the Charter of the United Nations as well as to the
basic resolutions on the Middle East problem adopted
by the Council.

It is therefore clear that this particular provision
explicitly defines the Disengagement Agreement
only as a first step towards a peaceful settlement
baaed on resolution 338 (1973), and, consequently,
it is a measure of a temporary nature.
159. UNEF, established under resolution 340 f1973),
is also of a temporary nature, since it was established
for an initial limited period according to resolution 341
(1973) and for the purpose of supervising the ceasefire while further steps were taken to implement
resolution 338 (1973) in all its parts.

166. Thus, instead of attacking and confusing the
issues and trying to divert the UNEF mandate from
its basic objective, I think that Israel should comply
with resolution 338 (1973) by declaring its readiness
to withdraw from the occupied Arab territories and
to restore the rights of the Palestinians.

160. Egypt’s position with regard to the nature and
presence of the Force on its territory is not new; it has
already been stated before the Council and it is
explicitly set out in a letter I addressed to the SecretaryGeneral as representative of Egypt [S/11055]. What is
the content of this letter? It is the following:

167. If the necessary steps towards peace were to
be obstructed by one of the parties-that is, Israelthen the whole process initiated by and embodied
in resolution 338 (1973) would consequentfy be
blocked, and the existence of UNEF itself would
then no longer be valid.

[The speaker read out paragraphs 14 of the letter
contained in document S/l 1055.]
161. UNEF is not an occupation force. It is also
not an enforcement force under Chapter VII of the
Charter. Neither is it a peace-keeping force created
for an indefinite period so as to become a substitute
for the achievement of a permanent peace-a theme
which has been repeated here today by many delegations. UNEF is no substitute for a solution in the
area. Thus the process of peace-making initiated by
the establishment of the Force merely aims at
facilitating the process of peaceful settlement, which
the Council in resolution 338 (1973) has decided
should be started immediately.

168. The fallacy of the Israeli argument is very clear
to all of us. It is quite simply another attempt at
perpetuating its occupation of our land. This cannot
be accepted by Egypt nor by any other Member of
the United Nations.
169. I would like to add that, in spite of Israel’s
negative policy, Egypt is yet willing to pursue peace
efforts in order to achieve a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East. To that end, Egypt has formally
requested the Co-Chairmen of the Geneva Peace Conference to reconvene the Conference with the aim of
achieving a settlement of all issues of the Middle
East problem.

16t. However, the Israeli argument today would have
the- world believe that the presence of UNEF is a
sine die presence. Such Iogic cannot be accepted.
Also, the Israeli allegation that the Disengagement
Agreement should be viewed not as part of a process
but as a separate occurrence of a sine die duration
cannot be sustained in view of the explicit text of
paragraph D of the Agreement itself, which I have
just read out to the Council.

170. In that framework, a settlement must be
reached by strictly adhering to both the letter and
the spirit of Security Council resolution 338 (1973),
and with the participation of the Palestinian people,
for the restoration of their legitimate rights is indispensable for the establishment of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.
171. Time is running out, and in these coming peace
efforts Israel faces a very grave responsibility.
Either, it will, by shedding its negative attitude, opt
for the road of peace, or it may, once more, shun
the responsibilities of peace. The alternatives are

163. The unacceptable result of such allegations,
which we heard today and which appeared in the
Secretary-General’s report, would amount to the
creation of new internationally supervised permanent
lmes in the disengagement area.
17

grave indeed, and the question for us and for the
world is how to avert disaster by establishing a
peace based on justice.

our friends, the Arab countries, and we consider
it beneath our dignity to reply to this Chinese
slanderer. We are firmly convinced, however, that
the time will come when the Chinese representatives
will remember with shame what a discreditable role
you had occasion to play, Mr. Huang Hua, with your
unpardonable slander against the Soviet Union, the
first country of socialism in the world, which has done
so much for the freedom and independence of China
itself.

172. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I shall now call on those representatives who have
indicated a wish to exercise their right of reply.
173. Mr. OVINNIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): I have a
few comments on the statement of the representative of China, Mr. Huang Hua. The Chinese representative came up with till already familiar recipe from
the contemporary Peking kitchen, although quite
unlike familiar Chinese cookery, these recipes are
surprisingly monotonous. They can produce only one
dish, which does not smell too good; that is, antiSovietism.

178. You can utter malicious anti-Soviet words,
Mr. Huang Hua, possibly reading them from a text
you have already prepared. But so much the more
shameful will be your contribution to history.
179. The PRESIDENT (interprefafion from French):
I call on the representative of Israel.

174. The Chinese representative, as he normally
does, produced some general phrases on the substance
of the matter which is under consideration in the
Security Council, and then devoted himself to
slandering the Soviet Union. In logic this is called
switching premisses. In morality this is known as
turpitude. Then why did Mr. Huang Hua feel it
necessary to resort to such tactics? As always, in
order to cover up the real position of China itself.
And this real position of China has tong been for
its representatives to come but in the role of devil’s
advocates, the virtual accomplice of those occupying
other people’s territories.

180. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The statement made by
the representative of Egypt illustrates the difficulties
of holding a reticent and constructive exehange of
views in a forum such as the Security Council.
International situations cannot be dealt with effectively
or even be discussed in a serious manner if they are
approached on the basis of hollow slogans and
distortions and not on the basis of facts. The world
will undoubtedly take note of this fact. Israel will. A
few examples of the distortions by the representative
of Egypt:
181. He alleged that Israel considers the Disengagement Agreement as a final agreement-and this at the
very time that it was Egypt that refused to take
at least one modest step in the direction of peace
from the present Agreement.

175. Only recently the Security Council discussed
the question of Cyprus. Then th.e Chinese representative also devoted himself substantially to slandering
the Soviet Union. But he did not say a word about
how foreign troops should be evacuated from Cyprus.
He did not say a word about the inadmissibility
of the partition of Cyprus. He did not say a word
about the need for maintaining the status of nonalignment of Cyprus. To whose advantage was this
position? Of course, not to that of Cyprus. China
is not only indiierent to, but even ready to play
with, the fate of that sovereign State Member of the
United Nations.

182. A second example, even more striking, perhaps.
He claimed that UNEF is not an integral part of
the Disengagement Agreement. I shalI quote a few
passages. I shall quote in fact the greater part of
the Agreement, which is extremely short, for the
greater part of the Agreement refers to UNEF and
assigns specific tasks to the Force. Paragraph B 2
states, in part:
“The area between the Egyptian and Israeli
lines will be a zone of disengagement in which the
United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) will be
stationed”.

176. Today, the Security Council is considering the
position in the Middle East. This time the position
of China favours the aggressor, Israel. One can say
frankly that China fears a just political settlement in
the Middle East just as much as the aggressor.
It fears this because it does not fall within the plans
of China, which would prefer a new war in the Middle
East regardless of how much that would cost the
peoples of that area. It is precisely for this reason
that the substance of the Chinese line in this matter
is to undermine any possibilities for a peaceful
settlement.

Paragraph 3 says:
*‘The area between the Egyptian tine and the
Suez Canal will be limited in armament and forces.”
Paragraph 4 says:
“The area between the Israeli tine (B on the
attached map) and the line designated as Line C
on the attached map, which runs along the western
base of the mountains where the Gidi and Mith

177. My final point is this. The true role of the
Soviet Union in the Middle East is well known to
18

Passes are located, will be limited in armament and
forces.”

commitments. In fact, the Egyptian attitude towards
its own undertakings, towards agreements signed by
it, is illustrated in an old Egyptian story which says
that a peasant promised that if God saved the life of
his ailing donkey he would sell it for one dinar.
When the donkey got well the peasant realized that
he could not part with it for such a small coin,
and yet he had to keep his vow. Putting his cat on
the back of the donkey, he went to the bazaar
and called out, “This donkey is offered for one dinar,
provided the buyer takes the cat as well. The cat’s
price is 1,000 dinars.”

Paragraph 5 says:
“The limitations referred to in paragraphs 3 and
4 will be inspected by UNEF. Existing procedures
of the UNEF, including the attaching of Egyptian
and Israeli liaison officer-s to UNEF, will be
continued.”
This is a solemnly concluded agreement,circulated as
a document of the Security Council, signed formally
by the representatives of Egypt and Israel, witnessed
by the Commander of UNEF, containing one provision after another specifying the deployment and the
responsibilities of UNEF. And yet the representative
of Egypt comes before this organ to say that UNEF
and its presence are not an integral part of this
Agreement. Is it not clear, therefore, that Israel is
justified in drawing attention to the arbitrary attitude
of the Government of Egypt towards the very
Agreement signed by it, the very undertakings
solemnly entered into by it?

185. The PRESIDENT (interpretatiorrfiom French):
I call on the representative of China, who has asked
to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
186. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from
Chinese): Since a Soviet representative by the name
of Ovinnikov has uttered what he has just said
now, I deem it necessary to say a few words.
187. The stand of upholding justice as consistently
taken by the People’s Republic of China in intemational affairs is known to all and cannot be distorted.

183. The representative of Egypt found it appropriate
to refer to the recent effort made in the Middle East
to advance towards additional understanding and
agreement between Israel and Egypt. He revealed,
perhaps unwittingly, Egypt’s responsibility for the
failure of those talks, because he once again reiterated
Egypt’s well known position that the agreement that
was to be concluded, the agreement at which Egypt
aimed, was to be of a purely military nature, without
any political connotations whatsoever. In other words,
Egypt demanded of Israel withdrawal from territories
held by it, while Egypt refused any political action,
Egypt refused the one political step which Israel
suggested that both parties should take at this decisive
moment in the peace-making process-a step towards
peace. That was the only political suggestion made
by Israel.

188. The ugly and evil doings of the Soviet Union
in the Middle East are too many to be enumerated.
Everywhere you boast about your “tremendous”
and “selfless” aid to the Arab countries. But it is
precisely the leaders of certain Arab countries which
have suffered deeply from this so-called “aid” and
the just Arab public opinion that have repeatedly
made clear and forceful exposure of the essence of
the Soviet “aid”. Speaking of the so-called “military
aid”, you have not only reaped fabulous profits
from huge arms deals under the smoke-screen of
your “military aid” by taking advantage of others’
difficulties, but you have even openly interfered
in the internal affairs of Arab countries and demanded
bases and privileges from them and repeatedly resorted
to the cessation of arms supply as a political
blackmail to sabotage the Arab countries’ just war
against Israeli aggression, not to mention your ugly
deeds of grabbing cheap oil from certain Arab
countries and reselling it at high price to others,
including your so-called “allies”. While ostentatiously
condemning Israeli Zionism, you are sending large
numbers of emigrants to Israel to help the Israeli
Zionists strengthen their force of aggression, and you
are flirting with the Israeli Zionists overtly and
covertly and doing things behind the scenes that
cannot bear the light of the day. Styling yourselves
a “natural ally” in the liberation cause of the Arab
and Palestinian people, you are actually sabotaging
their unity and struggle in various fields regarding’
their territories, sovereignty and national rights as
bargaining chips in your contention with the other
super-Power for hegemony in the Middle East. Over
a long period you have refused to recognize the
Palestine Liberation Organ&&ion and you have vilified
the Palestinian people’s armed struggle as “outrageous

184. Egypt’s attitude towards commitment and
Egypt’s arbitrariness in interpreting its own intemational obligations are further illustrated by the
reference made by the representative of Egypt to
the statement made recently by President Sadat
that the Suez Canal would be reopened. That was
presented then, at the time of the statement, and
it was presented again today, as a gesture of goodwill.
What was omitted, however, was that the announcement about the opening of the Suez Canal was also
accompanied by an announcement that Israel-bound
cargoes would not be permitted to go through the
Canal. What was omitted was the fact that Egypt
in January 1974 undertook solemnly to permit the
passage of cargoes through the Canal once it is
opened-without any discrimination, without any
distinction. In other words Egypt, a year later,
was openly declaring to the entire world that it was
about to violate another of its solemnly undertaken
19

,

acts”, in an attempt to write off the Palestine
liberation cause at one stroke. It was merely because
of the change in the Middle East situation that you
have disguised yourselves and changed tactics not
long ago. But in none of these changes have you
departed from your ultimate aim, that is, to maintain
the situation of “no war, no peace” in the Middle
East, so that you may fish in troubled waters and
expand your spheres of influence. But the times have
changed. In face of the daily awakening Arab and
Palestinian people, your social-imperialist tactics have
met with ever stronger opposition, and eventually
you will not escape from the tragic end of being
completely spumed by the Arab and Palestinian
people.

for European Studies of Harvard University; in the
same article he states his own conviction-it is not my
conviction-that it is time for a sweeping Israeli
initiative at a peace settlement.
193. Let me also remind the representative of Israel
of an article-maybe he has not seen it-in yesterday’s
issue of The New? York Times by C. L. Sulzberger,
who I do not think is a friend of the Arabs. I have
the article in front of me; this is what he said: “since
1%7 [Israel] has displayed little diplomatic sense”.
That is perhaps an understatement, but let us accept
it at its face value. And then -Mr. Sulzberger, in
another part of the article said: “The Israelis have
made crucial mistakes in diplomacy*‘. Now there is a
slight crescendo: he is speaking a little more bluntly:
“The Israelis have made crucial mistakes in diplomacy”. And then, in.another part, he said: “Even
in the recent unsuccessful Kissinger shuttle, Jerusalem
failed to give while the giving was good”. I invite
the representative of Israel to read that article.

189. The PRESIDENTCinterpretnrionfrom French):
I call now on the representative of Egypt, who has
asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
190. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): It is reluctantly
that I have to take the floor again, but I am really
obliged to do so. I know that the hour is late, but
I must say a few words in answer to the allegations
of the Israeli representative.

194. I have a lot to say but really I should like
to spare the Council although I am ready to stay
here until midnight or after midnight. What of his
tale about the Egyptian fellah? He always likes to
tell tales. His tale about the Egyptian peasant and his
donkey reminded me of a more famous tale about
someone who was living in Venice, called the
Merchant of Venice, who wanted repayment of his
debts not in money but in human flesh from his
poor prey. It is better not to tell tales about the
Egyptian fellah. The Egyptian fellah has behind him
5,O years of civilization. Mind you, this Egyptian
fellah gave you a lesson in October 1973 and is
ready to give you another lesson. So it is better not
to talk about the Egyptian fellah we all come from.

191. He has once again shown us his way of bypassing and confusing the main issues. He said that
he was qualifying his Government’s request for
non-belligerency as a “modest step” by Egypt. For
us to make a declaration of non-belligerency would
be a “modest step” in the mentality of the Israeli
representative. Well, that step of non-belligerency
will be taken only when there is peace, and I have
said that we are ready for peace under two very clear
conditions: restoration of the rights of the Palestinians,
and withdrawal of the Israeli occupation forces from
all Arab territories. Then we will take that “modest
step”.

195. My last comment is this. I hope I shall not be
obliged to take the floor again but I am ready to take
it. I want him to hear the following words: “You
can fool all of the people some of the time and some
of the people all of the time, but you cannot fool
all of the people all of the time”.

192. The Israeli representative has again said that
his country is justified in the attitude it is taking.
Well, I have to ask him to read some of the comments
of eminent American journalists and scholars and to
see their judgement; and these are people who
cannot be considered as very close friends of the
Arabs or of the Egyptians. I have here in front of
me an article by a Harvard professor, Stanley
Hoffmann, entitled: “A New Policy for Israel”.
published in the April 1975 issue of Foreign Aflairs,
part of which has been reproduced in The New
York Times of 27 March. I am sure many representatives here have read this article of Mr. Hoffmann’s,
in which he writes

1%. The PRESIDENT (interpretatiunfr~m French):
The representative of the Soviet Union wishes to
exercise his right of reply.
197. Mr. OVINNIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)(interpretationfrom Russian): They say that
in the East--possibly in China itself-there is an
allegorical sculpture representing three monkeys.
One of them sees nothing, the second hears nothing,
and the third is dumb. We saw today that the
Chinese representative can pronounce lengthy antiSoviet speeches, although they are prepared beforehand on paper. The Chinese representative said here
today, referring to other countries, that someone
apparently does not want a state either of war or
peace in the Middle East. I thank him for at least
that half recognition that someone else does not

“What is required is a willingness on the part of
Israel, in exchange for its recognition and the
signature of a peace treaty, to accept categorically
and in specific terms its withdrawal from occupied
[Arab] territories.”
Mr. Stanley Hoffmann, for your information, is a
professor of government and chairman of the Center
20

want war in the Middle East. Unlike this, the position of China is quite clear. China would like war
in the Middle East and, if possible, not only in the
Middle East, but I doubt that this position on the
part of Mr. Huang Hua will receive support in the
United Nations.

front of him because he is accusing Egypt and the
Arabs of blocking, of not respecting their word.
We must differ on that, but let us hear some of the
comments and observations from third parties. He
had better listen very carefully to this advice,
because we consider it very wise advice.

198. The PRESIDENT (inferpretation from French):
The representative of Israel has asked for the floor
to speak again in exercise in the right of reply.

203. Let me also put before the Council a statement
by another distinguished American journalist,
Mr. Anthony Lewis. I think Mr. Anthony Lewis is
well known to the Israeli representative, who pretends
he is not acquainted with some of these gentlemen.

199. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I am not acquainted
with the gentlemen-professors, writers and commentators-whom the representative of Egypt quoted
but I am certain that the representative of Egypt is
well acquainted with Mr. Heikal, a confidant of
Egypt’s presidents, who wrote the following:

204. I wish to quote from Mr. Anthony Lewis
because what he says is very relevant to the subject
we are discussing here today. Writing in The New
York Times on 27 March 1975, Mr. Anthony Lewis
said:

“We have two goals before us: one, the elimination of the consequences of the 1967 aggression by
the withdrawal of Israel from the occupied
territories; second, the elimination of the 1948
aggression by the eradication of Israel.”

“First, the land occupied in 1967 is less and
less significant in terms of physical security. New
weapons will cover the distance involved and more.
The next war will be more destructive than the
others, whatever the particular boundaries. And
militarily, time is running against Israel.”

I do not think any additional comment is necessary,
except to observe that the second statement by the
representative of Egypt further convinced me that this
is not a forum for construc_tive discussion or attempts
to take effective steps in the direction of peace.

It is not Egyptians saying that; it is Anthony Lewis:
“The economic power of the Arabs is beginning
to tell, and they are narrowing the gap with Israel
in the mastery of military technology.

200. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The representative of Egypt has the floor.

“Second, retention of the occupied territories
is sapping the already-diminished reservoir of good
will toward Israel in the world. Professor Stanley
Hoffmann of Harvard, one of the wisest foreignaffairs specialists in this country, has written of the
danger of Israel’s ‘isolation, physical and mental,
from its neighbours and indeed from much of the
outside world. The United States is almost the only
pipeline to the word . ..*.

201. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): I have said
that I should be obliged to answer if necessary,
and unfortunately I am obliged to answer. The
representative of Israel says that he is not acquainted
with the gentlemen I am referring to. He must be an
ignorant man not to know this particular gentleman
I am referring to. Perhaps he does not know Professor
Stanley Hoffman-I do not know him either-but
perhaps he knows Mr. C. L. Sulzberger, to whom I
have referred.

“Third, it is a delusion to think that Israel can
ever get true nonbelligerency from her neighbours
unless and until she returns the occupied territories*‘.

202. These are very serious moments. I am just
reminding the representative of Israel of some of the
declarations that are made by persons who are not
Egyptians or Arabs. He is giving me a hundred times
this declaration of Heikal. I do not want to discuss
what HeikaI said or did not say. I am reading some
comments by Americans who are saying, as free and
respected and eminent personalities, either journalists
or scholars, what they think. I am giving the benefit
of their thoughts to this distinguished gathering, the
Security Council, because, as I said in my speech,
time is running out for the change that this professor
has asked for, for a new Israeli initiative, to look
m the future a.nd.to discard the slogans of the past,
as mentioned in The Washington Post article. These
are not my friends. These are distinguished American
journalists and scholars. I can accept what Heikal
said or refute what Heikal said, but I yut this in

That is only one article; I have many others in front
of me. For it happens that there is now an attitude
that Israel should be judged by its deeds. It no longer
can fool everyone it used to fool.
205. The PRESIDENT (interpretation-z
from French):
I call on the representative of Israel in exercise
of his right of reply.
206. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I do not really think a
reply is necessary. I believe it would be superfluous.
I do not think that the members of the Security
Council need any assistance in making their own
appraisal of the presentation of the case by the
representative of Egypt.
21

207. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I call on the representative of China in exercise of
his right of reply.

louder than words. The facts will be crystal-clear
if only one recalls the exposure and condemnation
by certain Arab leaders and the just Arab public
opinion of the deeds committed by your country.
Consequently, there is no need for me to make any
further reply to the shameful statement of the
Soviet representative.

208. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from
Chinese,!: In my previous statement I cited a number
of facts about Soviet social-imperialist aggression and
expansion in the Middle East. These facts have been
repeatedIy exposed by certain Arab leaders and the
just Arab public opinion. Regrettably, however, the
Soviet representative, being in no way able to deny
ail these objective facts, has resorted to slanders and
lies. Yet lies cannot cover up the facts. Facts speak

The meeting rose at 8.05 p.m.
Notes
l See resolution 368 (1975).

22
Who in United Nations, New York

00400

82112024ctober

1983-2300
