United Nations

asdf

Security Council

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7015th meeting

Tuesday, 6 August 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Fernández/Mrs. Perceval/Mr. Oyarzábal . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Henschke
Mrs. Jafarova
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Ms. Lucas
Mr. El Oumni
Mr. Munir
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Nibishaka
Mr. M’Beou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
Letter dated 1 August 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Argentina to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/446)

13-42009 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1342009*

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before resuming
my duties as President of the Council, I should like to
make a brief statement in my national capacity.
When I spoke earlier about the achievements of
the Union of South American Nations (UNASUR), I
forgot to mention the Santa Marta agreement, which
was reached between President Santos Calderón and
President Hugo Chávez Frias. Colombia and Venezuela
were on the verge of an armed conflict, and it was the
then Secretary-General of UNASUR, President Néstor
Kirchner, who acted as mediator in achieving that
agreement. That achievement was a very important one
for me, and has both institutional and personal value.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Moreno Charme (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
The Government of Chile commends Argentina’s
initiative to hold this open debate on cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations in order to
consider the maintenance of international peace and
security from a regional perspective. I thank President
Cristina Fernández for this opportunity.
The Latin America and the Caribbean region is a
zone of peace. That has enabled us to cooperate in our
pursuit of sustainable development as one of the pillars
of stability. For us, meeting the needs of our peoples is,
in essence, a collaborative effort for peace. That vision
guides the Organization of American States, the Union
of South American Nations (UNASUR), the Common
Market of the South (MERCOSUR) and the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States. The task that
we face today is to pursue development through joint
integration projects.
The issue that brings us here today is of particular
relevance to Chile, whose foreign policy is based on
fundamental principles such as the sovereign equality
of States; non-interference; the binding nature of,
and respect for, international treaties; the defense of
democracy and respect for human rights; the peaceful
settlement of disputes; and international cooperation.
Those principles, which are set forth in the Charter of
the United Nations, constitute the basis of international
coexistence and a guarantee of world peace and stability.

2

Collective action is imperative in addressing
traditional and emerging threats. Such action is
strengthened by the involvement of regional and
subregional organizations. That is Chile’s interpretation
of Chapter VIII of the Charter, and that understanding
prompts us to promote effective multilateralism that is
genuinely capable of incorporating the contributions
of regional and subregional organizations to address
crises or conflicts that may affect security and peace.
Our country recognizes the importance of the
inter-American system, which has provided our region
with a set of instruments that constitute a fundamental
political and legal heritage for governance in the
hemisphere. That system should help foster linkages
and coordination between the region and global spheres.
We also wish to highlight the positive relationship
between integration and security in the Latin American
and South American region. The region has been
enriched by the establishment of different regional
and subregional bodies, which we understand to be the
guided by the principles of solidarity, cooperation and
the rule of international law.
Regional agreements have produced a series of
advances under the scope of security in the broadest
sense of the term, such as the declarations of peace in the
Andean region and the establishment of MERCOSUR
and UNASUR. In that connection, Chile attaches
importance to the adoption of democratic provisions,
integration projects and confidence-building measures,
which play an effective role in conflict-prevention,
peacekeeping and post-conflict processes. We would
also like to underscore the role our countries are playing
in the reconstruction of Haiti through the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, as well as the
various forms of cooperation that support different
regional and subregional mechanisms.
We also wish to highlight the contribution that
UNASUR has made in this area. That organization has
drawn attention to the importance of consensus — as you
mentioned in your statement, Madam President — as
well as to transparency in military expenditures, the
establishment of a peace zone in South America, the
peaceful settlement of disputes and political cooperation.
Those are factors that contribute effectively to the
achievement of peace, and they are principles that we,
the member States of UNOSUR, incorporated into the
2012 declaration of South America as a zone of peace.

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

Peace and security in our region is one of the major
drivers of integration, as well as a fundamental element
in making progress along the path to development while
also ensuring the appropriate inclusion of the region as
a whole in the international arena.

This is a very serious issue with a profound impact on
the international system. Brazil is coordinating with
countries that share similar concerns for the benefit of
an international order that respects human rights and
the sovereignty of States.

Collective action can be enhanced through the
involvement of regional and subregional organizations,
in particular in the areas of conflict-prevention,
development and post-conflict situations. As I have
already said, that is how we understand Chapter VIII of
the Charter, inasmuch as we are a country that strongly
promotes multilateralism and its rules.

I welcome the timely statement made on 12 July
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay: “surveillance [programmes]
without adequate safeguards to protect the right to
privacy actually risk impacting negatively on the
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms”.
Pillay also mentioned article 12 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and articles 17 and 18 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
which established, respectively, that “No one shall be
subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy,
family, home or correspondence”, and that “Everyone
has the right to the protection of the law against such
interference or attacks”.

In conclusion, as the Secretary-General said
himself here, the United Nations needs to continue to
strengthen its links with regional organizations as a
critical element of the Organization’s work to achieve a
better and more secure world for all.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to convey to you, Madam President, the
fraternal greetings of President Dilma Rousseff. The
Brazilian Government wishes every success to the
Argentine presidency of the Council for the month of
August.
I also welcome the statements made by
representatives on behalf of the various regional and
subregional organizations, in particular those on behalf
of the Union of South America Nations (UNASUR)
and the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States (CELAC).
You, Madam President, made my task easier by
referring to the interception of communications and
acts of espionage. Such practices violate sovereignty,
harm relations between nations and constitute a
violation of human rights, in particular the right to
privacy and the right of our citizens to information. In
that respect, you have complied with the decision of
the States parties of the Common Market of the South
(MERCOSUR) who met in Montevideo last month.
Yesterday, the Foreign Ministers of MERCOSUR
conveyed to the Secretary-General the position of
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Uruguay and Venezuela
with respect to, and in compliance with, that decision.
The matter will also be placed before various United
Nations bodies, in accordance with the decision and
the document circulated under the symbol A/67/946.

Brazil also associates itself with the repeated
appeals by Ms. Pillay in various forums that efforts
to combat terrorism must necessarily respect human
rights and international humanitarian law. Her position
was incorporated into the decision of the Heads of State
of MERCOSUR as well as the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/12) adopted by the Council this morning.
I would like to welcome for the timely initiative
of the Argentine Republic to hold this open debate,
which involves various dimensions on the coordination
between regional and subregional organizations and the
United Nations. Pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, that coordination already takes
place throughout the world, in different forms and to
various degrees, including in regions characterized
by peace, democracy and cooperation, such as South
America.
In that context, UNASUR has significantly
contributed to the promotion of the ideals and purposes
of the United Nations. The South American Defence
Council establishes an innovative mechanism for
coordination and cooperation among South American
countries in matters of peace and security, including
through greater transparency on military expenditures.
In addition, the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
and the countries of Latin American have decisively
supported the efforts of the United Nations for the
stabilization of Haiti, the only country in the Americas

13-420093

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

where a United Nations peacekeeping mission is
currently deployed.
CELAC constitutes a new mechanism for political
coordination and integration that brings together the
33 countries of South America, Central America and the
Caribbean. One of its main goals is to consolidate Latin
America and the Caribbean as a region of dialogue,
cooperation, integration and peace. In that context, it
is worth recalling the unequivocal support of CELAC
for the legitimate claim of the Argentine Republic for
sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands.
The member States of the zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic have supported a South
Atlantic free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction. We are thereby attempting to bring
closer together the two sides of the South Atlantic as
regions free of nuclear weapons thanks to the Pelindaba
Treaty in Africa and the Treaty of Tlatelolco in Latin
America and the Caribbean. We encourage other regions
to associate themselves to the agenda and look forward
to the convening of a conference for the establishment,
in the shortest possible term, of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East.
(spoke in English)
Chapter VIII of the Charter teaches us that, before
resorting to the Security Council, Member States
must make an effort to attempt to settle disputes
peacefully by means of regional arrangements,
agencies or mechanisms. No issue is more sensitive in
the articulation between regional and United Nations
multilateral spheres than the question of the imposition
of sanctions and the use of force. Even in the recent past,
we have seen the occurrence of unilateral interventions,
which are incompatible with an international order
based on peace, cooperation, solidarity and respect
for international law. It is with that in mind that in the
new world order being created, Brazil has defended the
establishment of a multipolarity based on cooperation,
devoid of unilateralism or exceptionalism, an order that
favours the improvement of multilateralism and aims at
searching for peaceful solutions to the challenges faced
by the Council, based on international law.
Mention should be made of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) in this context, a defense
alliance that does not seem to frame its activities clearly
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
and that has made use of concepts and strategies that
raise problematic and sensitive issues in terms of the

4

articulation between the regional level and the United
Nations system. We are concerned that, historically,
leaders of NATO and member countries have
considered that the organization does not necessarily
require explicit authorization from the Security
Council to resort to coercion. We are also concerned
that NATO has loosely interpreted mandates for action
aimed at promoting international peace and security
authorized by the Security Council. As Brazil has
maintained, including through the Brazilian concept
note on “responsibility while protecting” (S/2011/701,
annex), the Security Council should avail itself of
the institutional means of monitoring the adequate
fulfilment of its mandates.
We are concerned as well that NATO has been
searching to establish partnerships out of its area, far
beyond the North Atlantic, including in regions of
peace, democracy and social inclusion, and that rule
out the presence of weapons of mass destruction in
their territories. It would be extremely grave for the
future of the articulation between regional and global
efforts at promoting peace, as prescribed by the United
Nations, if groups of countries started to unilaterally
define their sphere of action beyond the territory of
their own members.
I would like to underline the important cooperation
that exists today between the United Nations and the
African Union. Through its refined Peace and Security
Architecture, the African Union has contributed to
satisfactorily preventing and solving tensions and
conflicts in the African continent, as in the recent
cases of the Sudan and Somalia. Brazil defends African
solutions to African problems. In that spirit, President
Dilma Rousseff participated at Addis Ababa in the
fiftieth anniversary of the African Union, thereby
reaffirming the Brazilian commitment to strengthen
our partnerships with the African continent.
Brazil welcomes the political commitment of the
Secretary-General and of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and neighbouring countries
to the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. We are confident that,
under the leadership of Brazilian General Carlos
Alberto Santos Cruz, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will play its role in the protection of civilians.
The military component, however, should be seen as
a tool in support of a political strategy, and, as Special

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

Envoy Mary Robinson has mentioned, as one part of
a comprehensive approach that embraces security and
development.
In the case of Guinea-Bissau, we welcome the
emphasis that the Security Council has placed on the
importance that stakeholders involved in mediation
efforts speak with one voice. The international
community must avoid any possible discrepancy
between the positions of regional and subregional
groups that are closer to a conflict or a specific situation
and the positions of other geographically broader
entities. The harmonization of messages and positions
between the regional and the multilateral strengthen
international efforts towards peace. Conversely,
discrepancies weaken our peace efforts.
The Brazilian Government remains deeply
concerned about the violence in Syria and strongly
supports the work of United Nations-League of Arab
States Joint Special Representative Lakhdar Brahimi.
His efforts should provide a synthesis of the possibilities
for an articulation of the regional and multilateral levels
in international relations.
We cannot help but take careful note of the words of
the Chair of the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry of the Human Rights Council, Paulo Sérgio
Pinheiro, to the General Assembly on 29 July, when he
stated “There is no military solution to this conflict”
and that “Those who supply arms to the various warring
parties are not creating the ground for victory but rather
the illusion of victory”. Mr. Pinheiro also highlighted
that that was “a dangerous and irresponsible illusion,
as it allows the war to unfurl endlessly before us” and
“it opens the door to further immense human suffering
and the possible conflagration of an entire region”. As
reiterated on several occasions, including at the Council
on 23 July, Brazil supports the holding of, and is ready
to contribute to, a new Geneva conference as soon
as possible, so as to promote an inclusive, Syrian-led
political process leading to a transition that corresponds
to the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.
Brazil considers it fundamental to reverse the
impasse and paralysis that have characterized the
peace process between Palestinians and Israelis. It
is a regrettable situation in which neither regional
organizations nor the United Nations, as a multilateral
organization, have reached tangible results. The
plurilateral mechanism that is professedly responsible
for the issue — the Quartet — has been inoperative.

I reiterate that the Brazilian Government considers it
fundamental that the Security Council fully assume its
responsibilities and refrain from outsourcing its role to
third parties, unless that can translate into measurable
results for the promotion of peace.
In that context, the Brazilian Government supports
the mediation efforts carried out by United States
Secretary of State John Kerry and notes with satisfaction
the announcement of the resumption of negotiations
between Palestinians and Israelis, with the objective
of reaching a comprehensive peace agreement in nine
months, which shall culminate in the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State. We welcome Israel’s
decision to free 104 Palestinians from its prisons and
hope that the gesture will contribute to the muchawaited realization of a two-State solution on the basis
of the 1967 borders.
Finally, allow me once more to welcome the
Argentine initiative of promoting this debate.
Opportunities to discuss topics directly related to the
core mandate of the Security Council are important,
not only to contribute to the constant updating of
the political guidance and working methods of the
Council, but also because they allow us to underline
the importance of basing our efforts for the promotion
of peace on the strict observance of the Charter and
of Council resolutions. They also bring to the fore the
need to permanently improve our coordination aimed at
the construction of a Council attuned to contemporary
reality, including as concerns its composition.
In that connection, Brazil would like to highlight
the paragraph of the presidential statement it adopted
today, according to which,
“The Council further encourages enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and
the regional and subregional organizations and
arrangements to foster a global dialogue for the
promotion of tolerance and peace, to promote
better understanding across countries, cultures and
civilizations”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia.
Mr. Choquehuanca Céspedes (Plurinational State
of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Today is 6 August, the
day that my country celebrates its independence. I
should like to welcome the struggle, the rebellion and

13-420095

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

the resistance of my people, who for centuries did not
give up and will never give up peace and harmony.
Today Bolivia is experiencing a revolutionary process
that is sustained by democracy and the conscience of
the people.
Here in the twenty-first century, we feel that it is
anachronistic to maintain the categories of permanent
and non-permanent members of the Security Council.
After 68 years, it is clear that some of these so-called
super-Powers were and still are the causes of conflicts
and wars in different parts of the world. Preserving
peace is not and will not be the result of the existence
of international policemen, but rather as a result of the
promotion of social justice, equity, complementarity,
solidarity and respect between States.
Latin America is an emerging zone of peace thanks
to the desire of its leaders to write its history without
oversight from other Powers. While NATO organizes
interventions in South America, the Union of South
American Nations has averted coups and conflicts of
various kinds. The existence of two categories violates
the principle of the equality of rights among States,
whether large or small, as established by the Charter
of the United Nations. In the twenty-first century,
the existence of monarchistic practices within the
United Nations is unacceptable. Those who claim to
be promoters and defenders of democracy in the world
must be the first to set an example and must respect
the basic principles of democracy within the United
Nations.
So long as we fail to discuss these substantive issues,
international peace and security will not be guaranteed
no matter how many cooperation programmes we have.
The day will come when all States Member of the
United Nations exercise their rights and participate in
equal conditions — in other words, when there is true
democracy in the United Nations. So long as the veto
exists, we will not have a true democratization of the
United Nations. We will have first-class and secondclass nations. All Members of the United Nations must
be equal in all its bodies. We must achieve the equality
of rights of large and small nations enshrined in the
United Nations Charter.
The Security Council’s action has not been
participatory. We require a Security Council that is
transparent, democratic and flexible; that acts with
authority; but above all, that is open to the vigilance of
all of the Members of the United Nations. In important

6

matters, the General Assembly must have the power to
review and to take a stand on issues and not simply leave
it in the hands of the Security Council. Transforming the
Security Council and the comprehensive transformation
of the United Nations are critical to enabling us to
tackle the various crises that have begun to merge and
that affect the important issues facing humankind and
the planet, such as energy, finance, food and climate
change.
Before concluding, I should like to express our
rejection and condemnation of the practice of espionage
on the part of the United States. I should also like to
express the grief and indignation of my people and my
Government over the act of aggression experienced
by President Evo Morales Ayma, which has been
described by the international community as offensive,
humiliating, discriminatory, colonialistic, unfriendly,
and a violation of human rights and international
standards. Given the grave nature of these facts, we ask
the United Nations to clarify these events and to take
measures to guarantee human rights and international
law so that no one will have to suffer such violations
again.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Jaua Milano (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I should
like to convey to the members of the Council and all
those present at this debate the greetings of the President
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Nicolás
Maduro Moros. He asked me in particular to convey
to you, President Cristina, his pleasure at seeing you
assuming with dignity and courage this very important
global responsibility. In Venezuela, we are sure that all
of Latin America and the Caribbean are deeply proud
of you. President Maduro reiterates before the United
Nations his firm commitment to continuing to fly the
banner of peace, social justice, cooperation and the
self-determination of peoples, bearing in mind the
historic legacy of Commander President Hugo Chávez
Frías, leader of the Bolivarian revolution.
Today, we join in the pleasure of the Bolivian people
on its national holiday, and recall the commemoration
of the 200 years of the triumphant entry of the liberator
Simón Bolívar into the town of Caracas after having
carried out a successful campaign that began in
December of 1812 in New Granada. We must always

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

remember that, when united, we South Americans will
achieve independence, and united we are achieving
independence, equality and democracy for our peoples.
On behalf of the States members of the Southern
Common Market (MERCOSUR), we congratulate
you, Madam President, and the people of Argentina
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council,
entrusted with maintaining international peace and
security. Today in the Latin American and Caribbean
region, there are no conflicts between countries that
would endanger global or regional peace. On the
contrary, we have seen more and more initiatives of
regional and subregional integration that promote
dialogue and trust among peoples and prevent and
avoid conflicts between States through innovative
mechanisms. We continue to strengthen our democratic
systems, creating the conditions in every country and
the entire bloc to build a culture of peace.
The Union of South American Nations (UNASUR),
the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our
America, PetroCaribe and MERCOSUR, which I am
proud to represent here, are among those regional
integration initiatives that, in a very short time, have
made major achievements in sustaining peace and
preserving democracy in our region.
Peace cannot be achieved in the world without
social justice and without eradicating once and for
all hunger, poverty, illiteracy, malnutrition, and the
wide technological divides — in other words, without
guaranteeing to all the resources necessary for their full
development in equal conditions. Nor can we achieve
peace without guaranteeing the effective participation of
citizens in political matters and in controlling their own
destinies — in other words, without the entrenchment
of democratic systems as a way of guaranteeing a social
state of law and justice. It is in these aspects where the
Latin American and Caribbean integration has made
progress, showing that we can identify joint formulas
to achieve the well-being of our peoples in democracy.
In particular, we note that MERCOSUR has
gone from being a commercial agreement to being a
very important social mechanism, creating common
institutions endowed with the human and material
resources to work in these areas. Furthermore,
MERCOSUR’s commitment to democracy has been
clear throughout its existence. The instruments,
declarations, decisions and resolutions of MERCOSUR

have sought democracy and peace in the region,
including by preventing coups and other attempts to
frustrate the democratic will of our peoples, promoted
by fascistic movements represented by political and
economic leaders that are found particularly in media
corporations. These movements attack democratic
Governments and peoples that have chosen the path
of independence, social inclusion and the grassroots democratization of our societies. These groups
and movements, which ignore election results and
democratic institutions and promote political violence,
pose the greatest threat to political stability in our
region.
The timely and firm action of MERCOSUR, along
with other regional and subregional organizations,
managed to stop attempted coups in Paraguay in 1996
and 1999, thereby guaranteeing democratic order.
Similarly, in 2006 and 2007, MERCOSUR condemned
and took action to prevent attempts to divide Bolivia
as a way of weakening the democratic Government of
President Evo Morales. Likewise, the Foreign Ministers
of the countries members of MERCOSUR condemned
the attempted coup against President Rafael Correa
in Ecuador on 30 September 2010, joining with other
regional blocs to issue a joint warning to the world and
prevent that crime from taking place.
Although it could not be prevented, MERCOSUR
acted decisively in the parliamentary coup against
President Fernando Lugo of Paraguay in June 2012. On
that occasion, the Foreign Ministers of MERCOSUR
and UNASUR travelled to Asunción with the intention
of starting a dialogue and preventing the interruption
of the constitutional order. That was not achieved, and
the bloc had to temporarily suspend the Republic of
Paraguay until its political institutional and democratic
situation was normalized through the holding of
elections. More recently, MERCOSUR issued a timely
appeal for respect for the popular will and democratic
institutions of my country, Venezuela, following
rejection by the defeated candidate of the results of the
elections on 15 April and his call to violence.
We stress that MERCOSUR has been able
to circumvent these situations with peaceful and
democratic mechanisms, without economic blockades,
military intervention, indiscriminate bombing or
armed intervention of any kind. We believe that the
only way to defeat violence is with greater democracy
and peaceful means.

13-420097

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

MERCOSUR has also participated in issues that
affect international peace and security, such as the coup
in Honduras against President Zelaya, and, inter alia, the
situations in the Middle East, the Korean peninsula and
the Balkan peninsula when it was engulfed in conflict.
MERCOSUR has also created its own institutions in
order to deepen and preserve democracy, including the
MERCOSUR Center for the Promotion of the Rule of
Law and the MERCOSUR Democracy Observatory,
among others.
MERCOSUR reiterates its support for United
Nations reform, including that of the Security
Council, with a view to giving greater legitimacy to its
composition and decision-making process in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter, among them the sovereign equality of States.
The words of President Hugo Chávez Frías before the
General Assembly during the closing meeting of the
Millennium Summit on 8 September 2000 remain valid
today. It is an appeal to continue working earnestly to
achieve the democratization of the Security Council.
Commander Chávez proposed
“that democratization of the Security Council be
faced and achieved. But it must be done because
if it is not, many said we could lose the credibility
of the message and the debate on democracy and
equality, which is spoken of frequently in these
forums. This is so necessary in order to effect
change in the world.” (A/55/PV.8, p. 37)
In the opinion of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, unfortunately, in recent times we have been
concerned to see that, on the contrary, some countries
have continued to assert their political, military and
economic power and distorted the very essence of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. They have gone so far as
to use the Security Council as a platform to encourage
armed interventions against sovereign States and
peoples with a view to promoting the poorly named
regime change, in contravention of all principles of
international law.
We reject ongoing colonial situations that undermine
the maintenance of international peace and security,
such as the violation of Argentinian sovereignty over
the Malvinas Islands. In this sense, the States members
of MERCOSUR reassert their full support for the
sovereign rights of the Republic of Argentina over this
island territory. Similarly, we continue to condemn

8

and call for an end to the criminal economic blockade
against the honourable and brotherly Republic of Cuba,
as well as compliance with relevant United Nations
resolutions. Furthermore, as a major contribution to
achieving peace in the Middle East, in particular the
question of Palestine, the Council must address as
soon as possible the legitimate request of the State of
Palestine to be admitted as a full-fledged Member of
the United Nations.
As Foreign Minister of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela and as Pro-Tempore President of
MERCOSUR, I take this opportunity to reiterate our
firm condemnation of the insult to the office of the
President of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, President
Evo Morales, when some European Governments did
not permit the overflight or landing of the aircraft
transporting him. That was not only a hostile,
unfounded, discriminatory and arbitrary action, but
also a flagrant violation of the precepts of international
law. Similarly, we reject the actions of global espionage
carried out by the Government of the United States,
which undermine the sovereignty of States and which
we have become familiar through the revelations of the
former security contractor, Edward Snowden.
Given the seriousness of these reports of computer
espionage on a global scale, recognized by the SecretaryGeneral of the International Telecommunication Union
himself, the United Nations must initiate a broad
multilateral discussion that would make it possible to
design agreements to safeguard the sovereignty and
security of States in the light of such illegal practices.
MERCOSUR has begun action to promote a discussion
on this matter so that we can open an appropriate
investigation within the United Nations and punish and
condemn this violation of international law.
We reiterate our condemnation of actions that could
undermine the power of States to fully implement the
right of humanitarian asylum. In this respect, we reject
any attempt to pressure, harass or criminalize a State
or third party over the sovereign decision of any nation
to grant asylum, which is enshrined in all international
conventions. Likewise, we express our solidarity with
the Governments of Bolivia and Nicaragua, which,
like Venezuela, have offered asylum to Mr. Snowden,
as expressed by the Heads of State of MERCOSUR in
the decision concerning the universal recognition of
the right of political asylum, issued in Montevideo on
12 July. These three matters were discussed yesterday
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

compliance with the mandate of the Presidents of
MERCOSUR, at his meeting with the Foreign Ministers
of our organization seeking due treatment from United
Nations bodies.
Lastly, MERCOSUR reaffirms its commitment to
the common cause of international peace and security
guided by shared values in building a pluripolar
system that is free of hegemony and contributes to
strengthening a multicentric and inclusive world with
unlimited respect for international law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Almagro (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to begin by congratulating President
Cristina Fernández de Kirchner and the delegation of
Argentina on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and on having convened this high-level open
debate aimed at strengthening our understanding of
the role of regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security and
incorporating new regional and subregional actors
that reflect the dynamics of sociopolitical realities
throughout all regions of our planet.
Uruguay also welcomes the presence of
the representatives of regional and subregional
organizations, in particular from Latin America and
the Caribbean, including the Common Market of
the South, the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States, the Union of South American Nations
(UNASUR), and the Organization of American States,
and our dear friends from the League of Arab States.
Notwithstanding the responsibility that the Charter
of the United Nations Charter entrusts to the Security
Council in maintaining international peace and
security, regional and subregional entities make a clear
and ineluctable contribution to preventing, resolving or
minimizing most of the situations that threaten global
peace. The South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone
is a contribution of our countries to protecting our region
from military adventurism. It has opened a path to
cooperation, completely changing the logic in the South
Atlantic with respect to the North Atlantic, which has
its defence mechanisms and its military alliances. This
strategy, which has been strengthened politically by the
importance attached to it by such organizations as the
African Union and UNASUR, to which our countries
belong in our respective regions, is also strengthened
by the greater interaction achieved through the Africa-

South America summit that took place in Abuja,
Margarita Island, and Equatorial Guinea. These entities
recognize the Zone as a fundamental instrument for
promoting peace, security and cooperation among our
countries.
The South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone
embodies a commitment to the essential values of
peaceful coexistence, democracy and respect for
human rights. For our countries, these are fundamental
and undeniable principles. The Zone is an initiative of
international scope, and we manage it in strict respect
for the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
including the sovereignty and legal equality of States
and the peaceful settlement of disputes, as well as
non-interference in internal affairs of other countries.
As current Chairman of the Zone, I note some of the
fundamental provisions of our Montevideo Declaration.
Our meeting in that city helped to reiterate our
commitment to the consolidation of the South Atlantic
as a zone of peace and cooperation free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. We
urge other States to recognize it as such.
We know that the very existence of weapons of mass
destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, remains
a serious threat to humankind, creating tension and
mistrust among peoples. We believe that progress in the
multilateral agenda, especially concerning compliance
with disarmament obligations under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, must be a high
priority for Member States.
The South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone
countries clearly recall the 1994 declaration of the Zone
on the denuclearization of the South Atlantic, adopted at
the third ministerial meeting. We are therefore doing all
we can to ban and prevent in our respective territories
and territorial waters the use, manufacture, production,
acquisition, reception, storage and deployment of
all nuclear weapons, as well as any direct or indirect
attempt to encourage any of these activities in the
South Atlantic. In that regard, we urge the international
community to respect the Zone’s status.
In addition to the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean
and the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty,
which are currently in force, we urge the international
community to fully respect the denuclearized status
of our Zone. Our countries are unfailingly committed
to disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation, and the

13-420099

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

peaceful use of nuclear energy, the three pillars of the
Non-Proliferation Treaty.
We also understand the importance of preventive
diplomacy, mediation and good offices, and the
establishment, maintenance and consolidation of
peace to the maintenance of international peace and
security; the key importance of avoiding the escalation
of conflicts and of settling disputes; and the important
role played by women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and in building peace. We highlight the
importance of their full participation in all initiatives
to maintain peace and security, and the need to increase
their participation in decision-making with respect to
prevention and resolution of conflicts.
Our country is concerned by the negative role
played by the exploitation of natural resources in the
exacerbation of conflicts. We welcome efforts under
way in Africa, in particular on the part of the States
members of the Zone, to implement a legal framework
designed to address this practice. In this respect, we
urge the international community to support these
efforts.
For Uruguay and the South Atlantic Peace and
Cooperation Zone, it is crucial to stress the importance
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations, to which
some States members of the Zone are contributors. We
recognize the potential for cooperation in strengthening
the capacity of member States of the Zone to take part
in peacekeeping operations. We also reaffirm the need
to support the peace processes under way, as well as
the United Nations peacekeeping operations deployed
in States member in the Zone. We reiterate the need
to further study mechanisms and possibilities for
cooperation in peacekeeping operations.
The South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone
supports the efforts of its member States in promoting
the principle of the peaceful resolution of conflicts and
the quest for negotiated solutions to territorial conflicts
which affect member States of the zone. In that respect,
the Zone calls for the resumption of negotiations
between the Government of the Argentine Republic
and the United Kingdom, in accordance with resolution
General Assembly resolution 2065 (XX) and other
resolutions of the General Assembly on the question
of the Malvinas Islands with a view to finding a just,
lasting and peaceful solution as soon as possible.
We also reaffirm General Assembly resolution 31/49,
which calls on both parties to the dispute concerning

10

the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South
Sandwich Islands, and the surrounding maritime areas
to refrain from taking decisions that would involve the
introduction of unilateral changes in the situation while
the Islands go through the process recommended in
resolutions of the General Assembly. In that context,
we are concerned to see the development of illegitimate
activities of oil exploration in the zone in dispute.
Uruguay, as Chairman of the South Atlantic Peace
and Cooperation Zone, maintains along with other
countries of the Zone, that we must eliminate the vision
of the South Atlantic as a stage for strategic action
between antagonistic States with competing interests.
The South Atlantic is a geostrategic area that endows
our countries, through the South Atlantic Peace and
Cooperation Zone, with a new instrument to move
forward in the major objectives of the international
community: peace, security and the development of our
societies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Holguín Cuéllar (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): I should like to start by stating our pleasure
at seeing you, Madam President, presiding over this
meeting of the Security Council, and by congratulating
you on your initiative to convene this important debate.
Colombia shares the proposed objective as contained
in the concept note before us (S/2013/446, annex),
which invites us to consider this matter from a broad
perspective and to identify options to strengthen and
deepen cooperation between the Security Council and
regional and subregional organizations.
I express my gratitude for the briefings by the
representatives of the African Union and the League
of Arab States, and I welcome the presence for the first
time before the Security Council of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States and the Union of
South American Nations (UNASUR).
The regional and subregional organizations play
an increasingly important role in the work of the
Security Council, and their activities in the field of the
maintenance of international peace and security are
more effective when they work in a coordinated manner
and their perspectives are taken into account. Libya,
Yemen, Mali, Côte d’Ivoire, Somalia, the Sudan and
South Sudan are just a few examples of countries where
the contributions of those organizations have been

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

instrumental vis-à-vis the decisions of the Security
Council.
In the Americas, Haiti is an example of the results
that can be gained from cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
Resolution 2070 (2012) recognized the positive efforts
that UNASUR had deployed in Haiti with tangible
results. In that regard, I would like to highlight the
leadership as well as the technical and financial support
that Argentina has given to the UNASUR technical
secretariat in Haiti.
The fulfilment of the mandate of the Security
Council benefits from the understanding of the
geographical, social, cultural and political context
that regional and subregional organizations have
with respect to crises or conflicts on its agenda. That
aspect is especially relevant to my country, which
acknowledges the way in which the international
community, in particular our regional partners, has
understood the importance of backing the initiative of
President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón to hold peace
talks with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia. The positive effect of reaching an agreement
to end the conflict and the achievement of a definitive
peace in Colombia will without question redound to the
benefit of the region. In that respect, we would like to
thank Cuba, Venezuela and Chile for their support for
the process.

It is of the utmost importance that, pursuant
to Chapter VIII, priority be given to regional and
subregional mechanisms to resolve matters relating to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
before referring them to the Security Council. The
search for political and diplomatic solutions to conflict
situations and the strict adherence to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the Organization and to
international law must be the cornerstone that supports
collective international security.
Some decades ago, State actors were the only
protagonists in history, and the main threats to their
peace and security came from other States. Today,
States have realized that they face common threats
that originate from international networks which are
involved in trafficking and crimes of various kinds.
The world of today requires cooperation in different
ways and between different regions. Reality has shown
us that those threats cannot be combated by countries
on an individual basis.
The nature of the crimes that we face today requires
us to cooperate and join our efforts. It is in that sense
that agreements between countries and organizations
from different geographical regions have to be
understood. Those crimes are transnational in nature
and should be fought as such. That is how countries
such as Colombia, which have suffered from the actions
of criminal organizations, understand it.

One of the challenges that the United Nations
faces in its dialogue with regional and subregional
organizations is finding common ground to build
positive agendas aimed at strengthening those areas
in which the experience of regional or subregional
organizations represents a substantive contribution that
will have an impact on the ground.

Cooperation and confidence-building have positive
impacts on all countries and regions, which is why,
to fulfil its mandate, the Security Council needs the
support of strong, capable regional and subregional
organizations that are prepared to resolve in a timely
fashion the conflict situations that arise in their
respective areas.

Perspectives that are closer to the realities of the
regions enrich and give greater understanding to the
analysis and understanding of a situation of crisis
under study. That implies having an open mind and
considering alternatives for a solution that may not
coincide with universally applicable formulas. That
is why we reiterate the importance of strengthening
consultation, dialogue and coordination mechanisms
between the Council and such organizations, in order
to provide long-term solutions to crises and ensure that
the Council bears in mind in an effective manner that
interaction when, among other aspects, it analyses the
renewal of mandates for peacekeeping operations.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Patiño Aroca (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the delegation of Argentina for the invitation
extended to the Government of Ecuador to take part
in today’s important event. We are honoured by the
fact that you, Madam President, are presiding over a
body of this nature with the great ability, leadership
and strength you show as President of the Argentine
Republic.
During the recent summit of the Common Market
of the South (MERCOSUR) that took place on 12 July

13-4200911

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

in Montevideo, the States convened resolved to “request
Argentina to submit the matter of the massive espionage
case uncovered by Edward Snowden for consideration
by the Security Council”. They also resolved to
“demand that those responsible for those actions
immediately cease therefrom and provide explanations
of their motivations and their consequences”. In similar
terms, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our
America spoke at the last Guayaquil, summit which was
held just five days ago, when it was decided to “warn
the international community about the seriousness of
these actions, which imply a threat to the security and
peaceful coexistence among our States”.
This takes place in a context where undoubtedly
Latin American regional authorities are assuming a
growing role when it comes to collective security, which
was commendibly cited by you, Madam President,
and by my colleagues in their earlier statements.
Accordingly, I will not refer to matters already covered
in statements that, to no one’s surprise, are designed
to honour Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, which brings us here today.
In compliance with the MERCOSUR agreement
referred to previously, which we endorse, I would like
to make the following statement.
Just a few weeks ago, the world saw a sequence
of events more akin to a Cold War spy novel than to
modern times. On 5 June, leaks began to appear in
publications in major global media outlets, leaks that
were mixed with almost deathly intent and unspooled
as a reality show before global public opinion. The
leaks came from a former 29-year-old American analyst
who sought to escape deportation to his country, where
he would be tried for those leaks. After a journey that
began in Hong Kong and was supposed to end in Latin
America, today, it seems to have stopped, but it may not
yet have completely run its course, despite the granting
of asylum by Russia.
During those few days in June, we saw the size
and the discretional nature of a massive surveillance
apparatus that suddenly brought all the inhabitants of
the planet closer than ever to an Orwellian nightmare.
Although at first it appeared to be a simple matter of
wiretapping, it was later discovered that there was
discretionary monitoring of emails. While it seemed
initially that the apparatus was being used in operations
against organized crime, later we learned that it was
also being used to gain advantage in trade negotiations

12

with other countries. If we once thought that they were
simply looking at unaffected States, we now know that
everyone — absolutely everyone: debtors and creditors,
friends and enemies, South and North — is considered
a usual suspect by the authorities of the United States of
America. Now we know that our communications are
permanently monitored by them.
No one knows yet if Mr. Snowden will once again
manage to leak information that he claims to possess.
Of course, it seems that he will not do it when he is in
Russia. In any case, the wounds opened by those events
should be assessed within the main multilateral forums.
They deserve to be so because not only do they reflect
an unacceptable imbalances in the global governance
system, which in no case would help to build a climate
of trust and cooperation between countries, and, in
the final analysis, a climate of peace among nations.
They deserve to be assessed because we have also have
moved dangerously close to the limits set out by the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The imbalances to which I refer are clear — the
United States, like any other countries, has the need
to deal with demands related to its national security, it
goes without saying, but those legitimate demands must
be dealt with in a way that does not affect the rights of
individuals or indeed the sovereignty of other nations.
That is to say, limits must be set. However, we are now
faced with the fact that any limits there may have been
have vanished. The national security of the United
States has been placed above all universal moral values.
Such a drive has meant that the principles of equality
and non-interference in the affairs of States, established
in the Westphalia peace agreement, have now vanished
into thin air. The 1948 Universal Declaration of Human
Rights has been violated. The rights to the privacy
of correspondence — article 12 — and to freedom of
expression and opinon — article 19 — the rights of all
citizens of the world, including United States citizens,
have been trampled in the name of a greater goal, that
is, national security — or rather, for the sake of the
profits of the national security industry.
Where are the limits, really? Has the time not
come for the Council to take up this question again and
discuss it? In the end, does this not pose a threat to
global peace? What mutual trust could possibly exist
among nations under such circumstances? We believe
that the time has come for the United Nations to face up
to this matter responsibly.

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

As we have seen with the disappearance of such
limits, this situation threatens to build walls between
our countries. If it has not done so already, it could
also affect international cooperation against organized
crime; strangely enough, there is even the possibility that
trade negotiations could be disrupted. Paradoxically,
even the very national security of the United States will
suffer from the increase in global mistrust generated by
massive espionage.
The events to which I have referred have also
revealed other very disturbing realities. To start
off with, it has re-ignited the debate on the right to
asylum, which all human beings have, as enshrined in
international law, as well as the ability of any sovereign
State to grant it. This is a right that is granted to avoid
fear of political persecution; its legitimacy can only
be determined by the country granting it. Let us also
remember its peaceful and humanitarian nature, which
cannot in any case be described as unfriendly towards
any other State, as established in General Assembly
resolution 2312 (XXII), on territorial asylum. I should
also like to quote Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, on the case at hand:
“Snowden’s case has shown the need to protect
persons disclosing information on matters that
have implications for human rights, as well as the
importance of ensuring respect for the right to
privacy.”
Leaders, who should be giving explanations and
facing up to the debate on the limits of what we are
discussing, have instead launched a crusade against
the right to asylum — a full-on diplomatic offensive
against countries that have taken to the global stage to
show interest in such an important case. States to the
Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America
(ALBA), have been under pressure, simply because
they are considering a request for asylum. All those
countries have have signed the 1954 Caracas Convention
on Territorial Asylum, which is perhaps one of the most
important instruments of the Inter-American human
rights system.
The day the United States signs that treaty — even
the day it ratifies the San José pact, one of the foundations
of the Inter-American system of human rights — we
will be closer to seeing that country adhere to the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, and it will
become a part of a group of equal nations, committed to
complying with international law.

Instead of joining this group, we find ourselves
with a country that prefers to lunge forwards and blame
the messanger in order to cloud the message. The final
result was that a group of countries decided to endanger
the life of the President of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, forcing him and his entourage to make an
emergency landing in violation of international norms
governing respectful relations among nations.
It is not the revelation of the offence that threatens
the climate of understanding among nations, it is the
offence itself. In a fragile world where armed conflicts
are barely affected by international pressure, such
actions do not help generate trust but tension.
I would like to conclude with two comments.
First, the Government of Ecuador fully supports
the request of the Bolivian Government that the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights conduct an exhaustive investigation into the
unjustifiable treatment suffered by President Evo
Morales Ayma during his trip from Moscow to La Paz.
Secondly, massive global, discretionary and
unlimited surveillance must stop. It is for the Security
Council to urgently make that demand of one of its
permanent members, since, theoretically, it is up to this
body to maintain peace on our planet. That, too, is the
demand of Latin America, a zone of peace that, through
organizations such as MERCOSUR and ALBA, has
demanded an end to those practices. It is also required
by the spirit of coexistence, which inspired the drafting
of the Charter of the United Nations. It is also the appeal
of billions of people in the world who understand that
any action that aims to ensure the security of a country
has its limits, which are the human rights of everyone
on the planet.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Casimir (Haiti) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the Government of Haiti, allow me, first of all, to
congratulate you, Madam President, for taking the
initiative to convene this debate on such an important
issue, that is, cooperation between the United Nations,
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace.
Cooperation between the United Nation and regional
organizations in maintaining peace is longstanding.
The principle underpinning it is enshrined in the

13-4200913

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

Charter of the United Nations, specifically in Chapter
VIII, Articles 53 and 54.
The United Nations not only recognizes regional
organizations as fully fledged actors in peaceful conflict
resolution but also stipulates that the Security Council,
without renouncing its monopoly to authorizing the
use of force, except in the event of legitimate defence,
can confer upon a regional organization the mandate
for applying enforcement measures taken under its
authority.
The past two decades have seen a significant growth
in the role of regional and subregional organizations
in peacekeeping organizations, especially in Africa,
Europe and the Americas. The proliferation of regional
conflicts, accompanied all too often by their ensuring
tragedies and atrocities, has made cooperation between
the United Nations and regional institutions a mainstay
of international relations. To see that, one need look no
further than a number of peacebuilding or peacekeeping
operations carried out in recent years on virtually every
continent and in a large number of countries dealing
with the scourge of war, conflicts of all kinds, political
upheavals and civil war.
My own country, the Republic of Haiti, has
undergone a terrible and extreme political upheaval,
making its own descent into hell, from which,
fortunately, it is now emerging with the assistance of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. In
that regard, I would like to thank the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, the Common
Market of the South, the Union of South American
Nations, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of
Our America, the Caribbean Community and the
Latin American and Caribbean Economic System for
their constant attention and interest in Haiti. I would
like to recall that during the past 25 years, my country
of Haiti has been subject to several interventions by
our multilateral Organization and by regional and
subregional organizations, and sometimes both together.
I have in mind the joint Organization of American
States/United Nations mission to which the SecretaryGeneral referred in his statement this morning. While
commending such international solidarity, we must
nevertheless recognize, as the representative of Cuba
emphasized in his statement, that missions must align
themselves with the priorities defined by the Haitian
Government so that we will not have to go down the
same road, for the same reasons, in a few years’ time.
It is thus Haiti’s fervent wish that the United Nations

14

Stabilization Mission in Haiti, which is currently
deployed in our country, should achieve the goals it was
created for. To that end, it can count on the assistance
of the Haitian Government in furthering the welfare of
the people of Haiti and achieving peace and security in
the region.
However, we are compelled to conclude that, despite
the inarguably spectacular development and success
of the cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, when it comes to maintaining
peace it still falls well short of the level that its potential
might lead one to hope for, and that the international
community has the right to expect. And despite its
successes, there are still many challenges, particularly
regional organizations’ lack of resources. The Republic
of Haiti is one of many that believe that — given the
maturity that regional organizations have acquired
over time, the configuration of the world today and
the constantly evolving international situation — a
new model is needed for relations between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the area of the
maintenance of peace.
We should recall that as far back as 20 years, ago
the Secretary-General was already calling for a model
based on decentralization and delegation of authority
in An Agenda for Peace (S/24111). Yes, various
coordination and consultation mechanisms exist, and
the record of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations is far from negligible. Haiti
is happy to bear witness to that. But as was recently
emphasized again in Security Council resolution 2033
(2012), there is a feeling today that it is essential, in
the spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter, to combine
the international legitimacy and legality of the United
Nations with the advantages of regionalism.
It is therefore incumbent on the international
community today to bridge that gap, as the Security
Council has called on us to do. We must effectively
reforge and renew the essential partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations, basing
it on well-defined principles and endowing it with a
precise legal framework and the resources necessary
to allow those regional organizations to fully play
their due role alongside the United Nations in a spirit
of complementarity and in every area where their
cooperation is desirable. The Secretary-General of the
Organization of American States would not disagree
with this, whether the issue is one of conflict prevention,

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

peacebuilding, electoral assistance, humanitarian
action or monitoring respect for human rights.
In that spirit, the Republic of Haiti will continue to
work with all who believe that the role and involvement
of regional organizations in maintaining international
peace is now more essential than ever and should
continue to grow in the future. In welcoming the
initiative taken to institute this dialogue, I trust that it
will open new lines of thought and for concrete action
aimed at continued cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of the Organization of
American States.
Mr. Insulza: I would like to begin by greeting
the Argentinian presidency of the Security Council,
led today by Her Excellency Cristina Fernández de
Kirchner. I would like to thank her for giving us the
opportunity to share our experience of regional and
subregional efforts in the area of international peace
and security.
Article 1 of the Charter of the Organization of
American States (OAS) stipulates that “[w]ithin the
United Nations, the Organization of American States is
a regional agency”. Article 2 adds that the Organization,
“in order to put into practice the principles on which
it is founded and to fulfill its regional obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations, proclaims
the following essential purposes: (a) To strengthen
the peace and security of the continent”.
There is no more essential or valuable area
of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations than the maintenance of
peace and security. That goal suggests the essence of
multilateralism — achieving peace and harmony among
nations, within a framework of respect for the law and
creating a climate of security for all. The States of the
Americas and their regional organization, the oldest
expression of multilateralism in the world, have always
been guided by those principles and have contributed,
through their own reality and as their own abilities
permit, to their spread and vigour on a global scale.
Thus, along with the foundation of the OAS in 1948,
we signed the American Treaty on Pacific Settlement,
the Pact of Bogotá, which since it was established
has formed the foundation for settling every possible
conflict situation that has developed in our region over

the years. That instrument, together with others signed
during the period of the Panamerican Union and after
1948, has succeeded, over more than half a century of
multilateral action, in making our continent the most
peaceful region in the world. It is a region that during
this period has not been involved in any conflicts on
a global level or been a theatre for significant armed
conflicts between its countries. It has, however, endured
internal conflicts that have unfortunately frequently
led to violence and disruption of the political process.
Since 1966, the OAS has not deployed military
missions of any kind and the implicit decision has been
taken not to do so, in the understanding that one way
of strengthening international institutions is to respect
the primacy of the Security Council in that area. The
occasions that have required such deployment have
been few and far between, and when they have required
missions with a military component, they have been
organized by the United Nations, with the OAS supporting
them in tasks of a civilian nature, or deploying its own
civilian missions, with particular attention to restoring
the democratic process. That is what happened in the
cases of Haiti, El Salvador and Nicaragua, as well as,
among more recent ones, Colombia, with the Mission
to Support the Peace Process in Colombia, the Mission
to the Belize-Guatemala Adjacency Zone and the Good
Offices Mission in Ecuador and Colombia, between
2007 and 2009. The Haiti, Colombia and GuatemalaBelize Missions are still active.
At the same time, the OAS has undertaken tasks
aimed at remedying the most lasting effects of internal
conflicts. Our demining programme has already
achieved the goal of declaring Central America a
territory free of anti-personnel mines. This year
our firearm destruction programme has destroyed
thousands of weapons, many of them dating to the
period of internal conflicts, with others related to
the criminality that plagues the region. Furthermore,
regional treaties or conventions have strengthened
peace in our hemisphere.
In the context of security, the key treaties and
conventions consist of the Charter of the Organization
of American States, which enshrines the principles
of non-intervention, sovereign equality, peaceful
settlement of disputes, collective self-defence in
case of aggression, respect for fundamental human
rights and strengthened representative democracy;
the aforementioned American Treaty on Pacific
Settlement, which describes all available means for

13-4200915

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

the peaceful settlement of disputes, good offices and
mediation, investigation and conciliation protocols,
arbitration and judicial procedures, including appeals
to the International Court of Justice; the Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean; the Inter-American Convention on
Transparency in Conventional Weapons Acquisitions;
the Inter-American Convention Against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related Materials;
the 2003 Declaration on Security in the Americas; the
Inter-American Democratic Charter and the American
Convention on Human Rights, also known as the Pact
of San José; and the Inter-American Convention on the
Prevention, Punishment and eradication of Violence
against Women, also known as the Convention of
Belém do Pará.
It should also be mentioned that the OAS actively
promotes the signing and ratification of all conventions
on limiting and prohibiting arms and armaments, under
the framework of the United Nations. Also included
in the list are defensive white papers and consolidated
confidence- and security-building measures, which
have made a major contribution to forging a culture
of respect for peace and security in the region. I have
not included the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal
Assistance, known as the Rio Treaty, which was signed
in Rio de Janeiro in 1947, one year before the creation of
the OAS, as it is not currently in operation and has not
been fully implemented in the inter-American system.
Despite the long period of peace experienced in
the region and the fact that most conflicts have been
resolved, the Americas still face various security
threats that are very different from armed conflict,
but which produce significant damage. I am referring
specifically to threats posed by organized crime and
drug trafficking, as well as increased natural disasters
and the risk of pandemics. That multiple reality led
to the formulation, in the Special Conference on
Security held in Mexico in 2003, of a new doctrine and
fundamental guiding principles on multilateral action
in the field of peace and hemispheric security, based on
the concept of multidimensional security. The concept
was developed in the inter-American sphere, along with
the concept of human security, which has been adopted
by the United Nations and promoted by like aspirations.
The multidimensional nature of security establishes
complementarity among the subjects and actors related
to security based on sovereignty and armed forces of the

16

States of the region, and new issues and actors related
to the identification of new threats, including crime
and natural disasters. That concept of multidimensional
security enjoys full legal force and was adopted by
nearly all States members of the OAS and ratified at
the 2004 summit of Heads of State and Government of
the Americas. It thereby acquired official status and
currently guides decisions in the security field, adopted
by the Organization of American States.
In that context, a great number of ongoing projects
could be cited, among which I will mention only one, due
to Argentina’s important role, namely, the Coordination
of Volunteers in the Hemisphere in Response to Natural
Disasters and the Fight against Hunger and Poverty.
Also known as the White Helmets Initiative, it was
adopted in 2007 by the OAS General Assembly and
faithfully expresses the concept of multidimensional
security.
With the increase in violent activity, our capacity
for cooperative and collective action is being tested, not
only within our region but also in the extra-regional
bodies of the United Nations system. The OAS has
expanded its work to other areas, especially those
related to drug trafficking. We recently submitted a
report that was requested by the Heads of State last
year. Organized crime, trafficking in persons and
weapons, and other crimes generate high rates of
violence in some countries of the region, despite the
absence of armed conflict. Those issues have assumed a
higher profile than the more traditional security issues.
The OAS has worked with specialized United Nations
agencies, and such action has been strengthened. In that
context, I note our work with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the Inter-American Drug Abuse
Control Commission, the Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism and other OAS entities to develop
and complement regular consultations and actions of
the United Nations.
At the beginning of this statement, I recalled the
character of the Organization of American States
as a regional body of the United Nations. It follows
that the areas of current and potential cooperation
between the two organizations are much broader than
those described in these few minutes. They include
issues related to the strengthening of democracy,
comprehensive development, the environment, the
defence of vulnerable groups, promotion of equal rights
and gender equity, among others.

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

I must therefore conclude by reaffirming our desire
to cooperate with the main body of the international
system in all areas of its activity, among which the
issues related to the maintenance of peace and security
and the peaceful settlement of disputes represent a
fundamental aspect.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia;
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia align themselves with this
declaration.
Let me first congratulate you, Madam President, on
assuming this month’s presidency of the Security Council
and welcome Argentina’s choice of the important topic
of cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations for its opening debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his statement
and the representatives of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, the African Union, the
Union of South American Nations and the League of
Arab States, for their briefings.
In the light of the many challenges to peace and
security, it is clear that the United Nations cannot
address these alone, but that regional organizations
often have an essential role to play. They can contribute
their understanding of local and regional conflicts and
their root causes, as well as their capacity to respond.
Their capacity to contribute is, in itself, important.
Enhanced regional capabilities for peacekeeping and
conflict prevention are a prerequisite for strengthening
regional ownership and responsibility for crisis
management.
Those capabilities require support, also among
regions. As Council members know, the European
Union and its member States provide substantial support
for the capacity-building of regional organizations,
both political and financial. For example, the EU is an
important donor to the African Union African peace
and security architecture and supports early warning

and crisis response activities of the League of Arab
States.
As the Secretary-General stressed in his statement
today, cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union is both geographically and substantially
wide-ranging. Allow me to briefly address some of the
areas of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations that we deem of
particular importance in that context, and to share our
own experiences in that regard.
First is peacekeeping. The European Union and its
member States welcome the increased attention given
to the role of regional organizations in peacekeeping.
The challenges of today’s United Nations peacekeeping
operations — including the ever-increasing demands
for their deployment — highlight the need for increased
cooperation with and capacity-building of regional
organizations.
Over the years, the EU has, in many locations,
provided operational, financial and political support to
United Nations peacekeeping efforts. The 12 completed
and 16 ongoing Common Security and Defence Policy
operations of the European Union — both military and
civilian, on several continents — bear testimony to that
support.
The EU will continue to look for ways to enhance
its direct support to United Nations peacekeeping based
on an action plan that we adopted last year. Those
actions range from hybrid, parallel and sequential
deployment to logistics support relationships and joint
training activities.
Such cooperation cannot start early enough. A joint
EU-United Nations assessment team recently visited
Mali to assess the support requirements of the Mali
police and in the area of counter-terrorism.
Similarly, in crisis management, as well as early
peacebuilding, regional organizations can develop
a mutually supportive relationship with the United
Nations. In those areas, the EU has over the years
developed a close relationship with the United Nations,
including through cooperation between our respective
missions. In 2003, we agreed to a joint declaration on
United Nations-EU cooperation in crisis management,
which was complemented and reinforced by a further
joint statement in June 2007.
As an example, we were able to provide timely
support for the rapid setting up of the United Nations

13-4200917

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Similarly, our ongoing dialogue and cooperation
regarding Mali illustrates how we can establish
mutually supportive solutions in crisis management
and early peacebuilding.
Also in terms of conflict prevention, longer-term
peacebuilding and mediation-strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and the relevant regional
and subregional organizations can bear fruit.
For the EU, the United Nations remains a key partner
in all of those areas. To that end, a mechanism has
been established to allow regular policy-level contacts
between EU and United Nations services. Moreover,
the EU continues to support specific activities in those
areas where the United Nations may be best placed to
take matters forward in the field. That support also
translates into substantial funding.
Finally, we want to emphasize the overall
importance of the exchange of best practices and
lessons learned, both between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations as well as
among regional organizations themselves.
Regional organizations can learn a lot from the
experience of the United Nations. For the EU, for
example, our cooperation with the United Nations in
the area of conflict prevention has a strong element of
experience-sharing. To further promote such exchanges,
we are exploring several possibilities for the better
linking up of our work in the field. We also hope that
we can bring our experience in conflict prevention to
other regional organizations, including on preventing
conflict over resources such as water and energyrelated challenges through subregional strategies and
institutions.
To conclude, every regional organization has an
inherent historical background, distinct objectives and
a diverse membership. The concept paper (S/2013/446,
annex) shared by the Argentine presidency rightly
points out that differences in capacity, vision, mandates
and objectives pose a clear challenge to elaborating an
overarching framework.
In formulating strategies for cooperation, we should
therefore approach our efforts to strengthen global
and regional cooperation in a results-oriented and
pragmatic manner. There is no one size fits all. But we
can and should learn from one another’s experiences.
That is why today’s discussions are so valuable, so we

18

can jointly grow the important partnership between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to remind all speakers that they should limit their
statements to a maximum of four minutes, so that the
Security Council can carry out its work expeditiously.
I would therefore ask all delegations wishing to make
lengthy statements to be kind enough to distribute their
texts in writing and to present orally in the Chamber an
abbreviated version of their comments.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
Allow me at the outset to voice my gratitude to the
Argentine presidency of the Security Council for
having convened this open debate on a theme that is so
important to the international community. I should like
also to point out that Kyrgyzstan is currently chairing
two organizations, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO), and that my statement will consist
of two parts, one on behalf of each organization.
It is my honour to speak on behalf of the member
States of the CSTO: Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Russia and Tajikistan. The members of our
regional organization believe that the United Nations
is the linchpin of international relations and equitable
international cooperation. It commands universal
legitimacy and has at its disposal the powers required to
respond appropriately to the multitude of contemporary
threats and challenges.
At the same time, a milestone in the current stage
of development of international relations has been the
growing influence of regional organizations. In this
day and age, the effective work of regional entities is
an important component in the emergence of a new
global architecture, and their efforts on the basis of the
provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations have significantly aided the United Nations in
carrying out the functions and powers vested in it by
the international community.
A key role in such processes has been played
by the associations and organizations active in the
Commonwealth of Independent States space, including
the CSTO. The CSTO plays a pivotal role in ensuring
peace and stability in its area of operations. The CSTO,

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

which has emerged as a political and legal instrument
of mutual assistance in the event of foreign aggression,
has in the 10 years of its existence fundamentally
changed; it has become a key player in the emergence
of the system of collective security in the CIS space.
Today the CSTO is a multifunctional structure
with the potential for a rapid response to a plethora of
threats and challenges. The CSTO plays a significant
role in combating terrorism, illegal drug trafficking,
organized crime and illegal migration, including with a
view to strengthening security and stability in Central
Asia.
We note with satisfaction the progressive
development of interaction between the United Nations
and the CSTO. In December 2004 our organization
was granted observer status in the General Assembly.
The significance of the interaction between the
United Nations and the CSTO was highlighted by the
adoption of resolutions at the sixty-fourth, sixty-fifth
and sixty-seventh sessions of the General Assembly on
cooperation between the United Nations and the CSTO.
Those documents represented a recognition of the rich
potential of comprehensive interaction between the two
organizations and galvanized its intensification.
The development of contacts also was expressed
in the signing of a joint declaration on cooperation
between the secretariats of the two organizations in
March 2010. Meetings between the Secretaries-General
of the two organizations are now held on a regular
basis. In the light of the dynamics of development in
Afghanistan, we have seen a productive continuation of
the contacts between the CSTO and the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia as well as the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan.
We have established useful contacts with the United
Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate. The CSTO’s successes also include
interaction with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC). We have conducted exchanges of
information and participated in the CSTO’s pre-emptive
counter-narcotics Operation Canal. Operation Canal,
as well as the assistance provided by CSTO member
States in connection with the transit of cargo for the
international forces in Afghanistan, is an example of
effective interaction among CSTO member States

in countering the threats and challenges to security
emanating from Afghanistan.
We believe that the need for the coordination of
approaches and for the development and implementation
of an agreed approach to Afghanistan by all international
players that care about the country is deeply relevant.
Among the most promising areas of cooperation between
the United Nations and the CSTO is peacekeeping. A
significant contribution to interaction in that respect
was the signing in September 2012 of a memorandum
of understanding between the CSTO secretariat and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the United
Nations. That document paves the way for practical
cooperation in the field of peacekeeping. The CSTO
peacekeeping mechanism offers the possibility of
using the Organization’s capabilities in peacekeeping
operations, including under the auspices of the United
Nations. In that regard, it is worth remembering that the
goals of the CSTO, which has become an international
regional organization with the entry into force of its
Charter on 18 September 2003, are to strengthen
peace and international and regional stability, and
to collectively protect the independence, territorial
integrity and sovereignty of its member States.
Moreover, the priority for CSTO members in
achieving those objectives is to use political means
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
The results of the CSTO’s activities reflect the genuine
potential for interaction with the United Nations
on the basis of the principles of partnership and
complementarity of efforts.
(spoke in English)
I now have the honour to make a statement on behalf
of the member States of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO): China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. I also have the
honour to confirm that all members of our regional
organization accord special attention to strengthening
cooperation with the United Nations, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
We are united in our understanding that, in accordance
with the Charter, the Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The aspirations of the SCO member States are
closely interlinked with the goals and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. We
seek to transform the SCO area into a region of lasting

13-4200919

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

peace, friendship and prosperity. General Assembly
resolution 67/15 on cooperation between the United
Nations and the SCO, adopted in November last year,
acknowledged the important role of the SCO in securing
peace and sustainable development, advancing regional
cooperation and strengthening good-neighbourliness
and mutual trust.
We are developing our cooperation in the area of
counter-terrorism and the fight against separatism and
extremism; inter alia, we have created the Regional
Anti-Terrorism Structure. Some other areas of
cooperation include non-proliferation and combating
transnational organized crime. Tackling problems of
international information security is also a priority.
At the July meeting of the SCO Council of Foreign
Ministers, it was stressed that peace and stability in the
whole region depends on the situation in Afghanistan.
The central role of the United Nations in international
efforts to achieve an Afghan settlement was confirmed,
and we expressed our support for the aspirations of
the peoples of Afghanistan for peaceful recovery and
revival. The SCO supports efforts to make Afghanistan
an independent, peaceful, neutral and prosperous
country free of terrorism and drug-related crime.
Cooperation between the SCO and the United
Nations has a solid international legal basis. Our
organization has had observer status in the General
Assembly since 2004, and the Assembly has adopted
three resolutions on cooperation between our
organizations. The Joint Declaration on Ccooperation,
signed in Tashkent in 2010, between the secretariats
of the two organizations is a good illustration of the
growing authority of the SCO, its focus on the expansion
of external relations and the creation of a partnership
network of multilateral organizations and forums.
The memorandum of understanding between the
SCO secretariat and the UNODC was signed with
a view to enhancing the cooperation between the
United Nations and the SCO. It aims specifically at
effectively tackling the problems of the production,
trade and trafficking of narcotic drugs originating
in Afghanistan. Another important document is
the protocol on cooperation between the Regional
Anti-Terrorist Structure and the UNODC. Important
elements of effective regional cooperation include
consistent implementation of the 2011-2016 Anti-Drug
Strategy and Action Plan, the creation of an effective
system of joint countermeasures aimed at combating

20

the drug threat and establishing reliable barriers to
the illicit trafficking of narcotic drugs, psychoactive
substances and their precursors.
In order to actively contribute to the economic
development of the countries of the region and boost
the welfare of its peoples, the economic component of
the cooperation among the SCO countries continues
to play a pivotal role. A close interaction has been
established between our Organization and the United
Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and
the Pacific.
We are convinced that further strengthening of
the partnership between the United Nations and the
SCO will contribute to the realization of the goals
and objectives of the United Nations with a view
to deepening comprehensive cooperation aimed at
tackling the political, economic, social, cultural and
humanitarian problems of the modern world.
The forthcoming summit of the SCO heads of State
on 13 September in Bishkek in the Kyrgyz Republic
is aimed at giving a new impetus to furthering the
development of the organization and the strengthening
of its standing in the international arena. We are
confident that the outcome of the Bishkek summit will
form an appropriate basis on which long-term security
in the region and expanding trade and economic,
cultural and humanitarian relations will be ensured.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Montaño y Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico welcomes the initiative of the
Republic of Argentina to convene this open debate
on United Nations cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security.
Providing peace and security to citizens is a duty
of States. To achieve those objectives in a world as
globalized as ours is today, international dialogue,
cooperation and the exchange of information and best
practices are crucial.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
the trafficking in small arms, transnational organized
crime, climate change and food insecurity, among
others, are challenges that threaten and hinder the
maintenance of international peace and security.

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

Regional and global organizations have a key
role in the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, the development of
mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of disputes,
dialogue and multilateral cooperation. They also
have a role to play in the protection of human rights,
institutional development, the consolidation of the rule
of law and the promotion of respect for international
law.
In these lofty aims, Mexico recognizes the
important role played by the Organization of American
States in our region as a promoter of cooperation in the
Americas, which is becoming a strategic partner of the
United Nations at the regional level. We also believe
that the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States has a major and specific role to play, which is
to strengthen and ensure that dialogue prevails among
all the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean
and to find areas of convergence so as to maximize
cooperation .
We also acknowledge the special role of bodies,
mechanisms and processes, such as the Association
of Caribbean States, the Central American Integration
System, MERCOSUR and the Union of South American
Nations, in promoting greater integration, and hence
greater development and a higher quality of life for
citizens. All of those institutions seek, from different
angles to build a prosperous, democratic and peaceful
world that fosters the development of their citizens’
potentials.
In October we will celebrate the tenth anniversary
of the Declaration on Security in the Americas, adopted
by the Organization of American States and which was a
result of a special conference on security, held in Mexico
on 28 October 2003. The Declaration on Security in the
Americas recognized that the threats and challenges to
security in our hemisphere and concerns about security
are diverse in nature and multidimensional in scope.
Similarly, the American nations believe that the basis
and rationale for security is the protection of the human
person in every aspect. To achieve that objective, it is
essential to adopt an approach that includes promoting
economic and social development, social inclusion and
education.
In order to improve security conditions, American
States have committed themselves to addressing
extreme poverty and social exclusion, ensuring
universal access to basic health services, promoting

a democratic culture through education for peace and
strengthening civil society participation in what we
believe to be, fundamentally, the development of a
multidimensional approach to security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me,
at the outset, to congratulate you, Madam President, on
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council
for August.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to commend the choice of the
subject for the first Council debate of this month.
Synergy between international, regional and subregional
organizations is a prerequisite for the success of peace
and security efforts. That issue has been discussed
before and should be revisited anew to address different
aspects and strengthen the cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations.
The Security Council has the primary jurisdiction
over matters relating to international peace and security.
However, full regional, subregional and national
participation in Security Council peace and security
efforts is necessary in order to ensure a sufficient level
of ownership and familiarity for regional parties to
every conflict. The engagement of the relevant regional
organizations is crucial for the success of United Nations
peace efforts at the various stages of responding to a
conflict, including early warning, conflict prevention,
mediation and post-conflict peacebuilding.
In the Middle East, cooperation between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States is indispensable.
The establishment of the mission of the Joint Special
Representative for Syria is just one example of the
potential cooperation between the two organizations.
Such cooperation should extend to conflict prevention
and resolution. It can also help in finding lasting
solutions to the two major chronic problems of the
region that have had a negative impact on regional
and international peace and security: the Palestinian
question and the proliferation of nuclear weapons in the
Middle East.
The United Nations can benefit from the regional
convening power and consensus-building of both the
League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation. For that to happen, the Security Council
should be more responsive to the regional mechanisms.

13-4200921

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

Consultations should take place on a more regular basis,
and consultations should have concrete outcomes.
A shared role between the United Nations and
regional organizations for peacekeeping is both
desirable and achievable. The African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur is a case in
point. It stands out as the most prominent example of
cooperation between the United Nations and a regional
organization in the field of peacekeeping. However,
hybrid peacekeeping operations continue to be the
exception, not the rule. In Africa, we should have
more hybrid operations with a predominantly African
character.
It is necessary to expand African capacity to meet
peace and security challenges. That could be achieved
through more streamlining and coordination between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council. Consolidating and securing
financial resources is another obstacle that should be
overcome. It is worth noting that the 2008 Prodi panel
report (S/2008/813) on African Union/United Nations
cooperation recommended a multi-donor trust fund
to support peacekeeping in Africa, based on African
ownership. After five years, that recommendation has
yet to be implemented.
Finally, international peace and security originate
in regional peace and security. The efforts of the
United Nations will not be successful without the direct
support of regional stakeholders and the organizations
that represent them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
congratulates Argentina on the priority it has given to
this very important issue. We recognize and applaud
the strength and relevance of the Latin American
regional organizations that are represented here today.
In the Pacific, we are also very well served by our own
regional organizations, which have restored security
when violence has threatened lives and stability. Just
last month, in Honiara on Solomon Islands, regional
leaders celebrated the success of the 10-year-long
Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands.
We therefore share the sentiments expressed today
about the importance of strong and effective regional
institutions and their competitive advantage through
proximity, in-depth knowledge, commitment and local

22

accountability. We would say that proper use of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations can be a
critical contributor to international peace and security,
as expounded this morning by the Secretary-General
and others. But we also share the realism expressed
today about the need, in difficult cases, for regional
efforts to be backed up or supplemented by the United
Nations and the Security Council in particular. We also
share the African Union’s optimism, as expressed on its
behalf by the representative of Ethiopia, that its African
Peace and Security Architecture can address regional
challenges. But we also share African concerns, as just
voiced by the representative of Egypt, that the Security
Council is simply not doing enough to respond to the
hopes and expectations of the African Union (AU) and
African regional and subregional organizations.
There seem to us to be two distinct elements
to the problem. First is the concern that, sometimes,
the Security Council can overshadow and effectively
marginalize the AU and other regional institutions
and, conversely, in other cases, the Council is often too
passive or is not responsive in a timely manner.
It is not enough for the Security Council to adopt
statements of good intention. What is needed is a new,
practical willingness to extend the Council’s capacity to
interact in a collective way that builds real partnerships
with the regions. To achieve this, the Council must
be perceptive and flexible in responding to particular
situations.
Sometimes, effective cooperation and partnership
will require urgent Council political action of
a preventive kind. Sometimes it will mean the
consideration of strong deterrent measures. Other times
it will require the use of the Council’s unique capacity
to provide financial, logistical and even military
support to assist regional efforts. Sometimes it will
require decisions to deploy a full-scale United Nations
operation.
Right now, the model developed for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur is
causing dissatisfaction on all sides, and that is hardly
surprising, given its history. Instead, New Zealand
would like to see a focus, by the Council and by regional
organizations, on building practical partnerships at
a much earlier stage of an emerging problem. The
Security Council and regional organizations should
be working together in conflict prevention, conflict
management and conflict resolution. We therefore echo

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

Ethiopia’s call on behalf of the AU for more effective,
results-focused consultations with the Council and
regional organizations. Regional actors can, as the
representative of Egypt has just emphasized, contribute
in-depth knowledge and longstanding relationships
with key local stakeholders, with whom they often
share linguistic, cultural and historical ties. Such ties
can be crucial for generating the trust and engagement
required for successful mediation, and they can prove
useful in supporting civil society constituencies for
building and sustaining peace.
At the global level, only the United Nations has the
power to levy assessed contributions from all Member
States, but this Council can also bring into play other
assets, such as institutional weight and impact and the
capacities of Member States with wide experience of
similar issues in other parts of the world, and it can
provide neutral perspectives. A real partnership along
those lines, including the hybrid missions advocated
by Egypt, could also be very useful in reducing
the incoherence that sometimes bedevils conflict
prevention, with overlap between the United Nations,
bilateral and regional organizations and actors.
To make progress on this important agenda item,
we believe that the Council must take a step that would
involve cultural change. Formats like the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa could be a very useful entry point for forging
the kind of partnership we are suggesting. But, for that
to be meaningful, working methods must be adapted to
allow regional and subregional organisations and their
members to be meaningfully engaged. We are convinced
that only through active conflict prevention under
Chapter VI and effective engagement with regional
and subregional organizations under Chapter VIII can
we hope to reduce the demand for hugely expensive
peacekeeping operations; and, above all, we must
address the enormous human, social, environmental
and financial costs of armed conflict. In Chapters VI
and VIII we have the tools, and New Zealand urges
that, by working together, the Council and regional and
subregional organizations should put them to very good
use.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Representative of Honduras.
Mr. Suazo (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): My
Ambassador has asked me to convey her greetings to
Council President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner.

Her presence today in the Council and the fact that
Argentina has called for this open debate on regional
organizations and their role in the international sphere
provide a clear example of Latin America’s ability
to bring together such a large number of ministers
and representatives of regional organizations. In my
experience at the United Nations I have never seen such
a large group of dignitaries in an open debate of the
Council.
We appreciate the statements made by the President
Pro Tempore of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States (CELAC), Mr. Bruno Rodriguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba. We
support the ideas that he expressed in his statement. We
also welcome the presence of the Secretary-General this
morning and the message he delivered to the Council.
We know now that no State can act alone or in
isolation. The globalized world and the progress
in industrial technology, cyber communication
and information technology make us increasingly
interdependent. That is a reality. Thus we face
dangerous threats and problems collectively, and that
is why this debate is very important to the State of
Honduras, which firmly believes in multilateralism and
the role of international organizations. That is also the
reason why we were one of the founding members of the
United Nations, the Organization of American States
(OAS), and the Central American Integration System
(SICA), among others. And we are firmly committed
to continuously strengthening regional and subregional
mechanisms, which should play a role in international
peace and security. Such regional and subregional
organizations must also, in our opinion, actively
fight against the scourge of international terrorism,
transnational organized crime, drug trafficking and
trafficking in persons. Above all, such efforts should be
carried out with the decisive cooperation of the United
Nations.
The collective efforts of regional organizations
and the United Nations are all the more crucial for
the development of programmes and projects of a
regional and subregional nature that are designed to
counter the adverse effects of climate change and
natural disasters and promote the coordination of
international humanitarian assistance. The whole
spectrum of regional and subregional cooperation in
its humanitarian dimension is an invaluable element
for coordination and cooperation. Here, in this
debate, it takes on a human face. We believe that the

13-4200923

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

commitment of States to strengthening cooperation
with international, regional and subregional bodies is
the highest expression of multilateralism.
In its previous meeting on this topic the Council
agreed that regional organizations are in a unique
position to understand the causes of conflicts and
other security problems, pointing out that we should
take advantage of the current and potential capacity
of regional and subregional organizations and
encourage the countries in every region to resolve their
differences peacefully through dialogue, reconciliation,
consultation and negotiations, as well as good offices,
mediation and the settlement of disputes through legal
means (see S/PV.6257).
The Foreign Minister of the Republic of Guatemala
mentioned the democratic and peaceful vocation of
Central and Latin America, and he described how
from the Contadora Group we arrived at CELAC.
Central America is a clear example of how the United
Nations and its peace operations can be a success today.
We have a Central American Parliament, we have an
integration system, a Central American Bank, a Central
American Court of Justice, and we are currently further
strengthening our expectations through international
cooperation.
Since the United Nations is not equipped to
tackle all of the crises of the world alone, we have
to strengthen the partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations in order to maintain
international peace and security. While it is true that
the Security Council has the primary responsibility for
maintaining peace and security, cooperation between
regional organizations and the United Nations would
not only lighten the burden for the Council but would
also provide greater legitimacy with the participation
of regional partners in times of crisis.
In that regard, cooperation between the United
Nations and the different regional and subregional
organizations must achieve a higher level of cooperation
and avoid a duplication of efforts and financial
resources and avoid the squandering of efforts,
financial resources and time. Communication channels
must exist between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations that would enable both
parties to be sure that they are on right track to achieve
their common goals. In the same spirit, we welcome
today’s presidential statement, which achieved a
consensus under the leadership of Argentina. It is not

24

always easy to achieve a consensus in the Council, and
we are sure that it will make a special contribution to
the urgent need to develop effective partnerships that
could smooth the way for the tasks envisaged.
Lastly, Honduras is fully convinced that, despite the
difficulties and obstacles that exist, the international
community can benefit, in the process of maintaining
peace and security, from a balance between the sound
knowledge of a conflict that a regional organization
might have and the legitimacy and authority of the
Security Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the 10 States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN): Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and
Viet Nam. At the outset, allow me to congratulate
you, Madam President, and the Argentine Republic
on assuming the functions of President of the Security
Council for the month of August. We wish Argentina
all the best of success.
In the past few years, we have witnessed enormous
changes, and new paradigms in international peace and
security have emerged. Hence, it is critical to strengthen
regional-global cooperation and coordination. Indeed,
from Europe to Asia, from Africa to the Americas,
regional organizations have displayed a more active role
in the maintenance of peace and security. In our region,
10 South-East Asian countries are building an ASEAN
community as envisioned in the ASEAN Charter. Over
the years, ASEAN has increasingly become a central
component of the regional architecture. Important
regional arrangements, with ASEAN at the core, in
particular the East Asia Summit, the ASEAN Regional
Forum and the ASEAN Defence Ministers MeetingPlus, have proven to be effective forums for dialogue
and consultation on regional security and beyond.
In its efforts to promote peace and stability in the
region and beyond, ASEAN attaches great importance
to cooperation with the United Nations. Since the
previous Council debate on this topic in January 2012
(see S/PV.6702), that cooperation has been improved in
a comprehensive manner.

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

First, ASEAN-United Nations cooperation has
been institutionalized with the adoption of a Joint
Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership between
ASEAN and the United Nations. Under that framework,
periodic ASEAN-United Nations interactions have
been established at various levels, including at high
levels, through ASEAN-United Nations summits
and annual meetings between the Foreign Ministers
of ASEAN, the President of the General Assembly
and the Secretary-General. The Comprehensive
Partnership has also established priority areas of
cooperation, which include mediation and good offices,
non-traditional security issues, counter-terrorism, the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention
and resolution, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, food and
energy security, climate change, ASEAN connectivity,
culture and education. In addition, a resolution on
ASEAN-United Nations cooperation has been adopted
biennially by consensus in the General Assembly, of
which the latest was resolution 67/110, which stresses
the need for continued and increased coordination for
the concrete realization of elements of cooperation
contained therein.
Secondly, ASEAN member States have actively and
constructively contributed to the work of the United
Nations in the field of peace and security. Individually
and collectively, ASEAN States have initiated or
have taken part in negotiations of important General
Assembly resolutions on peace and security. They have
become members and have chaired groups within the
framework of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the
General Assembly. As of June 2013, ASEAN member
States had contributed nearly 4,000 peacekeepers to 13
out of 16 United Nations peacekeeping missions, and
more are expected with the recent announcement by
Viet Nam, my country, of its intention to participate in
United Nations peacekeeping operations in early 2014.
Thirdly, ASEAN and the Secretariat have
expanded activities in the implementation of the
comprehensive partnership. The Secretariat and other
United Nations bodies have provided expertise and
cooperated closely with ASEAN and other partners
in organizing workshops and training courses and in
bilateral exchanges on peacebuilding and securityrelated issues. Notable instances include workshops
with various United Nations organizations, including
those that have been established by the Council.

The growing ASEAN-United Nations cooperation
has been beneficial to international peace and security,
as well as to peace and security in the region. Through
increased interaction and the expertise and niche
capacity of each side, we have been able to complement
each other.
For its part, ASEAN continues to be a net
contributor to international peace and security. The
ASEAN way of incremental interaction, consultation
and dialogue could be part of the solution to conflicts
and crises elsewhere. Most importantly, such dialogue
is crucial to cultivating a culture of peace that promotes
restraint, preventive diplomacy and mutual respect, as
well as a strong commitment to international law, the
Charter of the United Nations, including the principle
of the peaceful settlement of disputes.
It is our hope to benefit from continued United
Nations support and facilitation for the central role
of ASEAN in addressing regional peace and security
issues, as well as the ASEAN contribution to the
work of the United Nations. Emerging issues, such as
climate change, energy security and maritime security,
would be better dealt with by increased and diversified
cooperation between ASEAN and the United Nations,
including United Nations specialised agencies. I take
this opportunity to express the sincere thanks of
ASEAN countries to the Secretary-General, United
Nations bodies and the specialized agencies and their
leaders for their valuable support and assistance.
In conclusion, ASEAN reiterates its strong
commitment to further broadening and deepening
cooperation between ASEAN and the United Nations,
especially in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Permit me at the outset to welcome Her
Excellency Ms. Cristina Fernández de Kirchner,
President of the friendly Argentine Republic, and to
congratulate her on her country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Council during the month of August.
I would also like to express our appreciation of the
initiative taken by Argentina to convene this important
debate.
The Charter of the United Nations has established
a legal framework for cooperation between the

13-4200925

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

United Nations and regional organizations. Some of
those organizations have proven the important role
that they can play in many fields in the interests of
Member States, notably in the areas of mediation and
the prevention and peaceful settlement of conflicts,
in addition to defending the interests of the Member
States and promoting cooperation among them. The
complementarity of the efforts of the United Nations
and regional organizations on common issues, the
foremost of which is the preservation of international
peace and security, adds value to their joint work.
Success in those endeavours requires, however,
that those efforts be consistent with international
law, the objectives and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations and related propositions. That leads
us to consider what has been mentioned with regard
to the role of the League of Arab States as a regional
organization that assists in promoting and preserving
regional peace and security and in settling issues in the
Arab region, such as the situation in my country today.
As the Council is aware, the Syrian Arab Republic
is an original founder of the League of Arab States and
has played a pivotal role in the history of the cooperative
work among Arab States. It has defended the interests
of Arab Member States and has been committed to
the Joint Defence and Economic Cooperation Treaty
between the States of the Arab League. In spite of all
that, it has also been subject to pressures and aggression
that have cast a dark shadow on the life of the Syrian
people and the country’s prosperity.
Syria deeply believes in its Arab roots and nature,
and welcomed the engagement of the League of Arab
States in settling the Syrian crisis, thinking that it
would play a positive role in exposing the facts of the
situation and in assisting to put a halt to violence and
in supporting the national dialogue launched by the
Syrian Government for the settlement of the crisis. In
that regard, the Syrian Government has cooperated with
the Secretary General of the League of Arab States and
has remained committed to the implementation of the
action plan agreed to by both sides. At the same time,
the Syrian Arab Republic has opened its doors to Arab
observers.
However, Arab States, in particular Qatar and
Saudi Arabia, have taken advantage of the unstable
situations in some of the States in the region to hijack
the decision-making in the League of Arab States
and to impose the will of other countries, sometimes

26

through threats and at other times through bribes. They
have worked at making the League of Arab States
implement or push for external agendas that are not in
the interesta of the Arab region or its people. Instead of
working for the good of all, the League of Arab States
has fallen victim to the hegemony of the petrodollar and
cooperated in committing aggression.
The deviation began when the secretariat of the
League of Arab States aborted the mission of the
Arab observers and obfuscated its results before the
Security Council early in the situation that has afflicted
my country. The mission had made it clear from the
beginning that armed groups were committing acts of
terrorism and aggression in various parts of Syria and
serving external agendas that threatened the peace,
security and stability of the country. It went even
further when it issued a number of illegal decisions
that were aimed not only at manipulating the role of
regional organizations and shirking the responsibility
of the League but also at internationalizing the Syrian
crisis and calling for external interference in its
internal affairs. The last of those decisions provided
for cooperation with one of the external opposition
parties that is financed by Qatar and Saudi Arabia
and, without any right whatsoever, recognized it as the
representative of the Syrian people in clear violation
of its own Charter, the basics of international law and
Arab and international relations.
It went still further when those two countries,
despite the objections of another Arab country, exerted
pressure to adopt a decision that permits Arab States
willing to do so to provide weapons to the Syrian
opposition and armed terrorist groups that are also
sponsored by the Turkish Government, which funds and
arms them and assists them in crossing the border. This
clearly undermined the mission of the United Nations
Special Envoy, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and constituted
a clear admission on the part of some States that they
stood on the side of the terrorists in their aggression
against Syria, its people, State and institutions, in
violation of resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012),
which provided for a political settlement of the crisis
in Syria.
That decision also obviated the efforts made
by the Geneva Conference, in clear violation of the
commitments undertaken by Arab States members
of the League of Arab States and of the basics of
international law, the aims and objectives of the Charter
of the United Nations, particularly Article 2 on the

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

sovereignty of States, non-interference in the internal
affairs of States, the peaceful settlement of conflicts
and the non-use of force. That League of Arab States
decision also encroached upon the Security Council’s
role in maintaining international peace and security
under Article 24 of the Charter, and its exclusive power
under Article 53 to authorize regional organizations to
undertake enforcement actions.
All those decisions have only fanned the flames
of the Syrian crisis and hindered all efforts to find a
political solution thereto. They have harmed the Syrian
State and the Syrian people, and supported the terrorism
that all countries of the world have pledged to combat.
We call on the League of Arab States to be part
of the peaceful political solution, not a part of the
problems of the region and the crisis therein, in service
of agendas that are not in the interests of the Arab
peoples and that promote the so-called phenomenon of
the Arab Spring, which is more like a harsh winter that
has overshadowed the peace, stability and security of
the Arab people.
We call upon the League of Arab States to liberate
itself from the hegemony of the petrodollar and return
to the tenets of reason and respect for international law
and respect for its Charter and its rules of procedure, and
to refrain from using terminology that has been used by
others to undermine the sovereignty of Arab States and
their territorial integrity. We call on the Arab League
to work in the interests of Arab causes, foremost of
which is putting an end to the Israeli occupation of the
occupied Arab territories.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Madam President, first of
all, let me thank you for organizing today’s meeting.
Ukraine supports the meeting’s objectives to further
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional arrangements in conflict
prevention, mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The presence with us today of the President of the
Argentine Republic attests to the importance that her
country attaches to the issue. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General and the representatives of regional
and subregional organizations for their respective
insights.
While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement
made on behalf of the European Union, I would like to
make a few comments in my national capacity.

During its sole period of membership of the Security
Council as an independent country in 2000-2001,
Ukraine paid particular attention to the strengthening
of interaction between the Council and regional
organizations based on the principles of effective and
clear division of labour, complementarity, added value,
comparative advantages and regional ownership. We
welcome the progress achieved since then in ensuring
closer and more operational cooperation. In that regard,
the most recent rehatting experience in Mali comes to
mind. Yet the goal of ensuring the coherence, synergy
and collective effectiveness of joint efforts remains
as relevant as ever. That is why we fully support
today’s comprehensive presidential statement aimed at
achieving that purpose (S/PRST/2013/12).
As is rightly pointed out in the concept note
(S/2013/446, annex), the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is one of the two
regional organizations that, along with the African
Union, enjoy the most established interaction with the
Security Council. Since Ukraine has the honour to
chair the OSCE in 2013, let me briefly outline some
suggestions on how to advance the United Nations/
OSCE partnership. For the sake of time, I will confine
myself to general remarks, while the full text of the
statement will be uploaded to my mission’s web page.
As was emphasized by the OSCE Chairperson-inOffice, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Leonid Kozhara,
before this Council in May (see S/PV.6961), the OSCE
is a strong partner of the United Nations in promoting
international peace and security in its area. With a
comprehensive approach to security and in view of
its geographical scope stretching from Vancouver to
Vladivostok, the OSCE enjoys a unique place among
all other regional organizations under Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter.
In March 2006, the OSCE Permanent Council
adopted a Declaration on Cooperation with the United
Nations, welcoming Security Council resolution
1631 (2005) and declaring the OSCE’s readiness to
further strengthen cooperation with the Organization.
Consequently, the OSCE has boosted its cooperation
with the United Nations in all three dimensions — the
politico-military, the economic and environmental,
and the human — with particular attention given to
addressing post-conflict challenges, humanitarian
needs and transnational threats.
As security challenges continue to evolve, the nature
of United Nations/OSCE collaboration must evolve as

13-4200927

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

well, becoming more pragmatic and action-oriented.
We should clearly identify areas where the two
organizations can most effectively work together or in
parallel — but not in competition – guided by the needs
and priorities of their member States. In our view, the
OSCE should continue to engage closely on mediation
with the United Nations and its Friends of Mediation,
particularly as the OSCE bolsters its own mediation and
mediation support capacity through various measures.
The OSCE will remain committed to supporting
the United Nations by helping to create more synergies
in key regions of common concern. In particular,
the security, political and economic transitions in
Afghanistan, as well as the withdrawal of international
security forces in 2014, will continue to have security
implications for the OSCE area.
Progress in finding sustainable and long-term
solutions to the protracted conflicts in the OSCE area
is at the top of the Ukrainian chairmanship’s agenda.
We greatly appreciate the input of the United Nations
in solving security and humanitarian issues in the area
of conflict in Georgia, within the framework of the
Geneva international discussions, The OSCE mission
in Kosovo is a key component of the framework of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, providing valuable experience and expertise
in institution-building and promoting human rights and
engaging actively with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations
Development Programme and other international
organizations.
The OSCE pays particular attention to a broad range
of transnational threats. That attention encompasses
close cooperation with the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as well as interaction
on drugs, borders, and proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. We therefore see particular merit
in deepening cooperation with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC). An updated joint action plan with UNODC
for 2013-2014 entered into force in April. In the area
of policing, the OSCE has developed strong ties with
the DPKO’s Police Division and is actively cooperating
in developing a new United Nations strategic guidance
framework for international police peacekeeping. I

28

should recall that in March Ukraine hosted one of the
dedicated regional seminars.
The fight against trafficking in human beings
remains one of the key issues addressed by the
OSCE under Ukraine’s chairmanship. In June, the
chairmanship held a high-level international conference
in Kyiv on combating trafficking in human beings.
Other priorities for the human dimensions of
Ukraine’s chairmanship include strengthening the
freedom of the media. It is worth noting that OSCE’s
representative for the freedom of media has been
engaged in drafting the United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity,
which is quite significant in the light of the Council’s
open debate on that very issue last month (S/PV.7003).
The United Nations and the OSCE continually share
relevant information in this field.
This list of priority areas of cooperation between
the United Nations and the OSCE is not exhaustive, and
the Ukrainian chairmanship will make every effort to
advance our bilateral interaction as comprehensively
and effectively as possible. In closing, I would like
to reiterate Ukraine’s commitment to advancing
cooperation between the United Nations and its regional
and subregional partners.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, Madam President, I would like to extend
my sincere congratulations on Argentina’s assumption
of the Security Council presidency for this month, and
to thank you for the invitation to take part in this open
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. I would also like to
give special thanks to Her Excellency the President of
the Republic of Argentina for presiding over the first
part of the meeting.
We all agree about the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. The Charter of the United
Nations emphasizes the importance of urging regional
organizations to work towards the peaceful resolution
of local disputes. It also encourages the Security
Council to try to resolve such disputes through
regional institutions. The growing importance of such
cooperation is demonstrated by current trends, some of

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

the most important being, first, the escalation in the
number of conflicts and the places where such conflicts
occur around the world. In the past the Security Council
had a limited number of issues to deal with during its
regular meetings, but today its agenda is loaded with
issues, most of them regional conflicts, making it
difficult for the Council to perform its role alone.
Secondly, such local conflicts are displaying
increasing levels of difficulty and complexity, owing
to the intense influence exerted on them by ethnic,
religious, cultural and economic factors, as well
as other issues linked to foreign interventions and
special interests. That complexity makes it harder
to comprehend the nature and complications of the
conflicts, the circumstances in which they are created
and how they can be overcome, and makes a better
understanding of the intricacies and details of local
circumstances imperative.
Thirdly, regional organizations, by virtue of their
geographic proximity and direct involvement at the
local level are in a better position to understand and
address local issues.
Fourthly, regional organizations have special
capabilities in the areas of preventive diplomacy, earlywarning systems, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
although that should not exempt the international
community from fulfilling its responsibilities by
participating in such tasks.
In that context, the Security Council retains the
primary responsibility for ensuring international
peace and security. In addition, general humanitarian
principles — such as the right of peoples to selfdetermination; the importance of protecting civilians
when their authorities are unwilling or incapable of
doing so or, as in the case of Syria, when they seek
to exterminate them; the preservation of human
rights; the refusal to overlook war crimes and crimes
against humanity, and the willingness to hold violators
committing these crimes accountable — are basic
responsibilities that the Council cannot and should
not abandon. Cooperation with regional organizations
should be based on shouldering those responsibilities
and on upholding the principle of the maintenance of
peace and security.
My country has played an active role in resolving
a number of regional conflicts in cooperation with
relevant regional and subregional organizations, chief
among them the leadership role taken by the Gulf

Cooperation Council (GCC) in sparing its brother State
of Yemen the dangers of a grinding civil war, and to
help the people of Yemen find positive and creative
solutions to the political crisis in their country. Saudi
Arabia will continue to provide economic and political
support to our Yemeni brothers until they achieve their
aspirations. The supportive role played by the United
Nations has had an effective impact and demonstrated
the international community’s solidarity with the plans
and initiatives of the GCC. Furthermore, the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and the sisterly countries of the Gulf
Cooperation Council were the first to call for the
imposition of a no-fly zone aimed at preventing the
perpetration of massacres against the brotherly Libyan
people, a call subsequently reiterated by the League of
Arab States and the Security Council.
Concerning Syria, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
was the first Arab country to break the wall of silence
about the suffering of peaceful demonstrators exposed
to bullets, arrests and torture. Saudi Arabia joined
its sister countries in the League of Arab States in
developing initiatives aimed at saving the Syrian
people from bloodshed and enabling them to achieve
their legitimate aspirations of freedom, dignity and
prosperity.
Unfortunately, the Security Council’s failure to
adopt the positions of the relevant regional organization,
the League of Arab States, has contributed to the
escalation of the crisis in Syria and the continuing
tragedy there, manifested in the death of tens of
thousands of victims and millions of displaced citizens.
Thus, while the example of Yemen is one of positive
cooperation, that of Syria is a negative example of
what can happen when such cooperation is absent. The
positions held by some members of the Council not only
defy the regional consensus but also contradict the will
of the international community, as expressed in several
consecutive General Assembly resolutions on Syria.
My delegation stresses the importance of
establishing effective mechanisms to coordinate the
efforts of the United Nations and those of regional
and subregional organizations, in order to enable such
organizations to play a more effective role under the
umbrella of the United Nations. Such a role would
be in harmony with their capabilities, initiatives and
expertise and would enable areas affected by conflict
to avoid the internationalization of local conflicts,
especially when an international body loses its ability
to act effectively.

13-4200929

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

In conclusion, I wish to note that the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence, and Transparency group — a crossregional group of 22 States seeking to improve the
working methods of the Security Council — stands for
those very principles. Saudi Arabia values the efforts
of Council members to engage with the wider United
Nations membership in open debates and, accordingly,
welcomes today’s open debate organized by Argentina.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Argentine presidency
for its leadership in convening this open debate. I
would also like to express appreciation to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-Moon for his briefing, as well as to
the representatives of various regional and subregional
organizations for their remarks.
Good cooperation and coordination between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations, are important for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is therefore quite
pertinent that the Council should allocate its time to
update and assess the ongoing collaboration between
them. That is why we find today’s open debate timely.
I would like to make a few observations on the matter.
First, regional and subregional organizations are
well placed to play crucial roles in conflict prevention,
mediation and conflict resolution. They have a
comparative advantage in playing such roles because
of their proximity to conflicts and abundant knowledge
of the region and influence on the stakeholders. Japan
would like to commend the conflict-preventing,
mediating or other peacemaking roles played by such
organizations as the African Union in Somalia, the
Sudan and South Sudan; the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) in Mali; the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
in Central Asia; the Union of South American Nations,
in Latin America; and the League of Arab States in
addressing recent dramatic changes in the Middle East.
At the same time, the United Nations has played
a role in promoting political processes and achieving
peace agreements. It would be important for the
United Nations to lend its support to supplement the
peacemaking efforts of the regional and subregional
organizations, when and where necessary.

30

Secondly, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations can play their respective
roles in the area of peacekeeping activities. Regional
and subregional organizations can rapidly respond to
conflicts in order to settle disputes before they escalate,
while the United Nations remains primarily responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security
and could intervene, if necessary, with wide-range
international resources.
A recent example of this is the situation in Mali.
Japan commends the intervention of ECOWAS and
the African Union into Mali and the subsequent
smooth transformation of the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali into the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali.
Thirdly, we believe there is further room for
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
A mechanism such as the annual joint meeting of the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council certainly facilitates the harmonization
of their respective policies on specific issues related to
conflict.
A similar dialogue was held earlier this year between
the Security Council and the Political and Security
Committee of the European Union. The Secretariat
also has held similar consultative meetings with other
regional groups, such as the Caribbean Community and
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). The
continuation of those initiatives is encouraged.
The commitment of regional and subregional
organizations to the maintenance of peace and security
in their respective regions should be commended. In
order to help these organizations fulfil their intentions,
the international community should strive to support
their activities. Japan remains committed to extending
its assistance to these organizations. Since 2008,
Japan has extended assistance for capacity-building
to peacekeeping training centres in 10 African
countries — Benin, Cameroon, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Kenya, Mali, Nigeria, Rwanda and South
Africa — amounting to $30 million in total. Japan has
also provided other assistance to strengthen the African
peace and security architecture.
Japan also believes that it is important for the
United Nations to reach out to regional and subregional

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

organizations in the fields of conflict prevention and
preventive diplomacy. In that regard, Japan welcomes
the fact that the partnership between the United
Nations and ASEAN has been deepened in these
fields, and is proud to have supported the initiative
of the Secretariat to hold the ASEAN-United Nations
Workshop on Lessons Learned and Best Practices in
Conflict Prevention and Preventive Diplomacy, in
Jakarta, Indonesia, on 5 and 6 April.
Before concluding my remarks, I would like to
emphasize that Japan has always paid attention to
the enhancement of partnerships between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations. In
that regard, I would like to mention the fact that Japan
welcomed the African Union Commission to become
one of the organizers of the Fifth Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD V),
which took place in Japan in June, together with the
other organizers: Japan, the United Nations, the United
Nations Development Programme and the World Bank.
TICAD V was a huge success thanks to the
participation of 39 African Heads of State and
Government and heads of the five organizers, including
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Secretary-General of the United Nations. That
multilateral high-level policy forum will certainly
serve to create a more dynamic Africa by enhancing
economic growth, establishing inclusive and resilient
society and ensuring peace and stability in the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uganda.
Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): I congratulate you,
Madam President, and the delegation of Argentina, on
your leadership of the Security Council this month. I
thank you for organizing and presiding over this highlevel debate on this important topic. I also thank the
Secretary-General and the representatives of the African
Union (AU), the European Union, the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, the League of
Arab States and the Union of South American Nations
for their insightful briefings.
This debate is taking place at a time when the
international community is facing and grappling with
a number of serious peace and security challenges,
including violent conflicts, terrorism, transnational
organized crime, drug trafficking and the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. While we recognize
that the primary responsibility for the maintenance

of international peace and security is vested in the
Security Council, the emphasis should be on quick
and strong action through collective efforts. It is also
important for the Security Council to continuously
evaluate and reflect on whether its diagnoses of conflict
situations and the solutions prescribed are correct and
not defective.
My delegation would like to underscore the
importance of strengthening strategic partnerships
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations on issues related to the maintenance of
peace and security, human rights and development.
We would like to commend in that regard the Security
Council’s continuous prioritization of its engagement
with regional and subregional organizations to exchange
views on practical ways to strengthen that partnership.
The United Nations therefore should optimize the
contribution made by such organizations, which have
the advantage of proximity and the capability to
mobilize and respond quickly.
We are convinced that fostering strategic
partnerships will bolster the effectiveness of the United
Nations and of regional and subregional organizations,
with immense benefits for the nationals of the Member
States. I would like to focus on three fundamental
elements that we consider crucial to the success of that
cooperation.
First, it is essential for the United Nations and its
partners to provide effective, predictable and timely
support to regional and subregional organizations
in conflict prevention and resolution, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. These organizations
have played a pivotal role in addressing peace
and security challenges. For instance, the African
Union and subregional organizations such as the
Intergovernmental
Authority
on
Development,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the East African Community, the Southern
African Development Community and the Economic
Community of West African States have undertaken a
number of successful peace and security initiatives on
the continent. They have contributed in terms of troops,
logistics, political leadership and finances, according
to the capacity of their member States.
However, in many cases regional and subregional
organizations lack the requisite resources and capacity
to do so, as the experiences of the African Union
Mission in Somalia and the African-led International

13-4200931

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

Support Mission in Mali have shown. We would like
to stress that when the African Union or any other
regional or subregional organization undertakes
peacekeeping or peace-enforcement initiatives, they
shoulder the responsibility of the Security Council
and should therefore be adequately supported. The
critical issue of financing AU peacekeeping missions
authorized by the Security Council — which remains
unresolved almost five years since the AU-United
Nations panel formerly led by Mr. Romano Prodi made
an unequivocal recommendation to consider the use of
assessed contributions on a case-by-case basis — should
be finalized.
Secondly, it is important to strengthen further
cooperation between and among regional and
subregional organizations. The AU-European Union
Partnership on Peace and Security in support of the
African Peace Facility, as a case in point, has been
instrumental in enhancing the AU peace support
operations, capacity-building and early-response
mechanisms.
We call for regular interaction, coordination
and consultation between the United Nations
Secretariat and the secretariats and Commissions of
regional and subregional organizations on matters of
common interest. That will enable them to augment
complementarities and avoid duplication of efforts. We
further call for transparency. The Council should strive
to be more even-handed and transparent in its approach
and decisions so as to dispel the perception that on
some issues under its consideration, vested interests
override fairness.
Thirdly, and in conclusion, the Security Council
should take an interest in issues of human security,
including social and economic development. There is
a great need to stress the linkage between peace and
security, and economic development. We are convinced
that supporting developmental projects will ably
consolidate the peace and security efforts realized so
far by the regional and subregional organizations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): Let me begin
by joining previous speakers in congratulating you,
Madam President, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, and
your delegation on your assumption of this important
role and wishing you success in steering the work of
the Council during your presidency. My delegation

32

also aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
Permanent Representative of the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia on behalf of the African Union.
Madam President, South Africa commends you for
giving special attention to this important topic during
your presidency of the Council. The importance of
developing strategic relations between the Security
Council and regional and subregional organizations
cannot be overemphasized. It is evident that to
succeed in the implementation of its mandate, the
Security Council has to forge a strong partnership with
regional and subregional organizations, particularly in
promoting international peace and security.
Even more important is the realization that while
such organizations may not have sufficient financial
resources to resolve conflicts in their own regions,
they remain a reservoir of critical knowledge about
the nature of such conflicts, including their evolution
and dynamics, their understanding of the parties to the
conflict and other fundamentals that may be essential
for conflict resolution and prevention.
In the case of Africa, new conflict trends, occasioned
by intra-State conflicts, have warranted the increased
involvement of the African Union (AU), which has a
distinct comparative advantage in addressing conflicts
in the often complex environments on the continent.
In 2012, South Africa piloted the adoption of
resolution 2033 (2012), thus building on resolution
1809 (2008), which was also adopted during South
Africa’s presidency of the Security Council, in April
2008. Those resolutions encourage an improvement in
the regular interaction, consultation and coordination
between the two bodies on matters of mutual interest.
Moreover, the strategic thrusts of the resolutions are
the promotion of political and legislative coherence
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council in dealing with African peace and
security challenges.
Over time we have seen the benefits of the
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union and its subregional organizations. At
the operational level, the Secretariat has been active in
supporting the AU’s Peace and Security Architecture
through the implementation of the 10-year capacitybuilding programme. Both organizations also benefit
from the deployment of joint technical assessment
missions. A further example of such cooperation is
the hybrid model, as seen in the African Union-United

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the African-led
International Support mission in Mali, the African
Union Mission in Somalia, and, recently, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) Force
Intervention Brigade.
The debate we are holding today becomes even
more pertinent, particularly in Africa, in view of the
lessons provided by the Force Intervention Brigade. The
Brigade, piloted by the Southern African Development
Community and eventually endorsed by the United
Nations, brings unprecedented innovations that could
eventually serve as a model of United Nations regional
collaboration.
Despite those positive developments, challenges in
this relationship remain, particularly at the legislative
or policy level of the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council. Since 2007, the annual meetings
between the two Councils have become the central
trait of the Council’s relationship with the AU. Other
than the annual meeting, there is no active engagement
between the two Councils. The annual meeting has the
potential to move the relationship in a more strategic
direction.
I wish to point out here that the collaboration
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations has also had its challenges. Perhaps the
main painful reminder has been the differences and
indecisiveness in resolving the Syrian conflict even as
Syria is burning.
Central to the sustainability of peace initiatives are
the principles of national ownership and the sovereignty
of States, which ought to be respected if we are to create
sustainable peace. Steps undertaken by those directly
affected by conflicts, however minimal, including by
regional and subregional organizations, should be taken
into consideration and, where possible, built upon.
South Africa believes that, given the scarcity of
financial and human capital, a clear division of labour
and productive burden-sharing between the United
Nations and regional organizations is critical for
sustainable conflict resolution and prevention efforts.
We furthermore believe regional organizations could
benefit from flexible and predictable financial support
from the United Nations and other international
institutions.

In conclusion, as the AU celebrates its fiftieth
anniversary, clearly the level of maturity of that
organization has grown and its capacity to deal with
conflict resolution, mediation and peacekeeping
has increased. As South Africa, we believe that the
cooperation between the United Nations and the region,
and its subregional capacity, can further be enhanced to
ensure complementarity and minimize the duplication
of efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate Argentina on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council; to thank you,
Madam President, and your country for organizing this
debate; and to welcome and underscore the stewardship
of this debate for a large part of today by President of
Argentina, Ms. Cristina Fernández.
We welcome presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/12)
and we are grateful for the statements by the SecretaryGeneral and the representatives who spoke on behalf
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, the Union of South American Nations, the
African Union and the League of Arab States.
For a country without armed forces such as Costa
Rica, international law and the multilateral system
are the main tools to protect our integrity. For that
reason, we believe that cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations and
agreements is essential in maintaining international
peace and security.
The American hemisphere has a wealth of
experience in the development of bodies for cooperation
and collective security to prevent and settle conflicts
and to promote peace and stability. The Organization of
American States (OAS), as was previously stated, is the
oldest regional organization in the world. Its democratic
mandate offers multiple options for mediation, electoral
monitoring, justice and the protection of individual and
social rights, which are key to peace. The Inter-American
system of human rights in particular is an example of
independence, relevance and legitimacy.
Following the inception of the OAS, in 1948,
there developed in our hemisphere other regional or
subregional organizations and agreements with multiple
aims and scopes. Among them are the Caribbean
Community, the Central American Integration System,

13-4200933

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

the Andean Community, the Common Market of the
South, the Union of South American Nations, the Pacific
Alliance and the Ibero-American Summits, which span
the Atlantic and include Andorra, Spain and Portugal.
The Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, which is a collective endeavour, is the broadest
and most recent regional mechanism for dialogue and
political agreement. Its immediate predecessor was the
Rio Group, which, in turn, emerged from the Contadora
Group, which was established to seek peace in Central
America in the 1980s and shoe contributions contributed
to the achievement of peace in 1987, with the Esquipulas
II Agreement, promoted by the President of Guatemala,
Vinicio Cerezo Arévalo, and President of Costa Rica,
Oscar Arias Sánchez, who, as a result of that initiative,
was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. The great success
of the Esquipulas process was based on its regional
roots, its comprehensive approach to conflict and the
effective participation and coordination of the United
Nations, the OAS and other regional and international
actors in the management and implementation of the
accord. Its lessons are extremely relevant to this debate.
Faced with the reality of growing regional and
subregional arrangements in the world, with both
potential and genuine impact on peace and security,
coordination is increasingly necessary in two ways:
between the arrangements and organizations themselves
as well as between them and the United Nations. On that
basis and because of our experiences and aspirations,
my delegation wishes to make four proposals.
First, the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, should devote at least the same attention to
prevention as it does to the settlement of conflicts.
Prevention involves confidence-building, mediation,
providing good offices, triggering early warnings
and establishing mechanisms to facilitate, implement
and monitor agreements. However, true conflict
prevention, especially those of a domestic nature,
requires addressing the roots of the conflict; respecting
human rights; encouraging democratic processes;
strengthening the rule of law, good governance and
transparency; and creating conditions for development,
accountability and the fight against impunity.
Regional and subregional bodies can play key roles
in both aspects of prevention. They have in their favour
more direct knowledge of national dynamics, closer
and more personal contact with the parties, a greater
ability to act, greater facility to establish links with

34

the relevant organizations of civil society and probably
a particular interest in avoiding or settling conflicts
directly affecting their members. For that reason,
the United Nations should place particular stress
on building capacity for prevention and mediation
in regional bodies and support them in those tasks.
Support for the International Criminal Court is also
part of the preventive diplomacy equation.
Our second recommendation is that cooperation for
peace and security between the Security Council and
regional bodies should not be limited to only Articles
52 to 54 of the Charter of the United Nations. Equally
important, but very much neglected, is Article 26,
which gives the Council the mandate to develop plans
for the regulation of armaments,
“[i]n order to promote the establishment and
maintenance of international peace and security
with the least diversion for armaments of the
world’s human and economic resources”.
The Council must give real expression to Article 26
and channel its cooperation with regional organizations
more towards arms control, the regulation of military
spending and the prevention of an arms race, which are
obvious obstacles to peace and development.
However, many of the tasks entailed in promoting
peace and security go beyond the scope of Council
action. Therefore, our third recommendation is to boost
the organic connections between the entire United
Nations system and regional bodies, especially in the
systematic drive to prevent and mediate.
Our fourth and final recommendation is that, in order
to guide its coordination with regional organizations
and arrangements, the United Nations take into
account their different legal natures, experience, focus,
capacity for execution, institutional strengthening
and legitimacy. Given its comprehensive perspective,
the United Nations may discern which partnerships
to enhance and when, according to different needs
and goals. In addition, given its universality, it can
act to generate more communication, coherence and
synergies between regional entities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): Allow me to begin
by congratulating you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Argentina has been one of the leading

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

voices calling for regional cooperation in South
America, and the choice of the topic for this high-level
open debate clearly demonstrates your astuteness in this
area. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his earlier briefing.

also emphasized the rule of law and the importance of
respecting human rights while countering terrorism. In
that regard, Malaysia looks forward to the first review
of the comprehensive partnership, which is expected to
take place in October.

Malaysia associates itself with the statement made
by the representaive of Viet Nam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).

It would be relevant at this point to also highlight
the comprehensive approach taken by Malaysia in
addressing threats to regional security, especially
within the ASEAN context. We have always argued
that it is necessary to address the root causes of such
threats, be they underdevelopment, poverty, political
disputes or the preservation of national, socio-cultural
or ethno-religious identities. We therefore believe that
regional security arrangements should also take into
consideration such factors in a more holistic approach.
At the same time, the broader framework of ASEAN
also provides us with policy instruments to tackle the
economic and social factors that drive conflicts.

As a firm believer in multilateralism and
regionalism, Malaysia recognizes the importance of
regional organizations cooperating with the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. As one of the founding members of ASEAN,
we have strived to create a regional union of States that
can concentrate our shared efforts aimed at addressing
common challenges. From the outset, ASEAN has
faced threats to our collective peace and security,
ranging from post-colonial territorial disputes to the
non-traditional security issues of today.
As ASEAN has evolved over time, it has also
strengthened and deepened its linkages with the United
Nations and other international and intergovernmental
organizations. That of course includes cooperation
with the United Nations in maintaining international
peace and security. The pace of that cooperation has
accelerated, as can be seen in the ASEAN-United
Nations comprehensive partnership. This Partnership,
which was adopted over a year ago, has already
achieved tangible results, such as the exchange of
experiences and best practices in conflict prevention
and preventive diplomacy between ASEAN and United
Nations officials.
Peace and security has been one of the major
components of political and security cooperation, which
has been identified as the first priority area under the
ASEAN-United Nations comprehensive partnership.
As an initiative to enhance cooperation between
ASEAN and the United Nations on counter-terrorism,
including by improving capacity and the exchange of
information, Malaysia hosted a workshop and a seminar
on international joint investigations on cash courier
border controls, held in Kuala Lumpur, in November
2011 and June 2012, respectively. Both the workshop
and seminar, which were facilitated by the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, aimed at
strengthening the capacity of ASEAN member States
in joint investigations in the region and in detecting and
preventing the illegal cross-border movement of cash. It

I should also like to point out that, while regional
problems require regional solutions, there is also a
smaller subset of subregional problems that can be
more effectively resolved by subregional solutions.
That can be illustrated by using the case of the
Brunei Darussalam-Indonesia-Malaysia-Philippines East
ASEAN Growth Area. One example that complements
the work of the Security Council on the ground is that
arrangement’s working group on customs, immigration
and quarantine. That mechanism has the capacity
to enhance existing measures by individual States
to prevent the smuggling of small arms and light
weapons and the cross-border movement of individuals
suspected in terrorism. As such, despite its primary
intentions for enhancing economic cooperation, the
Growth Area and other subregional organizations have
demonstrated the potential to also play a supporting
role in the maintenance of peace and security.
In conclusion, ASEAN has been successful
in promoting peace and security in its region. My
delegation believes that this is due to the consultative
and discreet diplomacy that ASEAN members practice,
or what is commonly known as the ASEAN way.
Therefore, looking at the examples of other regions, we
are of the view that there should not be a one-size-fitsall approach to collaborations between the United
Nations and regional organizations. Instead, the unique
circumstances of a region and its people should be taken
into consideration when devising such mechanisms of
collaboration.

13-4200935

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate Argentina for assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and to wish you,
Madam President, every success. I would also like
to express our appreciation for the scheduling of this
important debate. And I thank the Secretary-General
and the representatives of the regional organizations for
their statements.
As encouraged in Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, effective cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is of crucial significance in maintaining
international peace and security. Although the primary
responsibility remains with the Security Council,
regional and subregional organizations also play an
important role in that regard. That role is clearly
spelled out in the Charter, and its importance has
been emphasized in various Council resolutions and
presidential statements.
We welcome the regional organizations’ keen
interest in working with the United Nations and
further strengthening their cooperation. We hope the
Security Council will seize this opportunity to benefit
from the insightful perspectives from various regional
viewpoints in better facing the urgent challenges that
confront us all.
Building upon that renewed commitment, we
should explore new and practical patterns of enhanced
cooperation and introduce the necessary mechanisms
for their implementation. After all, in today’s volatile
security environment, the United Nations is not capable
of dealing alone with all the problems threatening
international peace and security. Addressing them
entails strong and influential regional partners.
That is particularly the case for peacekeeping and
peacebuilding endeavours. Any contribution by regional
organizations in those areas is of great importance, not
only for burden-sharing purposes but also to ensure
regional ownership. In that regard, we are particularly
grateful to organizations such as the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, the League of Arab States,
the African Union and the European Union for their
determined efforts and exemplary commitment.
Furthermore, cooperation should not be limited to
peacekeeping efforts. Conflict prevention through early

36

warning, political mediation, cooperative interaction,
confidence-building, post-conflict peacebuilding,
reconstruction and the protection of civilians, including
women and children, are as central as peacekeeping.
Regional organizations have unique perspectives on
and a local understanding of conflicts, cultural norms
and security challenges in their region, giving them a
comparative advantage. In that context, they are making
a growing contribution to effectively complementing
the work of the United Nations in preventing and
resolving conflicts, including through mediation.
Turkey, as co-Chair, with Finland, of the Group of
Friends of Mediation and its 45 members, recognizes
the key role such organizations play in mediation. We
therefore welcome the collaboration on mediation, and
specifically capacity-building, between the secretariats
of the United Nations and the regional organizations as
a concrete example of fruitful interaction. The technical
assistance provided by the Mediation Support Unit of
the United Nations Department of Political Affairs to
such organizations has contributed to enhancing their
capacities in this very important area.
Turkey is a proud member or has observer status in
many of the organizations represented here today. We
firmly support the United Nations policy of intensified
engagement with regional organizations, including the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the Conference
on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in
Asia, the League of Arab States, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, the Organization of the Black
Sea Economic Cooperation, the Pacific Islands Forum,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, the Union
of South American Nations and the Organization of
American States.
We applaud the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, bearing in mind that
two-thirds of the work of the Security Council is on
issues related to Africa. We commend the remarkable
efforts of the African Union and such subregional
organizations as the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region to ensure peace, security and
stability throughout the continent.

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

The Organization of Islamic Cooperation, which
has members on four different continents, plays a
particularly unique role in helping to consolidate
the foundation of global peace and creating a better
understanding between different cultures and religions.
This platform has once more been abused in order
to make total misrepresentations that Turkey has
already categorically rejected. They cannot dissuade
us from standing firmly by the Syrian people, whose
voice, unfortunately, cannot be heard here. Before
I conclude, I would like to express Turkey’s earnest
commitment to making every effort to further advance
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. It is in that same spirit
that we fully support the draft presidential statement
prepared by Argentina.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): At the outset, the
delegation of Indonesia congratulates you, Madam
President, on your presidency for the month of August.
We are grateful to you for convening this important
open debate, and for your helpful and well-structured
concept paper (S/2013/446, annex).
Indonesia associates itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
We would also like to express our appreciation to the
various regional and subregional organizations that
have spoken today, and commends them on their work
to advance peace in their respective regions.
The subject of this debate is particularly important
to Indonesia. Indeed, during our last presidency of
the Security Council in November 2007, we also held
an open debate on it (S/PV.5776), after which the
Council issued presidential statement S/PRST/2007/42.
Among other points in that presidential statement,
the Council recognized the important role of regional
and subregional organizations in the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
and how such organizations are strongly positioned to
understand the root causes of many conflicts and other
security challenges close to home and to influence their
prevention and resolution.
On 13 January 2010, at the instigation of China,
the Council held another debate (S/PV.6257) that

focused on the relationship between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, stressing
the importance of developing effective partnerships.
Following that debate, the Council expressed its
intention to promote closer and more operational
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in the fields of conflict
early-warning, prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, and to ensure the coherence,
synergy and collective effectiveness of their efforts
(see S/PRST/2010/1). With that background in mind,
my delegation welcomes the adoption of today’s
presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/12, which reflects
and reaffirms many of the important elements from
previous presidential statements on the subject.
The greater complexity of current conflicts requires
regional and subregional organizations to play a more
significant and multidimensional role. In order to carry
out the task of maintaining international peace and
security more effectively, however, we must continue to
expand and deepen cooperation and dialogue between
the United Nations system and those organizations.
Is it possible to more clearly define the comparative
advantages of the United Nations and each regional
organization in problem-solving and their contribution
to international peace and security?
Our response to that question is that it is not
only possible to do so, but it is also important. In our
view, the challenge before the United Nations is not
to be everywhere or to attempt to do everything. On
the contrary, the emerging reality is that the United
Nations can be more effective simply by developing and
strengthening its partnerships, especially with regional
and subregional organizations, so that the stronger
those partnerships are, the stronger and more effective
the United Nations becomes.
If that goal is to be achieved, Indonesia reiterates
that one size does not and cannot fit all. Owing to
cultural and other factors, an approach that may
be a winner in one part of the world may not be as
successful in another. To that end, it is important to
maintain continuing consultations between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
so as to develop an understanding of the lessons and
mechanisms that are transferable and those that may
not be. Some regional frameworks should receive the
right assistance from the United Nations and other
actors, and strong efforts should be made to strengthen
strategic trust between the United Nations and various

13-4200937

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

organizations. In our view, it is those efforts that will
help to develop and strengthen cooperation in such
areas as early warning, conflict prevention, mediation
and post-conflict peacebuilding.
Let me turn to my own region, South-East
Asia. Indonesia is a staunch supporter of regional
cooperation, and ASEAN forms an integral part of
our foreign policy. A stable, peaceful and prosperous
South-East Asia, indeed, the Asia-Pacific, as once
underlined by Indonesia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs
Marty Natalegawa, must necessarily entail an ASEAN
that is at the heart of the region’s dynamics, positively
shaping and moulding developments.
Being an ardent proponent of closer United NationsASEAN cooperation, we are proud of the fact that
among the key outcomes of Indonesia’s chairmanship
of ASEAN in 2011 was the ASEAN-United Nations
Comprehensive Partnership and Bali Concord III. Both
are seminal documents reflecting a greater ASEAN
role on the global stage.
In that connection, allow me to share the following
thoughts. ASEAN, as a vibrant and dynamic regional
organization, can and should be part of the solution to
many global security issues by being effective, capable
and peaceful. It must continue to strengthen its role as
a net contributor to international peace and security.
Stronger and effective regional and subregional
organizations, able to promote and wage peace in their
respective regions, will not only contribute to global
peace but, as has been proved in the case of ASEAN,
also enable the countries in the region to channel their
resources to development.
What the United Nations can do is to assist
regional and subregional organizations such as ASEAN
in continuing to build their capacity. The United
Nations and ASEAN already have at their disposal
such a partnership platform under the Comprehensive
Partnership, which can benefit from broadened
cooperation in various pertinent areas, including
peacebuilding, peacekeeping, mediation and civilian
capacity.
I would like to conclude by underscoring the
significance of a comprehensive and integrated approach
to the maintenance of regional and international peace
and security. In order to effectively address conflicts and
achieve sustainable results, it is critical that mediation,
peacemaking and peacebuilding be deployed from the
onset of instability, and nurtured and sustained through

38

an inclusive and credible political process that includes
paying attention to the root causes.
Such an endeavour, when undertaken in a spirit of
partnership between the United Nations and regional as
well as subregional organizations, will inevitably yield
greater peace around the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): Madam President, let me begin
by congratulating you on presiding over this high-level
meeting of the Security Council. Cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security is an important and topical issue. We commend
the concept note (S/2013/446, annex) prepared by the
delegation of Argentina on this subject.
India supports the role of regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international
peace and security, as well as their cooperation with
the United Nations under Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. Article 54 of the Charter enjoins
such organizations to keep the Security Council
fully informed of their activities for the maintenance
of international peace and security. We therefore
welcome the participation of, and the briefings by, the
representatives of various regional organizations in
today’s meeting.
The Charter provides a broad framework for United
Nations cooperation with the regional organizations
while clearly underscoring the primary responsibility
of the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
It is important to underline here that cooperation
by the United Nations, particularly the Council, with
regional organizations should be in full compliance
with all other provisions of the Charter. The principles
of national sovereignty, political independence, and
unity and territorial integrity must be respected. It
is important that the peculiarities of each situation
be kept in mind. Also, cooperation with one regional
organization should not come at the cost of cooperation
with another.
We believe that the objective of the peaceful
resolution of conflicts should imbue the actions of the
United Nations in general and of the Security Council
in particular. It is important that Member States guide

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

all United Nations activities, including its cooperation
with regional organizations.

behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN).

While acting under Chapter VIII of the Charter,
regional and subregional organizations should make
every effort to assist their member States to achieve
the pacific settlement of disputes, in cooperation with
the United Nations, as appropriate. Such cooperation
should encompass all relevant issues related to
international peace and security, including the fight
against terrorism.

Thailand joins many of the previous speakers
in recognizing and commending the significant role
and valuable contributions of the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in resolving
conflicts and maintaining peace and security. We
wholeheartedly support the idea of developing effective
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations as well as that of
exploring greater cooperation in the fields of conflict,
early warning, prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, as contained in document
S/PRST/2010/1.

As many as two thirds of the active items on the
Security Council’s agenda concern Africa. About three
fourths of the Council’s time is spent on African issues.
It would therefore be no exaggeration to say that the
success of the Council’s cooperation with regional
organizations will be determined in significant measure
by its cooperation with the African Union (AU), as an
example. In that connection, it is important for the
Council to listen to Africa and its organizations, so that
the Council’s activities are not only based on Africa’s
needs but also complement the efforts of African
countries and organizations.
We think that such an important partnership
should be based on long-term strategic and
operational perspectives, taking into consideration
the complementarity of the strengths of the United
Nations and the African Union. Our focus should be
on building the capacity of the African Union’s Peace
and Security Architecture, so that the AU can become
a more effective and capable partner of the United
Nations system.
In conclusion, we reiterate that there is a pressing
need to further strengthen the existing capacity of the
United Nations system to help regional and subregional
organizations in order to significantly ensure the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): First of all, I wish
to congratulate Argentina on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August and
also thank it for bringing this important issue before
the Council for its consideration. I also thank the
representatives of the four regional organizations for
their substantive and comprehensive briefings.
Thailand aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam on

As mentioned by my ASEAN colleague earlier,
disaster relief is one area of possible cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
I would like to echo his statement by highlighting one
important example of the establishment of Tripartite
Core Group — the United Nations, ASEAN and the
Government of Myanmar — which was extremely
successful in mobilizing and delivering humanitarian
aid to people in need in the wake of Cyclone Nargis,
which struck Myanmar in 2008.
Indeed, cooperation between ASEAN and the
United Nations was established many decades ago, and
we continue to have close consultations to strengthen
our collaboration. This year will see a special session
between ASEAN and the United Nations to review our
partnership, with the goal of widening and deepening
our areas of cooperation.
My delegation would like to highlight the untapped
potential of the various regional and subregional
arrangements. Given their capacity, their role can extend
beyond the original scope of the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Thailand envisages an enhanced role for such
organizations in confidence-building and preventive
diplomacy, which are instrumental for sustainable
peace and conflict prevention. In that regard, allow me
to offer the Council a few thoughts on the issue.
First, it is essential that the United Nations, regional
and subregional organizations increase their focus on
preventive measures by expanding and deepening their
cooperation in promoting international norms, values
and principles of democracy, the rule of law, good
governance and respect for and protection of human
rights, which are fundamental for a united and peaceful
society.

13-4200939

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, we are concerned by the increase in
the number of conflicts and the level of violence that
originate from sectarian tension or are precipitated by
hate speech, religious rhetoric and racial incitement.
Regional and subregional arrangements can serve
as early warning mechanisms when tensions arise.
Furthermore, those organizations can play a vital role
in creating a culture of peace by promoting respect
and appreciation for diversity and harmony among
peoples of different cultures, faiths and beliefs, both
interregionally and intraregionally.

focused on the requirements of local situations in order
to promote local solutions. That includes providing
expertise most suitable for the systems existing in the
local situation and sourcing peacekeeping expertise
from States and regions that are able to provide unified
or consistent advice, particularly in the area of building
the capacity of local institutions. While expertise from
different backgrounds can provide well-intentioned
advice, that advice can nonetheless result in local
capacities that are not uniform and may not be best
suited for the local context.

Thirdly, Thailand also encourages closer
engagement between regional organizations and the
Security Council on issues affecting regional peace
and security, from peacekeeping to sanctions, as well
as thematic issues on the Security Council’s agenda.

In such situations, the contributions of regional
and subregional groupings that come from similar
backgrounds to the host country can be advantageous.
What we are saying is that the United Nations
should not measure the success of contributions to
any peacekeeping mission by the number of States
contributing troops, police, corrections or other
experts, but by the efficacy of the contributions made in
meeting the host country’s requirements. It is therefore
the Fiji delegation’s view that, in examining the
principles and forms of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
one element that is often missing from the discussion
is how to encourage contributions to peacekeeping
from regions that are most suited to the situation in the
country concerned and to encourage and use collective
peacekeeping capabilities accordingly.

Finally, another area where the United Nations
and regional organizations can enhance their close
cooperation is the systematic compilation and full
utilization of regional organizations’ knowledge and
information on the specific geography and situations on
the ground, the unique cultures of local communities
and the “do’s and don’ts”. That will be very useful when
multinational forces are deployed for peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions in areas where they lack
familiarity.
Let me conclude my statement by paying tribute
to the men and women of regional organizations and
international forces who tirelessly work and risk
their lives in conflict zones around the world in the
maintenance of peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Fiji.
Mr. Thomson (Fiji): At the outset, the Fiji delegation
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for choosing the
subject of today’s thematic debate. It is most pertinent,
given the growing number of peacekeeping mandates
issuing from the Security Council and the increasing
complexities of the tasks of peacekeeping missions.
The peacekeeping missions of today are not
the peacekeeping missions of yore. They include
mandates that fit well into traditinal peacebuilding and,
sometimes, mandates that focus on development related
to the rebuilding of national capacities in the security
sector.
Fiji has, in various forums, expressed the need
for Security Council peacekeeping mandates to be

40

In the Pacific Islands region, we are taking regional
initiatives to support United Nations peacekeeping. Fiji
already has a well-established record in the service of
United Nations peacekeeping. We have recently taken
on a new challenge upon request of the United Nations,
namely, that of contributing 501 troops to the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force in the Golan
Heights at a critical juncture in that mission’s work.
Recognizing our established tradition of
peacekeeping and the ability of our region to contribute
further, the Melanesian Spearhead Group (MSG) has
recently agreed to the concept of establishing an MSG
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. The MSG
is a subregional organization headquartered in Port
Vila, Vanuatu, and is comprised of Papua New Guinea,
Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, the Front de libération
nationale kanak et socialiste of New Caledonia and my
own country, Fiji. The MSG’s peacekeeping concept
is focused on developing collective peacekeeping
capabilities in the area of the police sector in
peacekeeping.

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

The United Nations Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has agreed to meet an MSG delegation
in New York to discuss United Nations support for
the development of such collective peacekeeping
capability. We look forward to the fruition of that visit
and to useful discussions while the delegation is in New
York, with a view to assisting the MSG to realize its
potential to play a positive role in the United Nations
peacekeeping community.
In addressing the principles and forms of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations for the maintenance of
international peace and security, we recognize that
the United Nations must adhere to the provisions of
the Charter that specifically prohibit any enforcement
action without the authorization of the Security Council.
Actions by regional and subregional organizations must
therefore be consistent with the mandates and authority
of the Security Council.
In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to all
those who have served in United Nations peacekeeping
operations since 1948. For their sake and for the sake
of the people in whose countries they serve, our efforts
must remain focused on optimizing United Nations
peacekeeping in response to changes in global realities.
Today’s discussion is surely a further step in that
direction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lithuania.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to begin
by expressing my delegation’s appreciation to Argentina,
which holds the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of August, for organizing today’s debate. I
thank the Secretary-General and representatives of the
regional organizations present here for their briefings.
Lithuania associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of the European Union. In
addition, allow me to make the following remarks.
In recent years, the relationship between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in the field of peace and security has evolved in
terms of both ambition and scope. We welcome such
developments because, as noted by numerous speakers
before me, regional actors possess a unique local
knowledge, can intervene more promptly through
existing standby arrangements and mechanisms and
can ensure regional ownership of conflict resolution

and subsequent peacebuilding processes. Importantly,
the geographical proximity of their members and the
specific regional knowledge and experience of those
organizations can play an essential role in the early
identification of potential conflicts and thus in defusing
crises before they occur.
Based on our own experience in preventive
diplomacy, including Lithuania’s chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), we encourage the United Nations and regional
and subregional actors to further explore and strengthen
the preventive and confidence-building dimensions of
cooperation.
No two crises or conflicts are identical. Therefore,
as noted in the 2009 non-paper entitled “A New
Partnership Agenda: Charting a New Horizon for
United Nations Peacekeeping”, the political and
operational realities on the ground will continue to
demand flexible, case-specific and creative United
Nations partnerships with regional actors, building on
their comparative strengths, ensuring consistency and
complementarity of efforts, and avoiding duplications.
Nowhere has United Nations cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations evolved as much
as on the African continent, with the African Union
(AU), African subregional organizations, the European
Union (EU) and occasionally other players, such as the
International Organization of la Francophonie, taking
part.
Lithuania is proud to contribute to such multifaceted
efforts. Recently, our military advisers joined the EU
training mission for Malian soldiers in the region of
Koulikoro. Earlier this year, Lithuania deployed troops
in an anti-piracy mission off the coast of Somalia, a
country where the United Nations, the AU, and the EU
have joined forces with an aim of restoring peace and
stability to that long-suffering nation.
While welcoming the Council’s continued dialogue
and consultations with regional organizations, as well
as joint actions on the ground, we would encourage an
enhanced focus on issues of justice and accountability;
tackling impunity for crimes against civilian
populations, including sexual violence in conflict;
and the effective implementation of Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security, and
children and armed conflict.

13-4200941

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

Regional and subregional organizations have a
vital role in stemming the illegal trade in small arms
and light weapons, which are responsible for countless
civilian victims and damaged lives. My delegation
would like to point out in particular that the recently
adopted Arms Trade Treaty expressly recognizes that
regional and subregional organizations can play a role in
providing implementation assistance through, inter alia,
stockpile management; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes; and developing model
legislation.
In the past 10 years, Lithuania provided assistance
to some 20 projects related to the destruction of
small arms, anti-personnel mines, cluster munitions
and unexploded ordnance, carried out by regional
organizations. Let me also stress the importance of
subregional, regional and international cooperation
in the field of non-proliferation. With that in mind,
Lithuania organized last year a regional seminar on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). This year the
Lithuanian chairmanship held a thematic OSCE forum
on security cooperation dialogue, with the participation
of the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), Ambassador Kim Sook.
In order to achieve durable peace, it is essential that
the United Nations and its regional partners continue
to take a long-term view aimed at breaking the pattern
of relapse into conflict, which still plagues individual
States. In that context, we welcome consistent
involvement by regional and subregional actors in, and
their ownership of, institution- and capacity-building,
implementing the rule of law and strengthening good
governance and human rights protection mechanisms.
In conclusion, let me note that cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations is not
an end in itself. It must lead to tangible improvements
and prospects for a safe and dignified life for those
suffering from violence and conflict. I am pleased
that presidential statement S/PRST/2013/12 reaffirms
the common determination of the United Nations and
regional actors to work to that effect.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Okafor (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your initiative in organizing this important debate,
and for providing a valuable concept note (S/2013/446,
annex) to facilitate the discussions.

42

Nigeria is particularly pleased with the depth of
cooperation that exists between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU), and welcomes the strategic plan
to consider further steps to promote closer cooperation
between the two organizations in consonance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. We
are satisfied that, since its inception, significant strides
have been made in conflict resolution, peacekeeping,
post-conflict
peacebuilding
and
economic
reconstruction in numerous African countries. That
has created momentum for the emergence of a more
enabling social, economic and political environment in
Africa.
We have witnessed United Nations and AU
peacekeepers patrol side by side in Darfur, as the two
organizations work concertedly to mediate a political
solution to that conflict. That enduring collaboration
has also proved fruitful in resolving the crisis in
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and has provided support to recent African-led
mediation efforts in response to political crises in other
parts of the continent.
Nigeria ardently believes that cooperation between
the United Nations and subregional organizations
should be an ongoing and dynamic process so that the
benefits of such cooperation can be reaped in preventive
diplomacy, conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peace
support and, indeed, in post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding. We believe that regional bodies should
assume leadership of efforts to maintain regional peace
and security, with the international community lending
the requisite support. Those organizations, after all,
are better placed in terms of geographical proximity,
political and cultural familiarity with local conditions,
and shared experiences with regard to regional peace
and security initiatives.
The response of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) to regional crisis situations
is illustrative of that potential. Therefore, we would
like to emphasize the need for the United Nations to
intensify such regional initiatives and to give impetus
to the implementation of the United Nations-African
Union 10-year capacity-building programme for the
African Union. More strident efforts are also required
to operationalize the African Union Standby Force and
the continental early-warning mechanisms.
The situation in Mali underscores the imperative
for early warning. It should be recalled that ECOWAS

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

made several attempts to draw international attention
to the imminent danger occasioned by the potent mix of
religious extremism, the lack of legitimate governance
and the failure to address the yearning of a section of
the population of Mali. Expedited action in response to
warnings of the looming crisis would have alleviated
the agony that we face today.
Nigeria recognizes that there are competing
demands for United Nations resources on myriad
issues, including peace and security, not only in Africa
but also in other regions. We therefore believe that it is
important to consider not only prioritizing our actions,
but also adopting innovative approaches. It is equally
important to assess the impact and sustainability of
our actions, as well as promote the complementarity of
roles in the promotion of peace and security. That will
require more intensive partnerships, inclusiveness and
purposeful leadership. We believe that there is room
in the cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union to incorporate those vital elements.
However, our best intentions will amount to nothing if
we fail to provide adequate, flexible and predictable
funding for peacekeeping operations in Africa.
It is also necessary to coordinate efforts between
the United Nations and regional organizations. That is
one of the objectives of the annual consultation between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council. We believe that for that interaction to bear fruit,
there must be a strengthening of the political will and a
firm resolve to implement strategic decisions. In spite
of the capacity gaps in the continent’s quest to achieve
sustainable development, Nigeria will relentlessly
support closer collaboration between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations to
ensure that those gaps are appropriately bridged.
We would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2013/12.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Allow me to join
previous speakers in thanking Her Excellency
President Cristina Fernández for presiding over this
important debate. I would also like to express our
gratitude to the Ministers, the Secretary-General and
the representatives of international organizations for
their presence and contributions this morning.

Armenia aligns itself with the joint statement made
on behalf of the member States of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO). However we would like to
make some remarks in our national capacity.
We welcome the increasing close relations between
the CSTO and the United Nations aimed at strengthening
the ties and seeking concerted actions in our quest for
international peace and stability.
In the area of preventive diplomacy, both
organizations have been working in close partnership
to address root causes and potential conflicts, as
well as promoting measures against cross-border
crime, terrorism and drug trafficking, so as to ensure
conditions for peaceful sustainable development, as
such transnational crimes continually threaten security,
stability and development, especially in the world’s
vulnerable regions.
The cooperation with and between regional
organizations is being discussed more and more in
various United Nations organs and agencies as the
means for increasing responsibility and involvement in
addressing international challenges and transnational
regional threats. In an increasing number of its
operations on the ground, the United Nations is calling
on the services of the relevant regional agencies and
organizations, because, among other things, in certain
areas those organizations are able to provide expertise
and a better understanding of the local peculiarities
to complement those of the United Nations. In some
instances, they can be mandated to perform the same
tasks, and rightly so.
It is worth mentioning that, in recent years, regional
and subregional organizations have played an increasing
role in conflict prevention, management and resolution.
Many of them have developed tailored capabilities
for action in the maintenance of international and
regional peace and security, as evidenced in a number
of peacekeeping operations and mediations in different
parts of the world.
Armenia highly values the close cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
We are convinced that the OSCE is an inclusive
and comprehensive security organization in the
Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian areas. Its role should be
further augmented to tackle new challenges and threats
to security.

13-4200943

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

Since 1992, the OSCE has been engaged in the
settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh issue, which
erupted in the region as a result of aggression. Today,
Armenia attaches great importance to the efforts of the
OSCE Mink Group co-Chairs, aimed at reaching a fully
informed, just and peaceful resolution of the conflict
based on mutual compromise. We believe that this
agreed format, which includes the Russian Federation,
the United States and France, has enough capacity
to maintain its lead role in the negotiating process.
That role has been confirmed on many occasions, in
particular in the commemorative declaration of the
Astana summit of the OSCE.
Armenia is deeply confident that ongoing
negotiations within this framework will serve as one of
the major prerequisites for the maintenance of the 1994
ceasefire between the parties to the conflict, without
any peacekeeping forces deployed on the ground. One
of the advantages of the OSCE Minsk Group is that the
principles that have been established by the co-Chairs to
date are based on initial compromises reached between
the parties to the conflict as a result of negotiations.
Those principles should be treated as equal, without
establishing any arbitrary hierarchy among them.
In May, Armenia assumed the chairmanship of the
Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, a
regional intergovernmental organization that remains
a key partner of the United Nations in our shared
global quest united behind the principles of all human
rights and fundamental freedoms. The cooperation
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe
is also well established, inter alia, in the fields of the
fight against racism, discrimination, xenophobia and
intolerance; the fight against terrorism and human
trafficking; the promotion of intercultural dialogue, the
strengthening of the rule of law, and the fostering of
democratic societies.
These issues are also Armenia’s chairmanship
priorities, and have been defined in response to the
challenges that States members of both the United
Nations and the Council of Europe are facing today, with
specific focus on issues that we consider to be the most
pertinent and to require immediate action. Armenia
will contribute to furthering the Council of Europe’s
cooperation with other international organizations,
including the United Nations. Such cooperation is
essential to achieving better synergies among activities
and to the enhanced effectiveness and impact of efforts.

44

I wish to conclude my statement by thanking you,
Madam, for the initiative of convening this open debate.
We must all nurture and support steps and initiatives
aimed at expanding cooperation with existing
partners, and seek new opportunities for partnership
arrangements with other regional organizations that
are working to advance the cause of international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Allow me to
congratulate you, Madam, and your country on
assuming the presidency of the Council for this month.
We also thank you very much for convening this open
debate today.
Let me at the outset reiterate the importance
that Botswana attaches to the relationship between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. It is for this reason that, as a member
of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), we are proud of the role we play in contributing
to a peaceful world order. Our belief is that, the role
of regional or subregional organizations in promoting
peace and security is closely linked to the larger role
played by the Council in discharging its mandate.
While we believe in the supremacy of the Security
Council in discharging its mandate, as provided for in
Article 24 of the Charter United Nations, we believe
that regional and subregional organizations constitute
an important building block in addressing issues of
conflict prevention, mediation and management at the
regional level.
The rising number of conflicts and peacebuilding
missions across the world has put a lot of pressure on
the Council’s ability to deploy resources in every corner
of the globe where they are required. Furthermore, the
cost of managing and maintaining peace very often
depends on regional dynamics and sensitivities that can
better be addressed by local institutions, which have a
better understanding of the culture and language of the
region.
Article 24 of the United Nations Charter confers
on the Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Partnership between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations not only relieves the
burden of the Council in dispensing its primary
responsibility, but also helps cultivate a culture of peace

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

and security, which the Council is mandated to do.
The strain of implementing various Security Council
mandates necessitated an increased role for Member
States’ contribution to An Agenda for Peace (S/24111),
accompanied by a rise in the role of regional and
subregional organizations. This partnership between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations has become the ultimate instruction
manual for resolving complex emergencies through
conflict management and peacekeeping.
However, the price of peace should never be
considered too much to pay when evaluation is
conducted regarding the necessary response and
enforcement action required following the outbreak
of conflict. Maintaining the context and support of
the United Nations in regional initiatives contributes
greatly to the transformation of the character of such
missions. United Nations regional and subregional
cooperation also ensures that impediments related to
limited resources, capacity constraints, and political
and economic fragilities relating to some situations
and environments are easily overcome. My delegation
therefore cannot overemphasize the importance of the
provision of training and logistical and material support
to the military, police and civil personnel on an ongoing
basis in order to prepare for the eventual success of
deployments and peacekeeping operations.
Cooperation between the United Nations, regional
and subregional organizations should therefore be
sustained and strengthened, not only as a source
of prevention, but also for purposes of reinforcing
the platform for post-conflict peacebuilding and
reconstruction. In this context, my delegation therefore
welcomes the efforts and progress made closer to home
surrounding the implementation of the commitments
under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like, at the outset, to express our sincere pleasure at
seeing the President of the Argentine Republic preside
over the Council’s debate this morning. We congratulate
Argentina on assuming the presidency of the Council
this month. We also thank the Argentine delegation for
convening today’s open debate on a very important topic
and for providing the concept paper before us (S/2013/446,
annex), which highlights the important of cooperation

between the United Nations and regional subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
I furthermore commend the importance attached to
the ongoing discussion of this important issue by the
Security Council and the Secretary-General.
We take this opportunity to welcome Ms. Samantha
Power as she takes up her new post and to wish her
every success. We look forward to cooperating with
her in order to achieve the goals and objectives of the
United Nations.
The continued discussion of this topic in the Security
Council and the submission by the Secretary-General
of various initiatives in that context is a reaffirmation
of the fact that the discussion on the importance and
usefulness of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations is no longer
academic or theoretical; it is a fact based on experiences
witnessed by the entire world. It is therefore clear
that such organizations play a significant role in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Our delegation therefore deems it very important
that specific mechanisms and norms be established
in order to enable regional organizations to fulfil
their mandates in accordance with the Charter. Such
mechanisms and norms must also be implemented in
order to help prevent conflicts and to resolve them in
keeping with international law, wherever they may take
place and without discrimination, in order to achieve
the primary objective of the United Nations: to maintain
international peace and security, as set out in Article,
paragraph 1, of the Charter.
Experience has shown that with the growing
number of armed conflicts and the increasing obstacles
and difficulties confronting the United Nations in
certain cases, the efforts of the United Nations require
support from regional organizations in accordance with
the mandate set out in Chapter VIII of the Charter. It is
clear that regional organizations are the best and least
costly option in terms of material and human resources
for gaining an understanding of what is happening in
some of those conflicts. They are the most capable of
analysing information relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security in each region. That
regional role has been very important in the prevention
or resolution of several conflicts.

13-4200945

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

We must therefore devote greater attention
to cooperation between regional and subregional
organizations and the United Nations in order to
strengthen the relationship between the Security
Council and regional and subregional organizations.
That requires the creation of an international
atmosphere that is conducive to enhancing the
capabilities of such organizations, thereby enabling
them to operate effectively on the basis of Chapter VIII
of the Charter. If such organizations avail themselves
of those resources, they will then become the front line
of the United Nations in dealing with and resolving
regional problems and preventing their spillover, as
well as in countering threats to international peace and
security. That would save the United Nations a great
deal of effort, and it could then devote greater attention
to other regions, especially in the area of development.
All of the foregoing will require the full implementation
of Chapter VIII of the Charter, specifically Article 52,
paragraph 1.
The Security Council and the General Assembly
have adopted a number of resolutions on supporting
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. They have welcomed the efforts of such
organizations in connection with the maintenance of
international peace and security and in furtherance
of the objectives of the Charter. In addition, many
important partnerships have been created between the
Security Council and various regional organizations.
Also, as noted by previous speakers today, regional
and subregional organizations have helped to prevent
and resolve conflicts as well as in post-conflict
peacekeeping, and to implement Security Council
resolutions in that regard.
However, we are still awaiting the implementation
of several relevant resolutions. Here I would specifically
mention the resolutions adopted by the Security
Council and the General Assembly on the Middle
East, where the failure to implement them has led to
continued instability and threats to international peace
and security.
Cooperation between the Security Council and the
League of Arab States on various occasions during
the past two decades has led to positive results in the
context of regional and global stability. The Council
was keen to work closely with the League of Arab
States on the basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter, and
several dangerous crises in the region and elsewhere
were addressed.

46

The Council has relied in several of its resolutions
on the vision and perspective of the League of Arab
States, which, in turn, was also keen to implement
those resolutions. However, today we are seeing a lack
of responsiveness to the resolutions of the League of
Arab States concerning the great dangers that threaten
our region and its stability as a result of the inability
of the Security Council to reach agreement on those
issues. Here I would specifically mention the conflict
in Syria, although it poses a great danger and has
immediate effects on international peace and security.
The League of Arab States, based on its role as
a regional organization, as mandated in its charter,
and in keeping with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, has adopted several resolutions
aimed at resolving the conflict in Syria on the basis
of international law and respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights. However, despite
the fact that those resolutions demanded that the Security
Council fulfil its role as mandated by the Charter of the
United Nations and the fact that the League expressed
its readiness to cooperate with the Council in order
to achieve a peaceful settlement of the conflict, the
Council, unfortunately, has been unable to carry out
its duties. That is despite the fact that the conflict
has resulted in more than 100,000 civilian deaths
and several million refugees and internally displaced
persons, and that external militias have now entered
the fray. That has led to further sectarian tensions in
the region, threats to its security and stability, and
violations of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Resolving that conflict will require the Council to
fulfil its responsibilities and cooperate directly with
the relevant international organizations.
The Syrian regime, instead of respecting the will
of the Syrian people and abiding by international
resolutions, has attempted to divert attention from the
war crimes and crimes against humanity that it has
committed by making desperate accusations. However,
League of Arab States resolutions are based on
international law, and we hope for further cooperation,
such as existed in the past between the League and the
United Nations, in line with the Charter and in order
to help support the Council in its efforts to preserve
international peace and security.
I should like to conclude by reiterating the
commitment of Qatar, as a member of the League of
Arab States and a State Member of the United Nations,
to further support the United Nations in all efforts

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

aimed at promoting the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations and at addressing
crises and achieving peaceful settlements. The Council
is aware of the efforts made by the State of Qatar in
recent years to ease tensions in several countries and to
avert and settle conflicts, including dangerous military
conflicts, that could have posed a threat to international
peace and security.
Madam President, we are proud of the fact that
the Security Council has acknowledged the role of
our country in its resolutions, and we welcome the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/12) prepared by
your country.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Madam
President, allow me at the outset to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month, and to thank you for having
convened this meeting to discuss cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.
The founding fathers of the United Nations were
committed to including in Chapter VIII of the Charter
language aimed at supporting the efforts of regional
and subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. That is because they
were fully aware of the fact that international peace is
an indivisible whole and that it was imperative to create
effective partnerships between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations on issues
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security. Accordingly, one recommendation of the joint
United Nations-African Union panel established by
resolution 1809 (2008) was to set up a mechanism for the
sustainable financing of African Union peacekeeping
missions supported by the United Nations.
Part I of that report focused on methods to promote
the strategic relationship between the United Nations
and the African Union and invigorated joint action
channels between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union in a manner that
rises to the level of partnership and direct coordination,
including decision-making and responsibility-sharing
according to the mandate of each body.
In the context of the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, we commend

the ongoing consultation and exchange of visits between
the two since the creation of the African Union Peace
and Security Council was created in 2004. However,
we still look forward to improved coordination
and closer cooperation, especially in relation to the
support provided by the United Nations to the 10-year
capacity-building programme designed to build and
promote African Union capacity in the various fields of
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
With regard to peacekeeping, we would like to
highlight the cooperation between the Secretariat
and the African Union Commission in the context of
the United Nations-African Union Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), which has proven its value
and effectiveness since the former African Union
Mission in the Sudan was transformed into a hybrid
joint mission between the two organizations on
31 December 2007, pursuant to resolution 1769 (2007).
Thus, the mission became an example and model of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that context, we
would also refer to the joint report of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the SecretaryGeneral of June 2007, which stated that UNAMID is a
mission with a predominantly African character, with
the United Nations providing financial, technical and
logistical support, including advice and expertise in
various areas that embody cooperation between the two
organizations.
In the same vein, in discussing cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations,
I would like to highlight another example of the
value of cooperation between the African Union and
international organizations. The regional mediation
mechanism known as the African Union HighLevel Implementation Panel on the Sudan, headed
by Mr. Thabo Mbeki, plays a very important role
in promoting peace within the Sudan and between
the Sudan and South Sudan. That is a constructive
example of cooperation that should be strengthened
and promoted. Such mechanisms should be accorded
sufficient time to finish settling all outstanding issues
between the two countries.
In conclusion, I would like to second and support
the affirmation, made by a number of speakers before
me, that regional and subregional organizations are
more specifically qualified to achieve peace and
security in their regions because of their knowledge

13-4200947

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

of the culture, nature and specific characteristics of
the areas of conflict within their respective regions.
Accordingly, we appeal to the Security Council to
cooperate with those organizations and provide them
with enough capacity to address those conflicts.
Finally, we support the presidential statement
adopted today (S/PRST/2013/12) and its emphasis on
supporting the growing role of regional and subregional
organizations, which complements the role of the
United Nations in maintaining international peace and
security. We also commend and support the presidential
statement’s mention of promoting the capacity of
national justice systems in order to contribute to
accountability.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Solomon Islands.
Mrs. Kenilorea (Solomon Islands): My delegation
attaches great importance to the subject of today’s open
debate and commends you, Madam President, and the
Government of Argentina for convening this timely
discussion of the agenda item.
As stated by the 2004 report of the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change (A/59/565),
while the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the Security
Council, over time a considerable number of regional
and subregional groups have been established. Some of
those organizations have directly contributed to peace
and stability and receive little or insufficient attention
by the United Nations.
Following the ethnic conflict that erupted in
Solomon Islands, the leaders of the Pacific Island Forum
dispatched the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon
Islands (RAMSI) at the invitation of the Government
of Solomon Islands. RAMSI, which initially consisted
of 2,000 military personnel was led by Australia, with
the support of New Zealand and all of the Pacific small
island developing States. RAMSI involved military,
police and civilian components. It was headed by a
civilian and it successfully carried out peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and peacemaking roles. After 10 years of
operation, the Mission, as of last month, is now going
through a transitional phase. The military component
has since withdrawn, with the police component now
playing a more advisory role.
The success of RAMSI can be put down to the
partnership the Mission has with the Government and

48

the people of Solomon Islands. Sufficient resources
provided by the region in carrying out its work and the
flexibility of the Mission have allowed RAMSI to adapt
to changing situations on the ground.
In the 10 years of regional operations in Solomon
Islands, there has been only one loss of life of RAMSI
personnel. Thousands of soldiers, police and civilians
have been rotated through the regional Mission. Last
month, in marking the tenth anniversary of RAMSI,
my Government and people thanked all 14 United
Nations Members of the Pacific Islands Forum and two
non-members of the United Nations for contributing to
international peace and security.
Today, a subregional organization of the Pacific,
the Melanesian Spearhead Group has established a
Department of Peacekeeping Operations unit within
its Secretariat. Solomon Islands would like to welcome
improved coordination between the United Nations
and regional organizations and share information
and expertise as appropriate, especially with regional
organizations that have peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and peacemaking capacities. Such relationships are
provided for under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations and should be encouraged.
We are pleased to see that consultation between
the United Nations and regional organizations is
increasing. It will be noted that, in all Solomon Island
statements that we have delivered in the Council this
year and in the past in such open debates, we have
always recognized the role of regional organizations,
by way of complying with Article 54 of the Charter of
the United Nations, in keeping the Council abreast of
the activities undertaken by regional organizations for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, let me
underline that Georgia aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the European Union
(EU). Allow me now to make a brief intervention in my
national capacity.
First of all, I would like to express our gratitude
to Argentina, as the current presidet of the Security
Council, for this excellent opportunity to discuss
the regional aspect of security and the significant
assistance provided by the United Nations to regional
and subregional organizations in maintaining

13-42009

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

international peace and security. In this context, allow
me to highlight the excellent cooperation developed
between the United Nations and the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development-GUAM, as
well as the priorities of Georgia as Chair State of the
GUAM in 2013.
Fifteen years of active work have shaped GUAM
into a full-fledged regional organization with a
well-established institutional infrastructure. This
organization unites countries with common interests
and challenges and gives us a unique opportunity to
speak out in unison on a number of pressing issues
of common concern. The global political landscape
has opened new horizons for cooperation and created
stronger incentives for joint actions within GUAM.
The ever-changing international environment,
new challenges and opportunities have led us to
develop an even closer interaction within and beyond
the organization. In that light, I would like to stress
the importance of resolution 67/109, adopted by
the General Assembly on 17 December 2012, on
cooperation between the United Nations and GUAM.
The resolution envisages deepening cooperation
between the two international organizations and places
such cooperation within an appropriate institutional
framework. The adoption of that text was important
in terms of increasing the involvement of the United
Nations specialized agencies within the GUAM area in
such fields as anti-terrorism, illegal drug trafficking,
human trafficking, integrated border management and
so on. The adoption of the resolution by consensus
clearly demonstrated the importance that States
Members of the United Nations attach to enhancing
cooperation with GUAM, which we highly value.
Under the current chairmanship of GUAM,
Georgia’s priority is to promote political interaction
between the GUAM States. We have a very close, if
not coinciding, set of foreign policy priorities, and
therefore consider GUAM as a format that reinforces the
position of individual member States in the network of
international relations. In addition, Georgia is focused
on facilitating sectoral cooperation by implementing
mutually beneficial projects within GUAM in the
economic, energy, transportation and other spheres, as
well as enhancing cooperation with major partners of
the organization in GUAM+ formats, such as GUAMUnited States and GUAM-Japan. The activation of
the interparliamentary dimension is also one of the
main priorities of the chairmanship of Georgia, as

this direction undoubtedly has a potential for further
evolution, giving a significant impetus to democratic
development within the GUAM area.
While talking about regional cooperation, I would
like to underline the United Nations active cooperation
with the EU and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to ensure sustainable
security on the European continent. For Georgia, that
interaction acquires a particular importance within
the Geneva international discussions through active
co-chairmanship of the format. We highly appreciate
the mediation that the United Nations and its team
provide between Russia and Georgia. We believe
that the restoration of the full-fledged mission on the
territory of Georgia and its regions would redouble the
United Nations contribution to preserving security and
stability in Georgia and the wider region.
We value the United Nations key role and its
cooperation with the EU within the Incident Prevention
and Response Mechanisms. We are confident that this
format provides solid ground for further developing the
cooperation between the United Nations, the OSCE and
the EU on security issues through the joint participation
of the United Nations and the OSCE in both of the
Mechanisms mentioned. Unfortunately, given certain
obstacles, the Incident Prevention and Response
Mechanism in Gali has been deadlocked since April
2012, but we are confident that our common diplomatic
efforts will be successful in resuming this Mechanism.
Regional organizations play an important role
in the development of regional cooperation, conflict
prevention, the peaceful settlement of disputes,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding. In
that context, we deem the United Nations continuous
support to be vital in assisting regional organizations
in facilitating and solidifying the process of regional
sustainability.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the United Kingdom wishes to make a
further statement.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the presidency for allowing the United Kingdom to
make a further statement. I wish to respond to some of
the statements made in relation to the Falkland Islands.
I note the very questionable relevance of this issue to
the theme of today’s debate and regret the fact that some
participants have used this debate, in which we have
seen a very valuable and timely discussion of United

13-4200949

S/PV.7015 (Resumption 1)

Nations cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, as a platform for expressing positions on
a range of unrelated issues.
Several ministerial participants referred in their
statements to Argentina’s so-called legitimate claim
to the Falkland Islands. The United Kingdom does
not accept that Argentina has any legitimate claim to
sovereignty over the Falkland Islands. The historical
facts and legal position are quite clear. The United
Kingdom has administered the Falkland Islands
peacefully and effectively for more than 180 years. In
1850, by ratifying the bilateral Convention for settlement
of existing differences, Argentina acknowledged
that there was no territorial dispute between the two
countries.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, on
behalf of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States (CELAC), said that respect for selfdetermination was a founding principle of CELAC.
The United Kingdom also attaches great importance to
that principle, which is enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. In March, the people of the Falkland
Islands exercised their right to self-determination in a
referendum, which established overwhelmingly their
wish to remain an overseas territory of the United
Kingdom
In her national statement, President Fernández
said that the United Kingdom and Argentina should
bilaterally discuss the Falkland Islands. The United
Kingdom is clear that any such discussion is not just a
matter for the two Governments. The views of the people
of the Falkland Islands cannot simply be ignored. There
can be no discussion of the sovereignty of the Falkland
Islands against the wishes of the islanders.
Finally, I reject the suggestion of the Foreign
Minister of Uruguay that illegitimate oil-related
activities are being conducted in Falkland Island waters,
which constitute unilateral measures by the United
Kingdom, contrary to a General Assembly resolution.
The decision to exploit its natural resources was made
by the Falkland Islands Government for the benefit of
the people of the Falkland Islands, and in accordance
with the right of self-determination of the people of the

50

Falkland Islands under international law. All activities
related to hydrocarbons on the continental shelf of the
Falkland Islands are regulated by legislation of the
Falkland Islands Government in strict accordance with
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
speak briefly in my capacity as the representative of
Argentina.
Argentina’s position with regard to its sovereignty
over the Malvinas Islands is well known and reference
was made to it this morning.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of the United States wishes to
make a further statement.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): Let
me address an issue unrelated to our debate that was
raised earlier today, namely, the United States efforts to
prevent terrorism and the recent disclosure of classified
information about techniques we use to do that.
All Governments do things that are secret: it is a
fact of modern governing and a necessity in the light of
the threats all our citizens face. Our counter-terrorism
policy is ultimately about saving people’s lives, which
is why the United States works with other countries
to protect our citizens and those of other nations from
many threats. All nations should be concerned about
the damage these disclosures can cause to our ability to
collectively defend against those threats.
The United States commitment to advancing
universal human rights dates to our founding, and
continues strongly to this day under President Obama.
Therefore, we welcome a fair discussion about the
appropriate balance between privacy and security, and
will continue to work with our partners to address the
many challenges and threats we all face.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.55 p.m.

13-42009
