United Nations

A/RES/60/176

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 March 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 106

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 2005
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/60/510 and Corr.1)]

60/176. United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 59/158 of 20 December 2004 and all other relevant
resolutions,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 1
Bearing in mind the urgent need to establish effective crime prevention
strategies for Africa, as well as the importance of law enforcement agencies and the
judiciary at the regional and subregional levels,
Noting that the financial situation of the United Nations African Institute for
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders has greatly affected its
capacity to deliver its services to African Member States in an effective and
comprehensive manner,
Commends the United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of
1.
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders for its efforts to promote and coordinate
regional technical cooperation activities related to crime prevention and criminal
justice systems in Africa;
Commends the Secretary-General for his efforts to mobilize the financial
2.
resources necessary to provide the Institute with the core professional staff required
to enable it to function effectively in the fulfilment of its mandated obligations;
Reiterates the need to strengthen further the capacity of the Institute to
3.
support national mechanisms for crime prevention and criminal justice in African
countries;
Urges the States members of the Institute to make every possible effort to
4.
meet their obligations to the Institute;
5.
Calls upon all Member States and non-governmental organizations to
adopt concrete practical measures to support the Institute in the development of the

_______________
1

05-49816

A/60/123.

A/RES/60/176

requisite capacity and to implement its programmes and activities aimed at
strengthening crime prevention and criminal justice systems in Africa;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to intensify efforts to mobilize all
relevant entities of the United Nations system to provide the necessary financial and
technical support to the Institute to enable it to fulfil its mandate;
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to mobilize
7.
the financial resources necessary to maintain the Institute with the core professional
staff required to enable it to function effectively in the fulfilment of its mandated
obligations;
Calls upon the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
8.
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to work closely with
the Institute;
Requests the Secretary-General to enhance the promotion of regional
9.
cooperation, coordination and collaboration in the fight against crime, especially in
its transnational dimension, which cannot be dealt with adequately by national
action alone;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to make concrete proposals,
including the provision of additional core professional staff, to strengthen the
programmes and activities of the Institute and to report to the General Assembly at
its sixty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
64th plenary meeting
16 December 2005

2
