38

General Assembly-Twenty-second Senion

preparation of the draft declaration on social development and invites the Economic and Social Council
and the Commission for Social Development to continue to give high priority to this task ;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Commission for Social Development the summary
records of the discussions held during the current
session of the General Assembly on the item entitled
"World social situation", together with the statements,
in extenso, of the Director of the Social Development
Division, so that they can be taken into consideration
particularly in connexion with the preparation of the
draft declaration on social development;
B. Decides to accord high priority at its twenty-third
session to the item on the world social situation.
1625th pleno;ry meeting,
11 December .1967.

2294 (XXII). Continuation of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees,1
Recalling its resolution 1783 (XVII) of 7 December
1962, in which it decided to review, not later than at
its twenty-second session, the arrangements for the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees with a view to determining whether the Office
should be continued beyond 31 December 1968,
Concerned at the ever-increasing number of refugees,
particularly in Africa,
Recognizing the continuing need for international
action on behalf of refugees,
Considering the valuable work which has been performed by the Office of the High Commissioner in
providing international protection for refugees and in
promoting permanent solutions for their problems, with
the joint participation of Governments, international
organizations and voluntary agencies,
Commending the High Commissioner for the efforts
he has made in finding satisfactory solutions of problems affecting groups of refugees who are his concern,
Taking note of the recommendation of the Economic
and Social Council in its resolution, 1253 (XLIII) of
1 August 1967 to the effect that the High Commissioner
be invited to attend the meetings of the Inter-Agency
Consultative Board of the United Nations Development
Programme,
N otin_q further the recommendation of the Executive
Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme
inviting the High Commissioner to participate in the
inter-agency activities and in the concerted efforts made
by the United Nations organs to attain the goals of the
United Nations Development Decade,
Expressing its concern at the difficulties with which
the High Commissioner is faced in financing his programme of assistance,
I. Decides to continue the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for a further
period of five years from 1 January 1969;
1 Official Records of the Genrral Assembly. Twenty-second
Session, SupPlement No.11 (A/6711) and Suprlcnunt No. ILi
(A/6711/ Add.1/Revl ).

2. Requests the High Commissioner to pursue his
activities of protection and assistance and to continue
to make every possible effort to facilitate the repatriation, local integration or resettlement on a voluntary
basis of the refugees who are his concern, bearing in
mind the ever-increasing number of refugees in Africa;
3. Invites the High Commissioner to continue to
report to and be guided by the Executive Committee
of the High Commissioner's Programme with regard
to refugee situations, in accordance with the Committee's terms of reference ;
4. Decides that the High Commissioner be invited
to attend the meetings of the Inter-Agency Consultative
Board of the United Nations Development Programme
and to participate in the preparatory work of the second
United Nations development decade;
5. Urges States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies to lend their
support to the humanitarian task of the Office of the
High Commissioner and to consider increasing their
annual voluntary contributions to the High Commissioner's Programme;
6. Further invites those Member States which have
not yet done so to accede to the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees 2 and to the 1967
Protocol to the Convention ;8
7. Further requests the Economic and Social Council
to consider as soon as possible the advisability of enlarging the membership of the Executive Committee
of the High Commissioner's Programme, in order to
give at least one additional African country the possibi 1ity of participating in the work of the Committee;
8. Decides to review, not later than at its twentyseventh session, the arrangements for the Office of the
High Commissioner with a view to determining whether
the Office should be continued beyond 31 December
1973.
.
1625th plenary meeting,
11 December 1967.

2295 (XXII). Elimination of all forms of religious
intolerance
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1781 (XVII) of 7 December 1962 and 2020 (XX) of 1 November 1965,
Bearing in mind the decisions of the Third Committee
(a) Not to mention any specific examples of religious
intolerance in the draft International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of
Discrimination based on Religion or Belief,4
( b) To amend the title, the preamble and article I
of the draft Convention proposed by the Commission on
Human Rights, 6
Having been unable to complete the consideration of
the draft Convention owing to its heavy agenda and the
lack of time,
Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189 (1954), No. 2545.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twmty/irst Session. Supplement No. 11A (A/6311/Rev.l/ Add.1), part
one, para. 2.
4 lbid., Twenty-second Session, Annexes, agenda item 54,
document A/6934, para. 21.
6 l/Jid., paras. 26, 72 and 90.
2 United

3 See

Resolutions adopted on the report• of the Third Committee

Decides to accord priority during its twenty-third
session to the item entitled :
"Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance:
" (a) Draft Declaration on the Elimination of All
Forms of Religious Intolerance;
" ( b) Draft International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination based on Religion or Belief".
1625th plenary meeting,
11 December 1967.
2331 (XXII). Measures to he taken against nazlsm
and racial intolerance

The General Assembly,
Considering the fact that in the Charter of the United
Nations the nations expressed their determination to
reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal
rights of men and women and of nations large and
small,
Noting that concern has been expressed regarding
recent manifestations of racial intolerance, including
the revival of certain groups and organizations professing totalitarian ideologies such as nazism which
may embitter relations between peoples and groups,
Con firming that nazism is incompatible with the objectives of the Charter, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, the United
Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination, the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and other international instruments,
Recognizing that measures should be taken to halt
nazi activities wherever they occur,
1. Resolutely condemns any ideology, including
nazism, which is based on racial intolerance and terror
as a gross violation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations;
2. Calls upon all States to take immediate and effective measures against any such manifestations of nazism
and racial intolerance.
1638th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.
2332 (XXII). Meaaures for the speedy implementation of international instruments
against racial discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1905 (XVIII) of 20 November 1963, 2017 (XX) of 1 November 1965 and
2142 (XXI) of 26 October 1966,
Expressing its profound concern that many Governments continue to violate fundamental human rights
and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
through policies of apartheid, segregation and other
forms of racial discrimination,
Concerned also that the principles of the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination and the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimina-

19

tion are being grossly violated in some parts of the
world, particularly in South Africa, in the rebellious
colony of Southern Rhodesia and in the Territory of
S_o?th West Af~ica, whi~h is under the direct responsibility of the United Nations and now illegally occupied
by the Government of South Africa,
lyoting that many States have not yet signed and
ratified the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
1. Urges all eligible Governments which have not
yet done so t? sign, ratify and implement without delay
the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the other conventions dir_ected against discrimination in employment
and occupation and against discrimination in education·
'
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make available
to t_he Com~ission on Human Rights at its regular
sess10ns the information submitted by Governments of
Member ,?tates on mea_sures taken for the speedy implementation of the Umted Nations Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
3. !?equests the Secretary-General, the specialized
agencies and all organizations concerned to continue to
take measur_es _to propagate, through appropriate channels! the principles and norms set forth in the United
Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination and in the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
4. Requests the International Conference on Human
Righ_t~ to consider the question of giving effect to the
provis10ns of the United Nations Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
~arms of R~cial Discrimination and the question of the
m!pl~me~tah_on of the conventions directed against disc~imi_na~ion_ m ~mployment and occupation and against
d1s~nm1_nati_on_ in. education in so far as they relate to
racial_ discnmmat1on, especially in South Africa, in the
rebel!10us colony of Southern Rhodesia and in the
~emtory of ~outh West Africa, which is under the
~hrect respons_tbility of the United Nations and now
1llegally occupied by the Government of South Africa·
'
5. Recommends that the Commission on Human
Ri~h!s continue to give consideration, as a matter of
pnonty! to mea~ures for the speedy implementation of
the Umted Nat10ns Declaration on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial. Discrimin~tion and that it report,
through the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session;
6. Condemns the Government of South Africa and
the illegal _regime in Southern Rhodesia for their open
~nd nefarious practices of racial discrimination and
intolerance against the African and other non-white
peoples in the Republic of South Africa, in the Territory of South West Africa, which is under the direct
respoi:isibility of the United Nations and now illegally
occupied by the Government of South Africa and in
the rebellious colony of Southern Rhodesia; '
~- Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
desist from all such nefarious practices;
8. Decides to consider at its twentv-third session the
question of the elimination of all fo~ms of racial discrimination.
1638th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.
