S/2020/420

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 May 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 20 May 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and
the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, as well as
the statements delivered by the representatives of China, the Dominican Republic,
Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in connection with
the videoconference on the Middle East (Syria) convened on Monday, 18 May 2020.
Statements were also delivered by the representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic,
Turkey and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 by
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefing and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
President of the Security Council

20-06943 (E) 280520 020620

*2006943*

S/2020/420

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Geir O. Pedersen
Since my last report, I have engaged widely among Syrians from all parts of
the country, who have been keen to communicate with the United Nations at this time
when all of us are finding new ways to be in touch. I have been struck by how deep
their concerns are about the current state and future of their beloved country, Syria.
I have heard relief that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has, so
far, not hit Syria on the scale initially feared, but also fear that it could still do so. I
sense deep anxiety over the fact that, even if violence has for the moment somewhat
abated, it does continue, and it can escalate at any moment. I have heard immediate
concerns at the further decline of the economy and the suffering this is causing.
There is profound apprehension and worry about the fate and well-being of detainees,
abductees and missing persons. There is, frankly, disappointment that the political
process has not really delivered tangible improvements in the lives of Syrians. And
there is a widespread sense that international competition is more prominent than
cooperation, with Syrians paying the price.
I share those concerns, and I take them as a strong reminder to the international
community of the importance of building constructive Syria diplomacy to support a
political solution. It is hard, but it is not impossible, and we must try.
We have elements to build on. In the north-west, this month saw further
progress in Russian-Turkish cooperation on the ground, pursuant to the agreement
they reached in March, which brought relative calm to Idlib. We all hope that this
bodes well for sustaining calm there.
But that calm has been punctuated by violent incidents and mutual attempts
at cross-line offensives, most notably one by the extremist Wa-Harid Al-Mu’minin
Operations Room. A number of Syrian soldiers were killed during that attack. This
prompted an escalation, including increased artillery strikes on areas inside Idlib,
as well as rocket fire towards Khmeimim Air Base in Latakia, before the episode
was contained.
Meanwhile, there have also been further incidents of mutual shelling; attacks
using improvised explosive devices around Afrin and the north-east; further tensions,
targeted killings, military build-up and clashes in the south-west; and further reports
of Israeli air strikes in Deir ez-Zor and Aleppo; as well as further incidents pointing
to a resurgence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in the eastern desert.
In short, violence continues and there is a constant risk of escalation, which
could lead to the unravelling of existing arrangements. We see such dangers right
now in Dara’a. We must, at all costs, avoid a reversion to the all-out fighting, abuses
and violations we have seen in the past.
Let us also remember that Syria’s instability reverberates elsewhere too,
including as far as Libya, given reports of fighters being recruited in Syria in large
numbers and sent to fight on both sides of that conflict.
The Security Council has called on all parties to ensure a sustained period
of calm throughout the country. Key players should be working together — and I
stand ready to assist in that — so that significant calm in many areas is sustained,
enhanced and expanded into a nationwide ceasefire, as called for in resolution 2254
(2015). Let me reiterate my belief that the presence of listed terrorist groups only
underlines the need for a cooperative approach in countering them, one that ensures
stability, protects civilians and fully respects international humanitarian law.
2/28

20-06943

S/2020/420

Thankfully, to date, Syria has not experienced mass COVID-19 outbreaks,
which have been the fate of many other countries. Bearing in mind testing limitations,
the officially reported caseload is 64, of which 58 are in Government-controlled
areas and six are in the north-east. No cases have yet been reported in the northwest. We note the early measures enacted by the Syrian Government and other de
facto authorities to address the pandemic, some of which are now being eased. Of
course, as in all countries, the risk of broader outbreak remains. And, given the
Syrian context, any such development could have devastating consequences in the
country and beyond.
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock will update the Council on humanitarian
issues in his briefing tomorrow. Let me note the importance of full, sustained and
unimpeded humanitarian access, using all modalities, including scaled-up crossline and cross-border access, to deliver assistance. As we scale up prevention and
protection against COVID-19 in Government-controlled areas and in the north-west,
such access is absolutely critical elsewhere too, including in the north-east, where
gaps in medical supplies have widened.
Further to the Secretary-General’s global call for the waiver of sanctions
that may undermine the capacity of countries to ensure access to food, essential
health supplies and medical support to respond to the pandemic, let me note the
public assurances by relevant States that their sanctions programmes relating to
Syria neither ban the flow of humanitarian supplies nor target medicine and medical
devices. I welcome their commitments to fully and expeditiously apply humanitarian
exemptions. I continue to closely follow this issue.
We are still awaiting concrete news on the issue of detainees, abductees and
missing persons. Large-scale and unilateral releases as well as more meaningful
actions on missing persons have never been more necessary. I continue to urge the
Syrian Government and all other Syrian parties to step up their efforts in this regard.
I believe they could follow the example of those Governments in the region and
elsewhere that have already carried out large-scale releases on an exceptional basis
as part of their pandemic response.
The COVID-19 crisis has added a new layer to Syria’s grave and worsening
economic predicament, which is the result of many internal and external factors and
measures over a decade of conflict. The Syrian pound has continued to depreciate
in recent weeks, with implications for the purchasing power of ordinary Syrians.
Significant price increases and shortages in basic commodities are widespread
across the country, with implications for food security.
We know that the crisis in Syria will not be resolved by a new constitution
alone. But if the Constitutional Committee could work seriously, it could build trust,
make an important contribution to a political settlement and be a door-opener. I am
ready to convene a third session of the Small Body of the Constitutional Committee
in Geneva as soon as global travel conditions allow. We do not know when that
will be. But let me stress, as both co-Chairs have affirmed to me, the importance
of a substantive third session on the agreed agenda and the equal importance of
there being no preconditions for moving on to other items of the constitution in
subsequent sessions, consistent with the mandate and terms of reference and the core
rules of procedure.
We remain in contact with both co-Chairs as we assess when the next session
will be possible. I also recently offered a briefing to the civil society members of
the Small Body. Those who wished to attend and could do so were updated on the
agenda agreed between the co-Chairs. I believe that all three components of the
Committee have been offered the information they need to prepare themselves for a
substantive and forward-looking session when conditions so permit.
20-069433/28

S/2020/420

I have remained in close contact with the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board,
whose members have been meeting virtually for the past several weeks. They
emphasize the active leadership role that Syrian women are assuming in their
communities, in the context of the severe economic crisis and of the humanitarian
needs of Syrians across the country and beyond its borders. They have asked for
special priority to help and protect the most vulnerable Syrians, including refugees
and internally displaced persons; children and the elderly; women who suffer from
violence and abuse; and detainees and abductees, who are now at greater risk
because of the pandemic. They have reiterate to me that a political process within
the framework of resolution 2254 (2015) is the only way forward, with Syrian women
as full partners at the table.
I have heard from a wide range of Syrian men and women, including civil
society interlocutors across Syria and the region, via our Civil Society Support
Room. Many continue to impress upon me their ability and desire to build bridges
within Syrian society. Almost all of them perceive that the political process, and not
only the Constitutional Committee, has stalled. All of them continue to highlight the
critical importance of real progress on the issue of detainees, abductees and missing
persons. Calls for accountability for serious offences and violations of international
law are often raised. Everyone is concerned about the declining economic reality
across Syria. Debates continue on the issue of sanctions. Many also note that
COVID-19 has created new stresses for Syrian refugees — and for the countries
hosting them. All seek the emergence of tangible steps towards the creation of a
safe, calm and neutral environment across Syria upon which a comprehensive and
credible political solution can be built. These are the same conditions that would
allow the safe, dignified, voluntary and well informed return of refugees and
internally displaced Syrians.
Many civil society interlocutors also raised the issue of elections. We take
note that parliamentary elections have been postponed, as one of the precautionary
measures against the transmission of COVID-19 announced by the Syrian
Government. I take this opportunity to note that those elections would be under the
current constitutional framework. The United Nations is not specifically mandated,
nor have we been so requested, to engage on the elections. I remain focused, in the
context of the United Nations-facilitated political process pursuant to resolution 2254
(2015), on working towards free and fair elections pursuant to a new constitution that
are administered under United Nations supervision, meet the highest international
standards of accountability and transparency and are inclusive of all eligible Syrians,
including the diaspora.
In conclusion, let us recall that there have been too many episodes in the past
decade where fleeting opportunities to turn dynamics towards a political path were
lost. Those missed moments were followed by renewed violence and a hardening of
positions among regional and international actors. We must not repeat that pattern.
With some calm, with the common threats of COVID-19 and the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, and with the Syrian people continuing to suffer, I want to stress that
renewed and meaningful international cooperation that builds trust and confidence
among international stakeholders and with Syrians, including through reciprocal
measures, is essential and could unlock progress.
I believe that dialogue between the Russian Federation and the United States
of America has a key role to play here, and I encourage them to pursue such dialogue.
The States that discuss Syria in the Astana and Small Group formats are key players
too, as are the members of the Security Council. Ultimately, there is a need to come
together to support a renewed effort in a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned, United Nationsfacilitated political process guided by resolution 2254 (2015), towards a political
settlement that can meet the legitimate aspirations of all Syrians and fully restore
Syria’s sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial integrity.
4/28

20-06943

S/2020/420

Annex II
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of
China to the United Nations, Yao Shaojun
I thank the Special Envoy, Mr. Pedersen, for his briefing. We appreciate his
dedication and devotion to the political process of Syria.
China has been following the situation in Syria very closely. We are worried
about the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Syria. The SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy, Mr. Pedersen, have appealed for a ceasefire on many
occasions. We attach great importance to those appeals, and call on all parties to
enhance mutual trust to pursue de-escalation and jointly combat the pandemic. There
is a window of opportunity to promote inclusive dialogue and create favourable
conditions for political solutions.
We have consistent maintained our position in support of a political solution
of the conflict in Syria. The Syrian parties should continue to engage constructively
with each other and maintain dialogue within the framework of the Constitutional
Committee. The future of Syria must be decided by Syrians alone, free from foreign
interference. It is fundamental importance that the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria be respected and upheld. China will continue to support the good
offices of the Special Envoy, in pursuit of a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned political
process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
At the same time, the international community should be alert to the fact that
terrorists are seeking to take advantage of the current situation. Terrorist groups are
still mounting assaults in Idlib and other provinces, which pose a constant threat
to the security and stability of Syria and the entire region. The Security Council
should pay close attention and support the Special Envoy’s calls for effective,
cooperative and targeted counter-terrorism efforts. We call on relevant parties to
step up dialogue and negotiations to swiftly find a long-term solution with regard to
counter-terrorism.
Concerning COVID-19, although the number of confirmed cases in Syria
is comparatively limited, containment and prevention measures are indispensable,
given the quick transmission of the virus. The Syrian Government is taking
effective measures in medical, transportation, education and many other sectors. We
appreciate these efforts. It is the primary responsibility of the Syrian Government
to cope with this public health crisis. China is ready to strengthen cooperation with
the people and Government of Syria in combating the virus, and to offer assistance
within our capacity.
It is also high time for the international community to provide greater support
for the urgent efforts of Syria, which serve the interests of the Syrian people.
Unilateral sanctions undermine countries’ capacity to mobilize resources and
respond to the pandemic, and therefore should be lifted without delay.

20-069435/28

S/2020/420

Annex III
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing.
At this particular juncture, the Council needs to be more proactive than ever
in order to revitalize a broad political process on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015).
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is, by all accounts, forcing
Governments, communities and people around the world to think beyond the current
situation and build a new future for themselves, with a renewed sense of common
humanity. Humankind has never been so vulnerable to the impacts of a crisis for
which no one seems to be prepared and from which no country is protected.
The Syrians deserve the same. The Syrians deserve the right to plan for the
future — a future of freedom, justice and respect for their rights. Are we doing what
we need to do to support them?
The Syrians need assurances — assurances that a nationwide ceasefire will
be sustainable and long-lasting; that if they get infected with coronavirus, it is not
a death sentence; that there will be accountability for the atrocities that have been
committed against their civilians; and that, above all, they will be able to return
to their homes, villages and cities, and that their basic needs will be met in the
framework of an inclusive and just rule of law.
But to achieve all that, a political process needs to be in place that responds
to the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. Why are we not there yet? Let us
ask ourselves that question. And let us avoid, once and for all, pointing fingers at one
another and move forward.
The situation in Syria remains complex and fragile. The humanitarian situation
is dire for millions, including those who are on the brink of starvation. The reports of
human rights violations in the south and continued tensions along cross-lines across
the north are deeply concerning for the Dominican Republic. We cannot afford to
come together again, month after month, to repeat the same recipe for action.
We call on the Syrian Government, the opposition and civil society to unite,
if not with each other, then with the Syrian people. We call on it to unite with the
women and make their aspirations its aspirations, and to unite with the young people
and make their aspirations its aspirations.
But we also call on those with influence on the parties in conflict to seize
every opportunity they have to promote dialogue and concertation, to ensure that
the ceasefire in the north holds and to extend it to the whole nation, and to help the
parties commit to the Constitutional Committee while also advancing in terms of
the release of detainees, increased confidence-building measures and the safe and
voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced persons, providing them with
all the assurances necessary for a dignified life. We remain confident that all this
is possible.
Determination and political will be required to boost the broader political
process, as envisioned in resolution 2254 (2015). The time is now. The responsibility
is ours. How much longer must they wait?

6/28

20-06943

S/2020/420

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
First, I, too, want to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. The
most positive takeaway is certainly the ceasefire in Idlib, which holds despite
the challenges.
The same cannot be said about the political process; once again, there are no
new developments. The Syrian regime has clearly distanced itself from the whole
process, with plans to organize parliamentary elections this year. This clearly
violates the road map set out in resolution 2254 (2015).
The situation of political prisoners also remains a pressing issue. Unfortunately,
the announcement of a general amnesty did not lead to the unilateral release of
thousands of arbitrarily detained people.
The European Union has been clear in saying that none of the sanctions will
be lifted or aid for reconstruction provided without a credible political process. That
position has not changed; we demand that Syria act in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
According to the Syrian Government, sanctions are affecting the response
to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak. In a letter dated 6 May addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2020/368), the Syrian Mission stated that the measures
imposed indirectly hinder the import of medical supplies and equipment into Syria.
That claim, which was also made just now by the representative of the Russian
Federation, is not true. If there are any difficulties with procurement, that means
that companies do not want to do business with the Syrian Government because they
lack confidence in it.
It is not only the international community or United Nations agencies that
see little change in the regime’s behaviour but also multinational corporations. To
affiliate themselves with a Government that is known for arbitrary detention and
chemical attacks is simply considered bad marketing. Sanctions have nothing to do
with this negative perception.
In order to regain the trust of the international community and businesses, the
Syrian Government needs to fulfil its international commitments under resolution
2254 (2015). Only then will it be possible to support Syria’s reconstruction; that is
the message of Estonia and the European Union.

20-069437/28

S/2020/420

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing.
First, France is very concerned by the lack of progress on the Syrian file.
The growing instability on the ground is worrying. The ceasefire agreement in the
north-west remains very fragile. Shelling continues as well as sporadic fighting. It
is of the utmost importance that the regime and its allies do not restart an offensive
that would worsen the already dire humanitarian situation, especially in the context
of a potential spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Coordinated action
is needed to deal with the threat posed by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham in respect of
international humanitarian law.
The resurgence of Da’esh is also extremely worrying for international peace
and security. Instability and unrest are also growing in regime-held areas, including
in the south-west. That shows that the regime cannot bring stability.
On the political side, the lack of progress in the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015) is also deeply troubling. The regime’s responsibility for the deadlock
of the Constitutional Committee is clear. It had first opposed an agreement on its
agenda, and now it is taking advantage of COVID-19 to endlessly postpone any
meeting of the Committee, including by refusing a video-teleconference meeting.
On the contrary, the opposition has constantly showed flexibility and openness. We
call on Geir Pedersen to make it clear to the Security Council when he deems that
negotiation is no longer possible on the Constitutional Committee.
No progress has been made on the detainee file despite the Special Envoy’s call
to free prisoners and facilitate access to detention centres. It is urgent that the Syrian
regime proceed to large-scale releases of detainees and abductees and allow access
to all detention facilities. The latest Astana meeting did not bring any progress. It is
now time to move beyond the reciprocal exchanges of prisoners. The United Nations
needs to be at the centre of those efforts. In this context, we need to work together
to unlock the political process and implement all elements of resolution 2254 (2015).
The priority is to guarantee a sustainable and complete ceasefire everywhere
in Syria. The Secretary-General and the Special Envoy have made this call to allow
an effective response to COVID-19. The regime, unfortunately, has not responded to
this appeal. A nationwide ceasefire is also necessary to create the conditions for a
credible political process. All parties must work with the United Nations to that end,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Finally, it is key to launch a broader political process based on all elements of
resolution 2254 (2015). That includes establishing a safe and neutral environment,
including through the implementation of confidence-building measures. The Special
Envoy has our full support in this regard, and we expect him to report to the Council
on the progress he has made on all elements of resolution 2254 (2015).
France will not recognize the results of any elections that do not meet the
standards for a free, fair and transparent ballot. Resolution 2254 (2015) sets the
conditions for credible elections: they should take place in a safe country, under
United Nations supervision and with the participation of all Syrians, including from
the diaspora.
Time passes, but the crimes of the Syrian regime cannot be forgotten and
cannot remain unpunished. France will continue to firmly support all efforts to
collect and preserve evidence and fight impunity.
8/28

20-06943

S/2020/420

A peace agreement that addresses the root causes of the conflict is more than
ever needed to bring peace and stability to Syria and the region. I therefore urge all
actors to work together to that end and recall Russia’s particular responsibility in that
regard. As long as a credible political process is not firmly under way, France and the
European Union will not fund the reconstruction in Syria.

20-069439/28

S/2020/420

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
Germany fully supports the call by Special Envoy Pedersen for a complete and
immediate nationwide ceasefire throughout Syria and his active engagement with
the Syrian parties and regional and international key actors in this regard. His call
needs to finally be taken up.
Given that the security situation throughout the country remains very fragile
and that a major coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak would exacerbate
the already alarming humanitarian situation, we need an immediate and lasting
nationwide ceasefire.
Since this has not been achieved yet, at the cost of innocent civilian lives, we
encourage the Special Envoy to inform the Security Council about exactly which
party is hindering an agreement on a lasting, nationwide ceasefire in Syria.
A genuine and sustainable nationwide ceasefire is a prerequisite not only for
an effective humanitarian response to COVID-19 but also for a resumption of the
political process. We stress the central role of the United Nations in reaching such
a genuine and sustainable nationwide ceasefire, which is also already included in
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).
Sustainable peace, stability and security in Syria can be achieved only through
a political process under the auspices of the United Nations, in line with resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex).
We therefore call for a swift return to the political process and reiterate our
full support for the efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen in this regard, including for
adapting working methods that allow for the next session of the Constitutional
Committee to take place soon despite the current Corona-related restrictions.
We are all well aware that it is the Syrian regime that is obstructing and
delaying the work of the Constitutional Committee. The Syrian regime must
finally end its obstruction and start engaging seriously and constructively in the
Constitutional Committee.
We need substantive progress in the broader political process and the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). As Russia claims that it is interested in
a political solution and that the Astana format can move the United Nations-led
political process forward, we urge Russia to use its influence over Damascus in
this regard.
Germany’s and the European Union’s (EU) position on reconstruction
remains crystal-clear — we will assist in the reconstruction of Syria only when a
comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political transition is firmly under way.
We also support the call by Special Envoy Pedersen for unconditional largescale releases of detainees and abductees and more meaningful action on missing
persons. The Syrian regime, which holds the overwhelming majority of detainees,
must finally release political detainees on a meaningful scale, starting with elderly
people, women and children and those with health conditions.
Since the beginning of the COVID-19 outbreak, Governments around the
world have released prisoners on humanitarian grounds. Unfortunately, it does
not come as a surprise that the Syrian regime has, on the contrary, continued with
arbitrary arrests, enforced disappearances and torture in its prisons.
We call on the Syrian regime to allow immediate, unconditional and unhindered
access for relevant humanitarian organizations to all prisons and detention facilities
10/28

20-06943

S/2020/420

under its control, and to ensure adequate medical care and protective measures for
all persons in detention in order to prevent COVID-19 leading to yet more loss of life
and misery in Syrian prisons.
The Syrian regime must inform the families of the tens of thousands of missing
persons about the fate of their loved ones.
We remain convinced that national reconciliation and sustainable peace in
Syria will not be possible without justice and accountability. Germany therefore
continues to support all efforts, in particular those of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, to ensure that the crimes
and atrocities committed during the Syrian conflict do not go unpunished, that
perpetrators are held accountable and that victims receive justice.
We welcome the most recent reports of the Organization on the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons Investigation and Identification Team and of the Board of Inquiry,
as well as the latest report of Amnesty International, which documents attacks on
medical facilities and schools in north-west Syria. All these reports clearly show
that the Syrian regime and its ally Russia were responsible for indiscriminate attacks
against civilians and civilian infrastructure in north-west Syria. There has to be a
follow-up to the findings in these reports; impunity for those responsible for these
serious violations of international humanitarian law cannot be an option.
It has, unfortunately, not been possible to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court (ICC). Those who committed and are still committing
international crimes in Syria can thus not be prosecuted by the ICC.
The recent start of the trial in Germany of two former officials of the Syrian
regime’s security service charged with crimes against humanity sends an important
message that those who commit crimes against humanity or war crimes cannot feel
safe anywhere and will eventually be held accountable.
So long as the Syrian regime does not change its brutal behaviour and does
not end its grave violations of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, there will be no lifting of sanctions. Even if the Syrian regime
and its supporters falsely claim otherwise, these sanctions are targeted at the
Syrian regime and not at the Syrian people. These sanctions specifically allow for
the provision of humanitarian aid, including the medicines and medical equipment
needed to respond to COVID-19 in Syria. As such, they do not affect the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to people in need.
The European Commission has published a detailed guidance note with regard
to humanitarian aid and EU sanctions vis-à-vis Syria. It explains that EU sanctions
do not stand in the way or impede the provision of humanitarian aid — in particular
medical equipment and supplies to fight the COVID-19 pandemic — and that they
provide for humanitarian exemptions.
The guidance note clearly states that medical equipment, including oxygen,
respirators, personal protective equipment and ventilators, as well as medicines and
other medical items required to fight the COVID-19 pandemic, are not subject to
direct restrictions on export, supply, financing or use in Syria.
To be very clear, the primary responsibility for the humanitarian catastrophe
in Syria lies with the regime. By destroying medical infrastructure, by arresting
doctors and nurses or by blocking humanitarian convoys, the regime is waging a
war against its own people and then blaming those who have helped to alleviate
the suffering of the Syrian people and have provided billions of dollars to United
Nations organizations. Its position is cynical beyond belief.
20-0694311/28

S/2020/420

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Indonesia to the United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
My delegation wishes to thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing,
and commend him and his team on their continued efforts in facilitating the political
process in Syria, particularly during this challenging time with the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19).
We have taken note of the Special Envoy’s remark that there is a widespread
sense that international competition is more prominent than cooperation, with
Syrians paying the price. It is a strong reminder to the international community to
engage in constructive diplomacy with Syria in order to support a political solution.
As I mentioned at our last meeting (see S/2020/353), the political track needs
to continue for the sake of the Syrian people. I am fully aware that it is easier said
than done. My delegation therefore urges all parties, including the Council, to extend
their full cooperation to the relevant United Nations-facilitated efforts, led by Special
Envoy Pedersen.
In today’s meeting, I would like to highlight several points.
First, a nationwide ceasefire in Syria is critical to ensuring sustained calm for
all Syrians. We welcome the current relative calm in the north-west, as the RussianTurkish ceasefire arrangement largely holds, and we thank the key parties in that
regard. However, like the Special Envoy, we note the fragile situation, not only in the
north-west, but also in other parts of Syria. This relative calm cannot be taken for
granted. As tensions flare, we must urgently prevent an escalation.
The Special Envoy also highlighted the ongoing risks of escalation and the
need to prevent a return to all-out fighting. We must not unravel the little progress
we have made. We applaud what Mr. Pedersen and his team have been doing to
engage with civil society and women’s leaders.
While efforts are under way to prevent a COVID-19 outbreak, we must all
remain committed to respecting a nationwide ceasefire. At the same time, we note
that it will take more than a nationwide ceasefire to suppress the pandemic. A
coordinated effort between all parties, including the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and the World Health Organization, is indeed crucial.
Secondly, all parties need to keep the current momentum towards peace.
The fear of an outbreak and its high risk it poses to the community has captured
our attention. My delegation believes, however, that all work to achieve a renewed
political framework must continue alongside efforts to mitigate the COVID-19
outbreak. We again thank the Special Envoy for his continued engagement with all
key parties in order to ensure a Syrian-led and-owned political process on the basis
of resolution 2254 (2015).
With regard to the Constitutional Committee, we sincerely hope that the
preparatory work for the third meeting of the Committee in Geneva will also continue,
with the support of all Committee members and other key parties. Discussion must
continue despite the pandemic.
Thirdly, an all-out effort is needed to suppress COVID-19 in Syria. The
number of cases in Syria remains relatively low, but we note the high risk of a major
COVID-19 outbreak in Syria, as mentioned during today’s meeting.
The densely populated areas, internally displaced persons camps and collective
shelters throughout the country, including detention facilities, are particularly at risk.
12/28

20-06943

S/2020/420

The vulnerable groups therein live in cramped conditions, where social distancing is
not possible, and lack adequate health facilities. Humanitarian assistance and access
are important. The international community must redouble its efforts to contain the
further spread of the pandemic in Syria.
We commend the efforts of the Government of Syria to address the COVID-19
pandemic. My delegation wishes to reaffirm its commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic as a
basis for advancing the United Nations-facilitated political process, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).
In conclusion, my delegation continues to call for a global ceasefire and an
end to violence worldwide. In this last week of the holy month of Ramadan and as we
approach Eid al-Fitr, we once again call for peace, harmony and reconciliation. Let
the people of Syria enjoy and celebrate Eid al-Fitr with calm and dignity.

20-0694313/28

S/2020/420

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen for his briefing and his commitment. I would also
like to commend his efforts to engage with all stakeholders at both the national and
the international levels.
The Niger continues to support the calls of the Special Envoy and the
Secretary-General for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire in Syria so as
to enable a coordinated fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
A complete ceasefire is indeed critical for any progress on the political process, but
is also essential for smooth and swift humanitarian operations, especially in the
north-east and in Idlib province.
It is very encouraging to see the Russian-Turkish ceasefire, signed on 6 March,
to halt fighting in the Syrian province of Idlib, still holding. It needs to be supported.
It might not be the solution we would like to see for the Syrian crisis, but it has
reduced hostilities to enable Syria to address the ongoing threat of the COVID-19
pandemic. My delegation therefore reiterates its call for continued diplomatic work
between the Astana guarantors, the Council members and Special Envoy Pedersen
to build on that momentum and to make progress on the political front, as mandated
by resolution 2254 (2015).
My delegation believes that the Syrian crisis can be settled only on a
non-politicized and non-militarized basis, because only a climate of security can
allow the establishment of a peace process. We therefore call on all belligerents to
build on the ceasefire and refrain from any action that could escalate the situation.
Similarly, we remain convinced that the formula for ending the Syrian
crisis must be inspired by the Syrians themselves, in their various components, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). We also call on all parties to be more flexible
during negotiations at the Constitutional Committee level in order to advance the
political track for lasting peace in Syria.
Furthermore, the Niger calls on both sides to show empathy in these
unprecedented times by ensuring medical care for all detainees and the release
of any arbitrary detainees and abductees, and by clarifying the situation of the
missing persons.
Lastly, the Niger recognizes the danger posed by terrorist groups in Syria.
We believe that the Government has the right to fight terrorism, but must respect
obligations under international human rights and humanitarian law with regard to the
principle of proportionality and the protection of civilian and civilian infrastructure.
The Niger commends the admirable contribution of the Syrian Women’s
Advisory Board and all Syrian women as they play a leading role in de-escalating
tensions, maintaining non-violence, raising awareness and fighting the spread of
COVID-19 in towns and in refugee and internally displaced persons camps.

14/28

20-06943

S/2020/420

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Russia to the
United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing. The pandemic has
affected the political settlement in Syria, just as it has affected many other processes
around the world. But the Special Envoy is determined, and we support him. The
Special Envoy is in constant contact with the Syrians on the issue of the next round
of Constitutional Committee talks. Some accuse Syrians of avoiding dialogue under
the pretext of not being able to meet in person, but these meetings are critical for
discussing sensitive details about the future of their country. Leaks or provocations
that could emerge from the use of video-teleconference platforms might undermine
those efforts. It would be unacceptable if the settlement process were to break down
for a lack of confidentiality.
We will continue to make efforts through contact with the parties concerned,
both in our national capacity and together with Turkey and Iran, within the framework
of the Astana format.
There are significant differences between the situation on the ground in
Government territories and in areas outside of Damascus control, especially in the
terrorist-held Idlib and the occupied Syrian territories. In most of Syria, the people
and Government are working to restore a normal life. The coronavirus pandemic is
an additional challenge. The authorities are taking the necessary measures by testing
for the disease, equipping isolation rooms for patients with coronavirus and opening
laboratories in Aleppo, Latakia and, eventually, Homs.
But suffocating sanctions have led to a deterioration in the socioeconomic
situation in Syria. Sanctions impact ordinary Syrians. Our colleagues will not
convince us that exemptions remove all problems. That is not true. It is impossible
to conduct banking transactions from Syria, including for the purchase of medical
equipment. In addition, international humanitarian non-governmental organizations
cannot take effective action for fear of being sanctioned. There is ample evidence of
that. We therefore again call for the lifting of unilateral sanctions.
In Idlib, the ceasefire is generally being maintained, although terrorists
frequently attack Syrian army positions. The Russian military, together with its
Turkish colleagues, continues to patrol designated areas even as radical groups
impede their work, incite provocations and create blockades, thereby confirming the
need to separate the moderate opposition from the terrorists.
Terrorist attacks are also carried out in other areas, most notably along the
east coast of the Euphrates river. The problem of foreign terrorist fighters and other
prisoners in the north-east has not gone away. Militants riot in prisons, escape to
other countries and beyond the region. We would like to hear what is being done in
that regard. We also have not gotten responses to our queries on what is happening
in the north-east of the country, where United States forces are present illegally in
the Al-Hol camp, as well as in the Al-Tanf area, in the Rukban camp. Stability and
security in those areas can be ensured only if they return under the control of the
legitimate Government.
Attempts to freeze the dividing lines that, unfortunately, have been drawn
in today’s Syria are unacceptable. Those line should be erased. The joint efforts of
Syrians in the Constitutional Committee and the effectiveness of responses to the
threats facing the Syrian nation — coronavirus, terrorism and foreign occupation —
call for concrete steps to be taken to restore the unity and territorial integrity of
Syria. That applies to the inside. The external perimeter should come together to
provide humanitarian assistance and enable the post-conflict reconstruction of Syria
so as to facilitate the political process without interfering in it.
20-0694315/28

S/2020/420

Annex X
Statement by the Political Coordinator of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines to the United Nations, Isis Gonsalves
I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen for his briefing. Peace and stability in Syria can
be restored only through a Syrian-owned and -led political process, facilitated by
the United Nations, and require an environment that encourages cooperation and
reconciliation. A cessation of hostilities is therefore essential to realizing the goals
of resolution 2254 (2015). Now more than ever, sustained calm is needed to enable
an all-out fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). In that regard, we are
pleased that the 5 March ceasefire in the north-west continues to hold, and we echo
the Special Envoy’s appeal for it to extend to the rest of the country.
It is our hope that, despite the virus-related challenges and restrictions, work
on the Constitutional Committee will continue and that, through compromise and
commitment, consensus on the provisions of a new constitution can finally be
achieved. We reiterate that the meaningful participation of women in the negotiation
process is imperative to ensure fair and balanced outcomes for all.
Resolution 2254 (2015) highlights the need for all parties to undertake
confidence-building measures to make the political process more viable and
to help to sustain a cessation of hostilities. In that context, action on the issue of
missing persons and detainees should be prioritized, particularly in view of the
current pandemic.
Syria is facing a grave economic situation, which is further exacerbated by the
measures that have had to be taken, justifiably, to contain and suppress COVID-19.
We reiterate the call for the lifting of unilateral coercive measures in order to enable
Syria to sustain an effective response to the pandemic and address its current
economic challenges.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines continues to support the determined efforts
of the Special Envoy. His continued positive engagement with all parties concerned
will only serve to promote cooperation and advance the wider process.
The Council has a great responsibility to assist Syria, through positive
action, to help it emerge from the despair of 10 years of conflict. We must set aside
geopolitical quarrels and unite in support of Syria and its people.

16/28

20-06943

S/2020/420

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
Let me begin by thanking United Nations Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his
briefing on the political situation in Syria.
South Africa welcomes the relative calm across Syria and commends the
parties for adhering to the 5 March ceasefire agreement between Turkey and Russia
in the north-west of the country, despite some incidents of shelling across the front
lines. We call on the parties to work towards a permanent ceasefire that will pave the
way for the establishment of an enabling environment in which an inclusive Syrianled dialogue aimed at achieving a lasting political solution reflective of the will of
the Syrian people can take place.
Special Envoy Pedersen’s constant and continued engagements with the
various parties puts him in a unique position and provides him with the understanding
that can help him support negotiations for a nationwide ceasefire. The road map
for achieving a peaceful and sustainable resolution to the Syrian conflict has
already been outlined in resolution 2254 (2015), and we call for all sides to adhere
to its provisions and see to its full implementation. South Africa also calls for the
Security Council’s — and the international community’s — continued support for
the Constitutional Committee and for the various political processes undertaken to
bring an end to the conflict in Syria.
South Africa remains fully supportive of the Constitutional Committee and
appreciates the willingness and readiness of the United Nations to convene the third
meeting of the Committee as soon as the global travel restrictions resulting from
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic are lifted and allow for face-to-face
meetings. Through our own experiences in the matter, South Africa understands that
the drafting process for a Constitution can be challenging but it can also result in
distinct rewards for all sectors of society. For there to be peace in Syria, it remains
imperative that external interference in Syria come to an end. South Africa fully
supports Syria’s sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
We are also concerned at the spillover effect that the conflict in Syria has
had on other regions, some indirectly so. The spillover effect has been felt in North
Africa, where external interference has exacerbated the conflict and contributed to
further instability. South Africa reaffirms that there can be no military solution to
the conflict in Syria. It is only through dialogue, negotiations, trust and confidence
in and with all parties that sustained peace and prosperity can be achieved in Syria.
With more than 50 confirmed cases of COVID-19 present in Syria, South
Africa reiterates its support for the Special Envoy’s call for a complete and immediate
nationwide ceasefire throughout the country. Indeed, this will allow for the Syrian
Government, the United Nations and its implementing agencies to adequately
prepare for and respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. We encourage the parties
to work together to create a unified response to combat the disease. Moreover, in
keeping with the call of the Secretary-General and other international actors, the
economic measures imposed on the Syrian Government must be eased to allow for
efforts to fight the COVID-19 pandemic and to ensure that all Syrians have access to
the necessary equipment and supplies to fight the virus.

20-0694317/28

S/2020/420

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Kais Kabtani
I thank the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria, Geir Pedersen, for
his briefing.
At this moment of global uncertainty and hardship, a renewed and
straightforward focus on peace and calm in Syria in line with the appeal of Special
Envoy Pedersen is an imperative necessity in order to enable the effective tackling
of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and promote progress in the Syria’s political
process. While violence has been de-escalated to a significant extent, calm remains
tentative in the north-west of the country, tangible tensions persist in the north-east,
terrorism is on the rise in central Syria, and security remains fragile in the south.
Tunisia reiterates its call on all parties to keep their abiding commitments,
exercise self-restraint and work together to maintain an environment of sustained
calm throughout Syria. We also recall the close nexus between the ceasefire and
the parallel political process in Syria set forth in resolution 2254 (2015). We renew
our support for the efforts to achieve both aims by Special Envoy Pedersen, acting
within his mandated prerogatives under the resolution.
The resurgence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) is a matter of
grave concern and a serious reminder that the threat of terrorism is far from over. In
fact, ISIS made an enormous leap in the number of claimed attacks in Syria and in
Iraq in April as compared to prior months. Tunisia again stresses the importance of
collective and determined counter-terrorism efforts aimed at eradicating Councildesignated terrorist groups in Syria and beyond. Such efforts are fundamental for a
long-term political solution to the Syrian conflict. We emphasize that understandings
on the ceasefire in Idlib remain temporary solutions of respite, until they jointly
and genuinely address the presence of terrorists of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and other
affiliated extremist groups and eradicate the safe haven these groups have established
in the region.
The recent agreement reached between the Syrian parties on the agenda of the
Constitutional Committee has been an encouraging development and an important
step on the road to lasting peace in Syria. Tunisia recognizes that COVID-19 has
caused the Constitutional Committee’s discussions and other peace processes across
conflict zones to grind to a halt. We look forward to the convening of the third round
of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva when the situation so allows.
We urge the Syrian parties to exercise flexibility, seek commonalities
and engage constructively and without preconditions in the negotiations of the
Constitutional Committee. Tunisia expresses its support for the good offices
of Special Envoy Pedersen in the Committee’s work and in the political process
broadly termed.
Finally, Tunisia reiterates that there is no military solution to the conflict.
The only viable way forward is a political settlement that enjoys Syrian ownership
and leadership, as well as United Nations sponsorship, pursuant to resolution 2254
(2015) — a settlement that safeguards Syria’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity and meets Syrians’ legitimate aspirations for freedom and dignity.
The political solution to the Syrian crisis is long-overdue. The Syrians’
resilience is over-stretched. This conflict must end.

18/28

20-06943

S/2020/420

Annex XIII
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Jonathan Allen
I thank the Special Envoy for his comprehensive briefing to the Security
Council today.
We remain concerned about the security situation in Syria. While we are not
seeing the levels of violence in the north-west today that we saw at the beginning of
the year, we are well aware of the recent clashes between armed groups and regime
forces south of the M4 motorway and the regime’s ongoing shelling of the Idlib
de-escalation zone. The ceasefire in Idlib and in the north-east of the country must
be upheld in practice and not in name only. We also fully condemn continued attacks
by extremist forces, including Da’esh.
We remain concerned about a rise in violence in the south of the country
and the risk that this violence might cause reconciliation agreements there to fall
apart. We would be grateful for an update, including from our Russian colleagues,
on implementation of those reconciliation agreements reached in summer 2018. It
remains vital that localized ceasefires lead to a nationwide ceasefire, as called for
by the United Nations Special Envoy and the Secretary-General. This is necessary
not only to bring an end to this devastating conflict in accordance resolution 2254
(2015) but to enable full attention to be devoted to the fight against coronavirus
disease (COVID-19).
In that regard, we continue to support efforts led by the World Health
Organization to confront the real risk posed to all parts of Syria by COVID-19.
We recognize the efforts made by authorities across the country and urge practical
cooperation among them all to confront a disease that knows no boundaries.
There remains an urgent need for medical supplies and other necessary
humanitarian aid to reach recipients in need without hindrance. We should not be
dogmatic about the modalities of making that happen, including by renewing crossborder assistance to all areas that need it. We will have an opportunity to further
discuss this matter tomorrow.
As to sanctions, in support of what some others have said, goods and medical
supplies used for humanitarian purposes are not subject either to European Union
sanctions or United Kingdom national sanctions. Additional exemptions from
sanctions are also available for humanitarian activity in Syria. I would just like
to note that the United Kingdom and our United States and European partners are
the leading donors for humanitarian aid in Syria, including in regime-held areas.
The problems facing the Syrian health sector and the economy are a result not of
sanctions, but of the Syrian regime’s actions through its cronyism, corruption and
brutal conduct of the war, which includes, I am afraid, politically motivated punitive
restrictions on humanitarian aid. If the Syrian regime and its allies want to see
removal of sanctions, then they know what they have to do: engage seriously with
the Special Envoy and the United Nations-led political process to achieve a peaceful
end to the conflict in the country.
Now, with regard to the political process, we are disappointed that, despite the
urgent humanitarian needs, the deteriorating economy and the continued threat of
COVID-19, there still appears to be no urgency in working with the Special Envoy to
achieve political progress towards a political settlement. Like others, we welcomed
the formation of the Constitutional Committee last year, but it has been over a month
since the agenda for the Constitutional Committee was agreed and nearly six months
20-0694319/28

S/2020/420

since its last meeting. We cannot let hard won progress on this front be lost because
of lethargy and disinterest from Damascus. I call on Russia to bring its influence to
bear on its Syrian clients.
In order to support momentum and keep the progress alive, we encourage at
least that the co-Chairs of the Committee urgently meet by videoconference to discuss
outstanding issues, including how a full meeting can work in practice. We also urge
the regime to make widespread releases of political prisoners and vulnerable people
and to ensure that medical care is available for those still in detention. While we
welcome negotiated releases, we would note that one-for-one releases are insufficient
in a context where the regime holds far more detainees than opposition forces do.
I would like to emphasize once again — and for the record — that there cannot be
any reconstruction funding from the United Kingdom without the regime’s genuine
engagement with a credible and sustainable political process.
Let me conclude by reiterating what I believe we all have said, namely, that the
deliberate targeting of humanitarian infrastructure and civilians is never acceptable,
whether it be through ground attacks, barrel bombs, air strikes or chemical weapons.
We note Amnesty International’s recent report detailing 18 attacks on medical
facilities and schools between May 2019 and February 2020, which only adds to
the evidence provided by the Board of Inquiry and the Commission of Inquiry. As
with the chemical-weapon attacks carried out by the Syrian regime and detailed in
the report of the Investigation and Identification Team of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, those responsible must and will be held to account.
In the meantime, such disregard for international humanitarian law must cease.

20/28

20-06943

S/2020/420

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank United Nations Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing today. The
United States fully agrees with him that there should be an immediate nationwide
ceasefire in Syria. Not only is a ceasefire an essential element of resolution 2254
(2015), but a ceasefire would also enable efforts to suppress the spread of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19). I want to reiterate in this context that the United Nations must
be at the centre of any effort to establish a ceasefire and that Special Envoy Pedersen
has the authority to monitor lines of contact to ensure that the ceasefire agreements
are honoured.
What is becoming increasingly clear is that the Al-Assad regime is intent on
exploiting the COVID-19 crisis for its own strategic political and military advantage.
When Russia and China forced the reduction of cross-border aid points from four to
two, they said that the United Nations should engage the regime to facilitate crossline aid from Damascus to Syrian civilians. The United Nations has engaged. But
since then, the Secretary-General has reported that efforts to gain approval from
the regime to deliver medical aid to COVID-19 hotspots are taking months — and
this, from a regime that has already used chemical weapons against its own people,
deprived its people of food and water, and destroyed medical facilities. Years of such
appalling behaviour prove that the Al-Assad regime will stop at nothing to pursue
a military victory, even if it means refusing to deliver medical supplies that are
essential for suppressing COVID-19.
In the light of these dreadful, irrefutable facts, we must collectively ask how
the Security Council can help restore stability in Syria. The answer lies in making
progress on all tracks of resolution 2254 (2015). The Council must make every effort
to ensure the Al-Assad regime reverses its destructive pattern of behaviour against
its own people and agrees to a comprehensive, enduring and verifiable nationwide
ceasefire. Equally important is making progress on the Constitutional Committee,
whose stakeholders have agreed on an agenda, but which has not met because of the
regime co-Chair’s unwillingness to convene virtually.
The Trump Administration calls once again for the Al-Assad regime to protect
the fate of thousands of civilians held arbitrarily in detention centres. As we have
noted before, the crowded and inhumane conditions of these centres dramatically
increase the risk of a rapid spread of COVID-19. We demand the immediate release
of all civilians detained arbitrarily, especially women, children and the elderly. The
Al-Assad regime must also immediately grant impartial and independent entities,
including medical and health organizations, access to regime detention facilities in
order to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
There is one way forward: full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). It
bears repeating that the only way forward is the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015). That is what will move Syria towards a future of peace, prosperity
and dignity for all its people. Accordingly, that is the approach we must pursue as
a Council.

20-0694321/28

S/2020/420

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, for his briefing.
Recently, there have been signs of hope, as the efforts made by relevant parties,
the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy have to a certain degree borne fruit,
namely, the relatively calm situation on the ground since the beginning of March, as
well as the progress made within the framework of the Constitutional Committee.
Yet the calm is fragile, with a number of sporadic incidents of violence, as
well as the reported increased operations of terrorist groups in several parts of
Syria. The progress towards a political solution is being hampered by the impact of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Meanwhile, this pandemic is also
worsening the humanitarian situation, which is already desperate.
Time and tide wait for no one. The pandemic may take away some of the time
and the means; we cannot let it take away our humanity and love for peace. Let us not
waste the positive momentum, but let us join forces to fight the common enemies,
which are war and COVID-19.
My delegation would therefore like first to re-emphasize the importance of
maintaining and promoting stability in order to create the most favourable conditions
for a lasting solution through dialogue and negotiation. We strongly support the
Secretary-General’s call for a ceasefire in Syria, and we urge all actors to heed that
call to facilitate not only an all-out effort to combat COVID-19 but also the political
process in Syria.
Secondly, it is important for the Council to be united during this time so as to
take advantage of any achievement we have made and any viable diplomatic efforts
in order to help the Syrian people through this current impasse, as well as to provide
unwavering humanitarian support for people in urgent need. We would also like
to stress the importance of the unceasing support for the facilitation work of the
United Nations.
Last but not least, Viet Nam has always firmly believed in a Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned political solution, with full respect for the principles of sovereign
equality, territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
in full accordance with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

22/28

20-06943

S/2020/420

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting. I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Pedersen, for his input.
I reiterate our long-standing position that the Syrian crisis must be settled
through political means. In that context, we extend our support to the work of the
Constitutional Committee, as has been expressed by the Astana format meetings on
numerous occasions. While the Committee should be supported to do its work, as a
matter of principle, any and all forms of external pressure must be avoided by all, as
stipulated in its rules of procedure. At the same time, any possible assistance to the
Committee, even by the United Nations, must be extended only at the request of the
Committee itself, in accordance with its rules of procedure.
As a principled position, which also has been repeatedly reaffirmed by the
Astana format summits, we continue to reject any separatist agendas as well as any
and all attempts to create new realities on the ground, including through illegitimate
self-rule initiatives.
The sovereignty, political independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Syria must be fully respected by all. Accordingly, all foreign forces whose presence
is not permitted by the Syrian Government must leave the Syrian territory. A living
example in that regard is the occupation of certain parts of Syria by forces of the
United States, which continue to support and shield terrorist groups under the guise
of combating terrorism.
Similarly, Israel’s acts of aggression against Syria are in gross violation of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations, in the face of which the
Syrian Government has a sovereign right to decide how and when to exercise its
inherent right to individual or collective self-defence. Such acts of aggression must
come to an end.
We also stress that the occupation of the Syrian Golan by Israel is illegal and
that the recognition by the United States of its annexation to Israel is null and void.
While condemning such unlawful, irresponsible acts, we stress that the Golan is, and
will remain, an integral part of the Syrian territory.
Finally, the right to determine the future of Syria belongs exclusively to the
Syrians, and the international community should assist them in realizing that right.

20-0694323/28

S/2020/420

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the United Nations, Bashar Ja’afari
A few days ago, the Security Council virtually celebrated the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the victory over nazism and fascism in the Second World War. The
victors, including us, pledged to make concerted efforts to maintain international
peace and security and to spare humankind from the ravages of war, which twice
brought about scourges that were more horrifying than the black plague that invaded
Europe and the world in medieval times. That led to the birth of the United Nations,
whose Charter enshrines the international legal framework and fundamental
principles of the structure of international relations, manifested in respect for the
sovereignty and sovereign equality of Member States and refraining from interfering
in their internal affairs and from threatening or using force.
Today, 75 years after the collapse of the ideologies of extremist regimes
that set a precedent for the emergence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
Al-Qaida and the Al-Nusra Front in our region — regimes that were based on acts
of aggression, hegemonic ambitions, discriminatory practices and hatred — we are
witnessing the systematic violation of the fundamental principles of international
law and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations by the Governments
of some Western States, which were supposed to have experienced the two World
Wars and realized their impacts, and were therefore entrusted with the maintenance
of international peace and security. However, those very same Governments have
systematically violated the basic principles of international law and the provisions
of the Charter and sought to undermine the choices of the peoples of Member States
through acts of military invasion, armed aggression, investment in terrorism and
economic and financial coercion. These practices are a consecration of the law of
power and the law of the jungle rather, than the power of law and the power of justice.
Moreover, we express our concern, condemnation and disapproval of the
distortion of facts about the Second World War voiced by two permanent members of
the Security Council, which deny the more than 27 million martyrs whom the Soviet
Union and its successor, the Russian Federation, lost in the war against nazism.
Whoever has the audacity to do that will not find it difficult to distort the facts about
Syria’s struggle and that of its people, army and leadership against terrorism.
For its part, my country, Syria, still believes in the purposes and principles
of the United Nations, to which it was a signatory in San Francisco, alongside
the other founding Member States. Today, and every day, Syria is committed to
maintaining its sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity, as emphasized in the
relevant Council resolutions.
The Turkish regime continues to violate its obligations under international law,
the Adana agreement and the Sochi, Astana and Moscow understandings, as well as
Security Council resolutions, especially those related to combating terrorism. That
regime persists in providing multifaceted support and sponsorship to its affiliated
terrorist groups operating in different parts of northern Syria.
Those terrorist groups have taken advantage of the period of calm following
the Moscow agreement and the global preoccupation with efforts to confront the
coronavirus disease pandemic to reorganize their forces and increase their armaments
in preparation for committing more terrorist crimes. The latest such crime was when
the terrorist groups affiliated with Huras Al-Din and the Turkestan Islamic Party —
as it is clear that these terrorist organizations do not even have Arabic names, but
rather names associated with the Ottoman era and their Turkish operator — attacked
one of the military points in the village of Tanjara, near Al-Ghab region in the
24/28

20-06943

S/2020/420

north-west, and targeted it with a barrage of mortar shells and machine-gun fire,
which led to a number of martyrs and wounded soldiers. Likewise, the terrorists
of the Turkish-backed Turkestan Islamic Party destroyed the tower of the Zeyzoun
power plant, in the Idlib countryside, after they had looted the equipment of the
station, in cooperation with Turkish technicians, and transported it into Turkish
territory through the crossings that some in the United Nations promote as so-called
humanitarian. In addition to that, the Turkish regime violated the Constitution and
Convention of the International Telecommunication Union by installing a number
of cellular communications stations inside Syrian territory and providing Internet
coverage and cellular communications, particularly to terrorist organizations, in
northern Syria through a Turkish Internet service provider called HATNet and a
Turkish telecommunications company called e-LUX.
Furthermore, the cutting off of water from the Allouk station, which is
controlled by the Turkish occupying forces and their affiliated terrorist groups, and
the denial of drinking water to the more than 1 million citizens of Al-Hasakah and
its vicinity are a war crime and a crime against humanity. We are saddened by the
fact that those who claim to stand up for the right of Syrians to regain their security
and daily livelihood, be they Western countries, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs or the specialized agencies of the United Nations, have not
said a word to condemn these inhumane practices.
On the other hand, the American occupation forces have begun to establish
a new military base in the countryside of Deir ez-Zor governorate, in north-eastern
Syria, with the aim of tightening their control over Syrian oil fields and continuing
to plunder the resources of the Syrian people. The period since the Special Envoy’s
previous briefing (see S/2020/353) has also witnessed military attacks carried out by
the Israeli occupying forces from over the occupied Syrian Golan and the airspace
of neighbouring countries.
These acts of aggression, comprising flagrant violations of international law
and the provisions of the Charter, are the tip of the iceberg of aggressive practices
aimed at prolonging the crisis in my country, obstructing settlement efforts and
supporting terrorist organizations and proxy separatist militias. As usual, under
pressure from its three Western permanent members, the Security Council has
remained silent in the face of such actions, which threaten regional and international
peace and security, seeking to render the Council a platform for NATO. That risks
undermining the foundations of the multilateral international order and bringing it
back to the pre-Second World War era. There are currently six NATO member States
in the Security Council. With Turkey at this meeting, the number becomes seven,
which is about half the Council members.
In that context, my delegation reiterates that we will not give up our legitimate
right to defend our homeland and its resources, combat terrorism and liberate our
occupied territories, whether occupied by the United States, Turkey, Israel or their
affiliated terrorist organizations. Any presence of foreign military forces on the
territory of the Syrian Arab Republic without the explicit consent of the Syrian
Government is an act of aggression and occupation, and it will be dealt with as such
in accordance with our national Constitution and our rights under international law.
The success of any political process requires the provision of appropriate
conditions, notably respect for the first paragraph of the Council’s resolutions,
which affirms the strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. Such a commitment requires an end
to the illegal foreign military presence, acts of aggression, support for terrorism and
unilateral coercive measures imposed on the Syrian people, as well as a cessation

20-0694325/28

S/2020/420

of the efforts of States hostile to Syria to impose their visions, intransigence and
conditions on the Syrian people.
My country is a victim of unprecedented and prescribed terrorism sponsored
by States members of the Council and beyond in order to obtain political concessions
commensurate with its interventionist agendas in the internal affairs of States of the
region. That explains the frantic attempt to invade States in the region and to try
to change legitimate Governments by force and impose new facts on the ground in
order to undermine the possibility of establishing a Palestinian State, sustaining the
Israeli occupation of the occupied Syrian Golan and achieving the illusion of the socalled “deal of the century” promoted by the American Administration.
The tyranny of power and investment in terrorism will not lead us to drink
from the river of madness. We have been, and continue to be, a safety valve for
stability and moderation in the region, and our strong attachment to our sovereignty
and independence reflects our true understanding of the victory over nazism and
fascism in the Second World War.
In conclusion, it is very unfortunate that I have not heard any comments from
the Special Envoy or some Council members about condemning the cutting off of
water by the Turkish regime in Al-Hasakah city for the third time this month. It is also
very unfortunate that I have not heard any comment from the Special Envoy or some
Council members with regard to how the hooligans of the Turkish regime affiliated
with the Huras Al-Din terrorist group blew up the electricity station in Zeyzoun,
located in the Idlib countryside, after they looted its equipment and transported it to
the Turkish territories in order to be sold as scrap.
It is very unfortunate that I have not heard any comments from the Special
Envoy or some Council members about how the American occupation is stealing
Syrian gas and oil around the clock. Furthermore, only yesterday the American air
force dropped hot air balloons on farms in Al-Shaddadah town, south of Al-Hasakah,
which led to the burning of more than 200 hectares of farms planted with wheat.

26/28

20-06943

S/2020/420

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun H. Sinirlioğlu
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting. I would also like to
thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. He has the full support of Turkey in
his efforts to advance the political process.
We all agree, I believe, that a political settlement, in line with resolution 2254
(2015), remains the only way forward in Syria. A serious political process requires,
above all, the seriousness of the Al-Assad regime and its backers in the efforts
towards the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
Today, despite sporadic violations, the ceasefire is holding in Idlib. Turkey
continues its efforts to stabilize the situation on the ground. Joint patrols have
been carried out with Russia on the M4 motorway since 15 March. Over 140,000
internally displaced persons have returned to their homes. Our aim is to ensure a
lasting ceasefire in Idlib. This is essential to improving the humanitarian situation,
facilitating the return of displaced people and advancing the political process.
However, we are witnessing a continuous military build-up by the regime in
Idlib. Taking into account the track record of the regime, this development threatens
the lives of millions of Syrians, mostly women and children. We cannot allow the
regime to interpret the ceasefire as an opportunity to regroup for its next offensive.
Turkey is committed to protecting the civilians in Idlib and reserves its right of selfdefence to respond to any attack.
We have emphasized the importance of reaching a ceasefire for reviving
the political track, and the ceasefire in Idlib has certainly helped with that. We are
pleased that there is now an agreement on the agenda of the third round. The next
round of Constitutional Committee meetings should be held without delay, once it
is possible to convene in person. But we have to make sure that the Committee’s
meetings are conducted seriously. These meetings must deliver concrete outcomes.
The Security Council has the responsibility to support the Committee’s work and not
to allow the regime to water it down again.
It is also ironic and shameless that the Al-Assad regime, which deliberately
targeted and tortured doctors and nurses for a decade and obliterated the medical
infrastructure of its country by systematically attacking hospitals, is now calling for
a lifting of sanctions under the pretext of fighting the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Last month, almost all members of the Council expressed their sympathies for
the victims of the terrorist attack that took place in Afrin on 28 April. Let me recall
that this barbaric attack was perpetrated by the Kurdish Workers Party/Kurdish
People’s Protection Units (PKK/YPG), and was followed by another, in Al-Bab, on
9 May. In these two attacks, the PKK/YPG killed more than 50 civilians, including
babies. Since mid-March, the PKK/YPG has carried out more than 30 terrorist attacks
throughout northern Syria. These indiscriminate attacks include suicide bombings.
All these attacks have taken place at a time when the so-called Syrian
Democratic Forces have pretended to support the Secretary-General’s appeal for
a global ceasefire. It is no secret that these terrorist groups have been using such
occasions to gain legitimacy. We all have the duty not to fall into this trap and
to demonstrate a united front against terrorism by condemning the PKK/YPG’s
terrorist attacks, without hesitation.
Attempts to include the PKK/YPG in the political process through so-called
reconciliation talks are both unjustified and unacceptable. A terrorist entity with
20-0694327/28

S/2020/420

a separatist agenda for Syria, in contradiction with all relevant Security Council
resolutions, has no place within this process.
Let me briefly touch upon the use of chemical weapons by the Al-Assad
regime. Turkey welcomes the report of the Investigation and Identification Team
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The Team’s
report, in addition to the reports of the Joint Investigative Mechanism, provides
indisputable evidence that the Syrian regime is in non-compliance with the Chemical
Weapons Convention. These are war crimes and crimes against humanity, and those
responsible for these crimes must be held accountable and brought to justice.
Turkey will continue to support all efforts, including the steps to be taken by
the OPCW and the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist
in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious
Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011, towards ensuring full accountability in Syria. This remains crucial for
a credible political process.
By way of massacring thousands of innocent civilians, the Syrian regime has
gained control over some parts of Syria. Yet it has no legitimacy in the eyes of the
Syrians. There are millions who cannot go back to their homeland for the simple
reason that their most fundamental right — the right to life — is under threat. These
millions of people are not represented in Damascus or here in New York, but their
voices need to be heard. Their grievances need to be addressed. That can be achieved
only through an election, as described by the Permanent Representative of France,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). In the tenth year of the civil war in Syria,
we need to do more, not less. And it is our collective duty to make sure that these
Council meetings have a meaningful outcome beyond words.
As usual, I will not honour the delusional state of mind of the previous speaker
with a response. He does not represent the Syrian people. I will provide an answer, on
behalf of my country and the nearly 9 million Syrians whom we protect, once there
is a legitimate representative behind the name plate of the Syrian Arab Republic.

28/28

20-06943
