A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/32
10 January 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 44
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/51/L.31 and Add.1)]
51/32.

Mid-term review of the implementation of the
United Nations New Agenda for the
Development of Africa in the 1990s

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 46/151 of 18 December 1991, the annex to
which contains the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in
the 1990s,
Recalling its resolutions 48/214 of 23 December 1993 and 49/142 of
23 December 1994 on the New Agenda,
Recalling also its resolutions 50/160 A and B of 22 December 1995 and
16 July 1996 establishing the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the General
Assembly for the Mid-term Review of the Implementation of the United Nations
New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s,
Noting that the mid-term review of the implementation of the New
Agenda1 has been an occasion for an in-depth assessment of the actions taken
in the implementation of the New Agenda and the measures needed to accelerate
its implementation during the remaining period of the decade and beyond,
Recognizing that while there was an overall improvement in economic
performance in some African countries, in the continent as a whole many of the
critical social conditions and economic problems which led to the adoption of
the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and

1

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session,
Supplement No. 48 (A/51/48).
97-76129

/...

A/RES/51/32
Page 2

Development 1986-1990,2 and the New Agenda in 1986 and 1991, respectively,
still exist and have worsened in some countries;
Recognizing also, as noted in the mid-term review,3 that poverty and
unemployment are expected to increase substantially in Africa, leading to the
need for African countries and the international community to take urgent
measures to attain the objectives of the New Agenda,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General concerning the midterm review of the implementation of the New Agenda,4
Taking note also of the document of the Organization of African Unity
concerning the mid-term review of the implementation of the New Agenda, the
outcome of the High-level Seminar on African Development, held at Tokyo on 27
and 28 August 1996, and the submission by the non-governmental organizations,
Noting the contribution made by individual Governments and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to the work of the Ad Hoc
Committee,
1.
Adopts the conclusions of the mid-term review of the
implementation of the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa
in the 1990s, consisting of an assessment of the responses and measures to
accelerate the implementation of the New Agenda, as set forth in the report of
the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the General Assembly for the Mid-term
Review of the Implementation of the United Nations New Agenda for the
Development of Africa in the 1990s,1 highlighting key areas for priority
attention, inter alia: (a) economic reforms, including the effective
mobilization and efficient utilization of domestic resources; (b) the
promotion of private sector and foreign direct investment; (c) the
intensification of the democratic process and the strengthening of civil
society; (d) environment and development; (e) resource flows; (f) solution of
Africa's debt problem; (g) trade facilitation and market access; (h) the
diversification of African economies; (i) the improvement of physical and
institutional infrastructure and social and human resource development; and
(j) women in development;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to give the outcome of the mid-term
review the widest publicity to all Member States and in particular to
sensitize the heads of the agencies and institutions of the United Nations
system, including the Bretton Woods institutions, and the donor community to
the measures and recommendations contained therein;
3.
Requests all States, international and multilateral organizations,
financial institutions and development funds, the organs and programmes of the
United Nations system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
to take, as a matter of urgency, concrete and effective measures in order to

2

Resolution S-13/2, annex.

3

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement
No. 48 (A/51/48), para. 44, annex.
4

A/51/228 and Add.1 and A/AC.251/5.
/...

A/RES/51/32
Page 3

implement fully the recommendations contained in the report of the Ad Hoc
Committee and to do so in a coordinated manner;
4.
Reaffirms the importance of effective follow-up, monitoring and
evaluation arrangements for the implementation of the New Agenda at the
national, regional and global levels, and in this regard requests the
Secretary-General to strengthen and improve follow-up, monitoring and
evaluation of the implementation of the New Agenda;
5.
Recognizes the complementary role of the United Nations Systemwide Special Initiative on Africa in the implementation of the New Agenda,
including the mobilization of adequate resources, while avoiding unnecessary
duplication of activities;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General, pending the final review and
appraisal of the New Agenda in the year 2002, to submit to the General
Assembly at its fifty-third and fifty-fifth sessions a progress report on the
implementation of the present resolution under an item entitled
"Implementation of the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa
in the 1990s, including measures and recommendations agreed upon at its midterm review".
75th plenary meeting
6 December 1996
