United Nations

S/PV.6572

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6572nd meeting
Thursday, 30 June 2011, 11.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Messone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Vukašinović
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Berger
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force for the period from 1 January to 30 June 2011 (S/2011/359)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-39599 (E)

*1139599*

S/PV.6572

Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): We voted in
favour of resolution 1994 (2011) today as the United
Kingdom welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) to maintain
stability within its area of operations. It continues to
play a valuable and effective role.

The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force for the
period from 1 January to 30 June 2011
(S/2011/359)
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Israel and Syria to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2011/385, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, Germany,
Portugal, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/359, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Gabon, Germany, India,
Lebanon, Nigeria, Portugal, Russian Federation,
South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and United States of
America.
The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1994 (2010).
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the adoption of
the resolution.

We must, however, find a lasting solution to the
situation. That will require the cooperation of both
parties. We therefore urge Syria and Israel to resume
peace negotiations aimed at achieving a comprehensive
peace agreement, in accordance with the Madrid
Conference terms of reference for peace.
The United Kingdom is gravely concerned by the
ongoing violence in Syria and the clear threat to
regional peace and stability that it presents. In
particular, in this context we deplore the loss of life
which occurred in UNDOF’s area of operations on
15 May and 5 June. We hope that the circumstances
which led to these tragic events, including the role of
the Syrian Government, will be investigated
thoroughly. We urge both parties to show restraint and
to refrain from provocations so as to prevent an
escalation of tensions along the ceasefire line.
We are also concerned at the Secretary-General’s
finding that anti-Government demonstrations in Syria
have spread to the area of limitation on the Syrian side.
We have repeatedly urged the Syrian Government to
halt the violence, to respond constructively to the
legitimate demands of the Syrian people, and to
implement meaningful reforms. It has not done so.
Instead, it has met legitimate demands for reform with
brute force in which an estimated 1,400 people have
died in the past three months. This is completely
unacceptable.
We are also very concerned that the Syrian
Government continues to obstruct United Nations
attempts to help alleviate the crisis and bring assistance
to the Syrian people. President Al-Assad refuses to
accept phone calls from the Secretary-General; his
regime
has
barred
access
to
humanitarian
organizations; and the Human Rights Councilmandated fact-finding mission has been refused
permission to enter the country and carry out its work.
The Government’s actions are causing increasing
numbers of Syrian refugees to flood over the borders
into Turkey and Lebanon.
The situation in Syria is not sustainable. If we
genuinely want to see an end to the violence, this

2

11-39599

S/PV.6572

Council should send a clear message underlining our
collective concern. The United Kingdom will therefore
continue to press for a Security Council resolution on
the wider situation in Syria.
Mr. Berger (Germany): The United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) was
established in 1974. It has been operating for more
than 37 years now. We salute the men and women who
serve and have served to support UNDOF in the
discharge of its mandate. We look forward to receiving
in the next report of the Secretary-General an
assessment of the capacity of UNDOF to ensure the
appropriate operational capability in the future.
On 15 May and 5 June, demonstrations in the
UNDOF area of operations resulted in a number of
civilian casualties that, to quote paragraph 3 of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/359), “put the longheld ceasefire in jeopardy”, an assessment we fully
share. We deeply regret the loss of life and are gravely
concerned about these events, which are the most
serious incidents since the establishment of UNDOF’s
mandate.
Such events cannot go unreflected, which is why
we deviated from the long-standing practice of
reiterating the same resolution as in previous years.
While we call on both parties, Israel and Syria, to fulfil
their obligations under the 1974 status-of-forces
agreement, we note that these demonstrations would
not have been possible without Syrian consent, and we
call on Syria to refrain from any action that could
provoke further unrest. Throughout the country, Syrian
authorities have been cracking down with the utmost
brutality on demonstrations against their Government.
On 15 May and 5 June, however, they actively
encouraged demonstrations against Israel in one of the
most sensitive areas of the country. Syria seems to be
willing to risk an international conflict in order to
divert attention from its repression of the legitimate
calls for political freedom voiced by its population.
Subsequent riots in the Yarmouk refugee camp indicate
that Palestinian refugees have realized that they and
their aspirations were manipulated and abused in this
very dangerous game.
The violence in Syria must stop. Imprisoned
demonstrators must be freed, and instead of spreading
fear, meaningful reforms must be implemented.
Playing off parts of Syria’s multifaceted society against
each other will not work. We join in the

11-39599

Secretary-General’s call to the Security Council to
express itself on the situation in Syria. For us, this is
long overdue.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) has played a critical role in maintaining the
ceasefire between Israel and Syria since 1974, and we
welcome today’s vote. The calm in UNDOF’s area of
operations was seriously disrupted just weeks ago. The
United States is deeply concerned about the grave
events of 15 May and 5 June in the Golan Heights. We
are further troubled by credible reports that the Syrian
Government played a role in those demonstrations,
which resulted in fatalities and injuries. These actions
are a transparent ploy by the Syrian Government to
incite violence along the disengagement line in order to
divert public attention from its own indiscriminate
killings and abuses of the human rights of the Syrian
people.
These events display clearly the regime’s
hypocrisy. It uses the Palestinian cause to encourage
violence and risk its long-standing ceasefire with
Israel, while continuing to brutally repress the Syrian
people and deny their call for reform and democratic
change. The Syrian people have shown their courage in
demanding a transition to democracy. The Syrian
Government must stop shooting demonstrators and
allow peaceful protests. It must release political
prisoners and stop unjust arrests and torture. It must
allow human rights monitors access and start a serious
dialogue in order to advance a democratic transition.
In operational terms, we are concerned about the
increased restrictions on UNDOF’s movement in the
area of separation. Both parties must respect the terms
of the 1974 disengagement of forces agreement,
including by preventing breaches of the area of
separation.
Finally, the United States commends the men and
women of UNDOF for their dedication, and thanks
Major-General Ecarma for his leadership.
Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We wish
at the outset to emphasize the importance of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force’s operations,
and to pay tribute to the sacrifices it has made. Today
Lebanon joined the consensus in adopting resolution
1994 (2011). We would have preferred that it be
technical in nature, as had always been the case in the
past, when the resolution was accompanied by a

3

S/PV.6572

presidential statement recalling the need to arrive at a
comprehensive, peaceful solution to the conflict in the
Middle East. We hope that this will be the case once
again in future.
We condemn Israel’s attempt to change
demographics and to bring about significant changes in
the occupied Syrian Golan area, particularly through
the extension and expansion of settlements, which is a
flagrant violation of international law, of General
Assembly resolution 497 (1981) and the Fourth Geneva
Convention. We call on Israel to implement Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and to
withdraw completely from the occupied Golan Heights
to the 1967 line. We stress the importance of arriving at
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the region of
the Middle East.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): Today the
Security Council has reaffirmed its support for the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF). However, the resolution that was adopted
today — resolution 1994 (2011) — is profoundly
different from its predecessors in its response to the
very disturbing developments in the situation in the
Golan Heights. Since the 1974 Agreement on
Disengagement, the ceasefire line between Israel and
Syria had been the most stable borderline in the region;
then, in rapid succession, on 15 May and 5 June, major
incidents occurred that threatened the ceasefire
observed since 1973, jeopardizing stability and security
in the region.
Today, therefore, the Council reminds the parties
of their obligation to fully respect the 1974 Agreement
and the Council’s resolutions. Those obligations
involve preventing violations of the ceasefire line and
the area of separation. The violations of 15 May and
5 June on the Syrian side show that the Syrian
authorities did not respect those obligations. The
Council also reminds the parties that they must show
the utmost restraint, and France deeply regrets the
many casualties of those incidents.
UNDOF’s movements have been restricted and
the Force attacked by the Syrian side. That is
unacceptable. Freedom of movement for peacekeepers
is, I should recall, a fundamental element in the
deployment of peacekeeping operations, as a corollary
of the State’s consent in accepting such a deployment
on its territory. The parties must therefore fully
guarantee UNDOF’s implementation of its mandate by

4

ensuring its
movement.

security

and

complete

freedom

of

That is the message that today’s resolution sends,
reflecting the Council’s deep concern about the
potential destabilizing influence in the region of the
events in the Golan. The origin of those events is clear:
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/359) shows that
the Palestinian demonstrators in the area of separation
benefited from being ignored by the Syrian authorities,
even if they were not actually helped by them. The
Syrian authorities were under the obligation to
guarantee respect for the ceasefire by preventing
violations of the line of disengagement and the area of
separation. Those violations took place under the nose
of the Syrian security forces, such that the report
indicates that they controlled the demonstration.
No one is seeking to deny the legitimacy of the
Palestinians’ aspirations to achieve an independent,
sovereign State, living side by side in peace with
Israel, and France has always supported a resumption
of negotiations along those lines. What the Council
cannot accept is the hypocritical use by the Syrian
regime of the aspirations of the Palestinian people and
the resulting threat to regional stability. The incidents
of 15 May and 5 June are a tragic manifestation of this
attempt by the Syrian regime to distract international
attention from the aspirations of its own people, which
it is now crushing amid bloodshed.
Let me be clear: no attempt at regional
destabilization will distract our attention from the
brutal and systematic repression of peaceful
demonstrators in Syria. Quite the contrary: these
actions, which threaten international peace and
security, strengthen our determination to see the
Council express its views on the Syrian situation. The
stability of Syria is crucial for the Middle East, a
region whose fragility the Council knows only too
well. Such stability can only come about through an
end to the violence against the demonstrators and the
effective implementation of reforms that meet the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people to control
their own destiny.
Last week the Secretary-General invited the
members of the Security Council to overcome their
differences and to send this clear message to the Syrian
authorities. The resolution that the Council has just
adopted unanimously is evidence of the fact that it has
maintained its capacity to react when international

11-39599

S/PV.6572

peace and security are at stake. We must draw lessons
from this and respond to the call of the SecretaryGeneral by working to adopt a resolution that would
send to the Syrian authorities the only message that can
preserve peace and stability, for which the Council has
primary responsibility.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation was the initiator of
the first draft resolution on the extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force in the occupied Syrian Golan Heights
for another six months. We support the important
stabilizing role played by the Force, and we believe
that its presence in the area is necessary until there is
an end to tension in the area.
The Russian Federation, which voted in favour of
the draft resolution, wanted to continue the longstanding practice by which members of the Council
unanimously express, in a presidential statement, their
support for the view of the Secretary-General that the
situation in the region is unstable and will remain so
until a comprehensive settlement is achieved that
covers all aspects of the Middle East problem. While
there was not unanimity in the Council on this, as there
were doubts in this regard, we are confident that this
important idea about the Middle East settlement was
reflected in the resolution adopted today.
We call on both sides to continue to cooperate
actively with United Nations personnel acting under
the Force’s mandate and within the framework of
existing agreements to observe the ceasefire
agreement; to assist the United Nations Force in
carrying out its mission; and to ensure the security and
freedom of movement of its staff. We believe that the
capacities and resources of the United Nations Force
are sufficient for it to carry out its tasks.
In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that the
resolution just adopted, of which Russia was a
co-sponsor, is technical in nature and bears no relation
to developments in the political situation in Syria or in
Israel. Syria is not on the agenda of the Security
Council because it does not pose a threat to
international peace and security.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China is watching closely the situation in the Middle
East. We commend the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) for the very important role it

11-39599

has played in maintaining regional stability, and we
support the smooth renewal of UNDOF’s mandate.
The events in Syria are an internal affair of that
country. It should be left to the parties concerned to
find a proper solution through dialogue and
consultation. The question of Syria and the renewal of
the mandate of UNDOF are two distinct issues and
should not be linked, so as to avoid complicating and
politicizing the renewal of UNDOF’s mandate.
At present, the situation in the Middle East is
extremely complex and sensitive. The international
community must work to maintain regional peace and
stability and to facilitate the efforts of the parties
concerned to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East that is based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Ja′afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
would like at the outset to express its appreciation for
the efforts being made by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and to the members
of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF). I want them to remember this statement.
UNDOF personnel in the occupied Golan Heights
are on a part of our land that has been occupied by
Israel since 1967. The reason UNDOF forces are in the
Golan is the Israeli occupation of the Golan. I want this
fact to remain present in the minds of our colleagues.
We would therefore like to express our appreciation for
the efforts being made by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and by UNDOF personnel in
the occupied Golan Heights to observe the Agreement
on Disengagement and to maintain peace and security
in the Force’s area of operations, which is, of course, in
implementation of its mandate.
UNDOF has always been, and continues to be,
the safest peacekeeping operation of all such
operations being carried out by the United Nations
throughout the world. Syria has supported and
facilitated the work of UNDOF and respected its
mandate since the Force was formed in 1974.
Moreover, Syria has maintained close ties with
officials of UNDOF and the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization, as well as with DPKO, for a
period of approximately 40 years — the duration of the
Israeli occupation of the Golan Heights.

5

S/PV.6572

The periodic reports issued by the SecretaryGeneral since the Israeli occupation of the Golan began
in 1967 have expressed appreciation for Syria’s
positive attitude in cooperating with UNDOF and its
personnel as well as in ensuring their safety and
respecting their mandate. On behalf of the Syrian Arab
Republic, we reiterate that we will do everything
necessary to maintain the safety of UNDOF’s
personnel in order to ensure the success of its mandate.
Syria expresses its regret that the long-soughtafter just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East
that certain colleagues have mentioned has not been
achieved yet. Israel has not withdrawn from the
occupied Golan Heights, in implementation of
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981) and
of all international initiatives in that respect, including
the Arab Peace Initiative and other well-known terms
of reference. It has also not complied with international
law. This has led, naturally, to the prolonged presence
of that force in part of our occupied land.
In that regard, we ask the Security Council to
play its due role by putting an end to the Israeli
occupation of our land and thus uphold the mandate
that it has given itself through its own resolutions and
fulfil its task of maintaining international peace and
security.
Ever since the start of the recent internal events
and developments in Syria, and especially after certain
extremists started using violence and bearing arms
against the forces of law and order and innocent Syrian
citizens, including peaceful demonstrators, it has
become clear to us and to many observers throughout
the world that some parties, including in this very
Security Council, are attempting to involve the
Council, on the pretext of weak excuses and
justifications, in internal developments that have
nothing to do with its role, responsibilities or mandate.
Without going into detail concerning the attempts
we have witnessed on the part of some Council
members to involve the Council in issues that are none
of its business, we must confess our bafflement over
the attempts — described to us by certain colleagues,
whom we thank — of some of these parties to include
references to Syrian domestic affairs in a technical
draft resolution extending the mandate of UNDOF.
This is a technical issue that the Security Council has
addressed in a technical manner dozens of times over
the many years of the Israeli occupation of our Golan.

6

This exploitation of strictly internal developments in
Syria is aimed solely at putting political pressure on
Syria, and is another indication of how some member
States will not hesitate to continue to use the Security
Council as a tool to enforce their own policies. Syria
expresses its deep appreciation to the Council members
that did not get involved in these brazen tactics and
suspicious activities.
We note that the reforms announced by President
Bashar Al-Assad, which emanate from his belief in the
need to implement reforms that will meet the demands
and aspirations of the Syrian people, will be applied on
the ground through the national dialogue conference,
the consultations for which will begin in the next few
days. We should keep in mind that some of these
reforms have now become a tangible reality on the
ground and enjoy the support and the appreciation of
the international community, as we have reported
consecutively to the Secretary-General and members of
the Security Council.
Since the formation of UNDOF in 1974, we have
continued to draw the attention of the Security Council
and the Secretary-General to the activities of Israel, the
occupying Power — and that is its legal title — and its
authorities. They have built settlements in the Golan,
which now number 44. They continue to build bypass
roads around Syrian cities in the Golan and to drain
Mas'adah Lake, on which thousands of Syrian farmers
depend for their living. They continue to oppress the
citizens of the Syrian Golan Heights, who refuse to
carry Israeli identification cards and reject the Israeli
occupation, and to undertake campaigns to arrest them.
In 1981, the Council unanimously adopted its
renowned resolution 497 (1981), which condemned
and rejected the Israeli occupying Power’s decision to
annex the occupied Golan Heights.
Not all of this news, it appears, has reached the
ears of some representatives who have spoken today.
They have never even mentioned these issues in their
statements on United Nations resolutions and the
renewal of the UNDOF mandate over the past 30 years.
Our people’s suffering in the occupied Golan Heights
deserved some reference a long time ago. Instead, these
speakers focused exclusively on the strictly internal
affairs of a founding State Member of this
Organization.
According to a report issued in Washington, D.C.,
yesterday, the recent wars waged by the United States

11-39599

S/PV.6572

military have cost $4 trillion. These wars have led to
disasters in Iraq, Afghanistan and other areas of the
world. We now also hear of the scandal of NATO’s
failure to respect the strict mandate of resolution 1973
(2011), and this scandal is there for all to see. These
facts, and not some internal domestic incidents that
could have taken place in any State Member of the
Organization, are relevant to the Security Council’s
mandate.
My country has received 2 million Iraqi refugees,
who fled Iraq because of the American- and British-led
military invasion. But we have not put our brothers in
camps or asked them to live in tents. We welcomed
them as they awaited the liberation of Iraq so that they
could return to their own homes and land. Since we
first received these 2 million Iraqi refugees, no one in
the international community has even offered
humanitarian aid to assist us in bearing the burden that
has been thrust upon us by the British and United
States invasion and occupation of Iraq. We host half a
million Palestinian refugees as a result of the Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian territories, and half a
million Syrians displaced from the Golan.
Not one of those who have spoken today to
express their concern at the internal incidents in Syria
has offered any form of humanitarian support to help
us meet these dangerous challenges, which are not of
our own creation. Moreover, no Hollywood stars have
come to visit the millions of refugees who have fled to
our country.
Yes, Syria’s stability is important — very
important — to the Middle East, as one of our
colleagues has pointed out. Therefore, threatening this
stability is extremely dangerous to the region and
international security and stability, especially when
such meddling is done by countries harbouring
animosity towards us, based on principle and for
political reasons. These are the same States responsible
for the disasters of the Sykes-Picot Agreement of 1916,
the Balfour Declaration of 1917 and the division of the
region. These are important considerations that those
with a poor memory should bear in mind when seeking
a clear perception of what is happening in the world.
To speak of concern for pluralistic Syrian society,
as the representative of Germany did, is not at all
consistent with Germany’s provision to Israel in recent
years of six submarines that can be equipped with
nuclear warheads. I will not go into further detail, as I

11-39599

would have to refer to other speakers who have also
furnished Israel with nuclear technology, helped it to
build nuclear reactors, and defended its refusal to join
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and to place its nuclear installations under
international supervision.
All of this is only part of what I would like to
discuss, but I would like to thank you, Sir, for having
given me the floor. I hope that the Council will focus
on real issues within its mandate instead of
encroaching upon the sovereignty of a State Member of
the United Nations and meddling with its internal
affairs.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Israel deeply appreciates the
work carried out by the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF). The international
community must continue to support its mission, which
remains an important component of stability in our
region.
As we witness unprecedented turmoil in the
Middle East, the need for all parties to fully respect the
disengagement line between Israel and Syria has never
been clearer. Yet after decades of relative quiet, we
have witnessed several brazen attempts to breach the
line from the Syrian side and raise tensions in our
region.
On 15 May, a large organized group of protesters
tore down the Alpha fence in Syria, breached the
disengagement line with Israel and carried out acts of
violence against Israeli Defence Forces in the village
of Majdal Chams. On 5 June, we saw another act of
provocation on the line. Hundreds of individuals
sought to breach the disengagement line with Israel in
the areas of Majdal Chams and Quneitra. They tried to
break through the fences in the area, threw Molotov
cocktails and other large objects at the Israeli Defence
Forces, and used other modes of violence to advance
their goals.
Despite its clear responsibilities, the Syrian
regime did not prevent demonstrators from arriving at
the disengagement line, or the attempts to cross it. To
the contrary, these incidents, which could not have
taken place without the knowledge of the Syrian
authorities, reflect a blatant attempt by Syria to distract
international attention from its violent repression of its

7

S/PV.6572

own people. The Syrian regime’s fingerprints are all
over these protests; to my mind, one does not have to
be a New York City Police Department forensics expert
to detect it.
The events that followed the 5 June protests in
the Yarmouk Palestinian refugee camp in Syria provide
one glaring example of Syrian involvement in the
demonstration. I think Bashar Al-Assad is the only
ophthalmologist I know who is actively engaged in
blackening the vision of hope of his own people and,
indeed, of the whole region.

The Syrian-Israeli disengagement line has been
quiet for decades. The Syrian regime cannot be allowed
to disturb this quiet just because it does not want the
cries of its own citizens to be heard. I want to thank, on
behalf of the State of Israel, the President and all the
people who have worked tirelessly in UNDOF over the
years because their work, as I said, is an important
component in the stability of our region.
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

8

11-39599
