UNPED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL

.;

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2609’”

MEETING:

30 SEPTEMBER 1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional ‘agenda (S/Agenda/2609)

.. .. ... ... .... .. ... ... .... ... .... ... .

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 26 September 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Botswana
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17497);
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security- Council resolution
. 568 (1985) (S/17453) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

WPV.2609

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbo!‘ indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2609th
Held

MEETING

in New York on Monday,

30 September

1985, at 4 p.m.

of

submitted by Botswana, Burkina Faso, Egypt, India, Madagascar, Peru and Trinidad and Tobago [S/Z75033.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

3. The first speaker is the representative of Botswana, on
whom I now call.

President: Sir. John THOMSON
(United Kingdom
Great Britain and Northern Ireland).-

4. Mr. LEGWAILA
(Botswana): Sir, the friendship
between our two countries is so deep, so real and so meaningful that you can take it for granted that I am extremely
pleased to see you as President of the Security Council in
this very busy month of our United Nations year. Under
your leadership we are confident that the Council will once
again live up to our expectations. We also congratulate
your predecessor for the skilful manner in which he presided over the deliberations of the Council last month.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2609)
1. ‘Adoption of the agenda
2.

Letter dated 26 September 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Botswana to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17497);

5. We have come to the Security Council to perform a
simple and straightforward task. We have come to ensure
that our case against South Africa arising from that country’s unprovoked and unwarranted attack against our capital on. 14 June 1985 is pursued to its logical conclusion.
The Council has before it the report of that tragic incident.
Pursuant to resolution 568 (1985), the report confirms the
very serious charges brought to the Council by my country
against South Africa on 21 June [2.59&h meeting].
Unadorned and without any exaggeration, the report
details all the facts about the incident as we saw them then
and as seen and observed by the United Nations mission
subsequently. In other words, the report is a simple and
clear portrayal of what actually happened on the night of
14 June in the capital of the Republic of Botswana. The
report is completely devoid of embellishments or coverups.

Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution 568 (1985) (S/17453).
The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.
Adoption of tbe agenda
The agenda was adopted
Letter dated 26 September 1985 from tbe Permanent Representative of Botswana to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council. (S/17497);
Report of tbe Secretary-General pursuant to Security
Council resolution 568 (1985) (S/17453).

6. It is quite clear that the attack was unprovoked and
unwarranted. Not only were the houses attacked scattered
all over an open town but the victims, the refugee families
who were murdered in cold blood, were found in their
beds, asleep, as the bullet marks in the bedrooms have
shown. None of those families was found armed and ready
to defend itself as guerrillas would have been. And yet, in
their pyjamas and natural state, they were brutally riddled
with bullets and’bombed to death in the most merciless
fashion. The report confirms this fact.

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Botswana in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President. Mr. LegwaiIa (Botswana) took a place at the Council table.

7. The attack on our capital was, as the Council knows,
blamed on the alleged use of our country by “ANC [A@can National Congress of South Africa] terrorists”. It was
alleged that our capital had become the nerve centre of the
ANC’s armed campaign against apartheid and that incidents that had occurred in places as distant as Cape Town

2. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them the report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to resolution 568 (1985) [S/Z74sJ1. Members of the Council also have before them the text of a draft resolution
1

had originated in our capital. We.have denied this preposterous allegation, for it is nothing but preposterous, given
the location of our capital vis-ci-vis the South African
border. But what is even more supportive of our innocence
is the very fact that since the attack on our capital the
situation has gone from bad to worse in South Afri&. A
state of emergency has been declared in spite of the
destruction of the “ANC nerve centre in Botswana’*. This
proves quite conclusively that South Africa’s problems are
South African-made, and not a consequence of an external
conspiracy. The ANC’s guerrilla bases are in Soweto,
Langa. Guguleto and all over South Africa, and not in
foreign capitals, let alone the capital of Botswana.

and. security. This is a right which we believe the. intemational community has the obligation. to,defend and protect, for without it human civilization would suffer
grievously.
12. We therefore expect to be assisted in strengthening
our security if we are in turn expected to provide security
for the refugees resident in our country. Security for the
refugees is dependent on the security of the receiving State,
and not the other way round. We know that with the kind
of neighbour we have to the south of us it may not be
possible for our country to be so secure as to be able to
prevent acts of aggression such as that which was perpetrated against our capital on 14 June. But at least the
international community must not be seen to be helpless in
the face of a brutal violation of a regime of international
treaties and conventions it holds so dear. For it would be
tragic if the refugee-receiving countries were to be forced
to seal their borders against refugees for fear of attacks by
refugee-producing countries.

8. Quite obviously, therefore, our capital was attacked
unjustly on 14 June, and it is our right to demand compensation for the damage caused to life and property and for
the very serious injury inflicted on the territorial integrity
and national sovereignty of our country. The question of
proving the culprit’s culpability has never been an issue.
Pretoria itself celebrated the brutal murder of the 14 June
victims as soon as the heinous deed was done. So our case
has been proved beyond all doubt, if any proving was ever
necessary.

13. Our request for assistance, the report shows, is modest by any standard of measurement, given the enormity of
the security problem we face in the strife-tom area which
southern Africa has become. It is more than reasonable,
for it has to be borne in mind that our country would not
have had the slightest inclination to create refugee centres
such as the Dukwe settlement, lost in the middle of
nowhere, if we had no refugees to look after. It costs us a
lot of money and manpower to provide security and other
services for the Dukwe settlement, and we have neither: we
have neither the manpower nor the money to do so.

9. As paragraphs 83 and 84 of the Secretary-General’s
report attest, the invasion of our capital in the middle of the
night was a traumatic experience for its inhabitants and
refugees alike, besides the carnage it left in its wake. If our
country is an island of peace and tranquillity, as it is well
known to be, it is in many special ways personified by its
capital situated so close to the edge of a seething volcanonot only an island of peace and tranquillity in the turbulence
of southern Africa but, in addition, a show-piece of nonracial harmony so close to the citadel of racism.

14. So, every request for assistance we have made in this
report is genuine and heartfelt. It is a direct consequence of
the added burden imposed on our limited resources by the
presence in our midst of so many refugees, victims of political circumstances who have sought asylum in our country.

10. Yet there is today in that capital a great deal of fear,
and, understandably, gone is the unquestioning hospitality
our capital had long been known to accord refugees from a
South Africa to which we are inseperably joined by geography,. history and culture. A gateway to freedom for
victims of apartheid, the town of Gaborone is not about to
abandon its humanitarian tradition, however; but it has
been forced to be more circumspect in its generosity. Our
refugee policy has not changed, but we have every reason
to dread a repetition of the 14 June experience. We wil]
never abandon our values and respect for the rule of law,
but in carrying out our international obligations towards
refugees, we should not and cannot be left to our own
devices.

15. South Africa has threatened to repeat its 14 June
performance, and we take the threat very seriously indeed,
since our country will always be a refugee-receiving country. We cannot change our values, and it is not our intention to do so. Our doors will always remain open for
genuine victims of political circumstances, even as it is our
earnest and cherished prayer and hope that reason and
sanity will soon prevail in South Africa so that a new
society, free and democratic, can see the light of day in that
tortured land.
16. Let me conclude my statement by saying how deeply
grateful we are to the Secretary-General for the report and
for his forceful appreciation of the problems and quandaries of a front-line State. My country will forever be
indebted to him for having dispatched to Botswana so
promptly a mission composed of so dedicated and efficient
a team of United Nations officials.

11. That is why we feel very strongly that the attack on
our capital by South-African commandos on 14 June was
a serious challenge not only to our weak and powerless
country but also to the international community as a
whole. As the Secretary-General’s report states:
“At stake is the right of . . . asylum countries to be
secure from attack or coercion by refugee producing
countries.” [S/17453, para. 86.1

17. Let me also thank the Security Council in advance,
since I have no reason to doubt that this draft resolution
will be adopted unanimously. Let me thank the Council
for the invaluable support it will render us and that it has

Indeed, at stake is a fundamental principle cherished by all
civilized humanity; the right of political asylum in peace
2

rendered us in the past in our hour of trial and tribulation.
We thank you all very much indeed.

furnished by the Government of Botswana is enlightening
and demonstrates its determination to carry out its legal
and humanitarian obligations and perform its moral duty
towards those who have decided to suffer the atrocities of
apartheid no more.

18. Mr. RABETAFIKA
(Madagascar) (in&7~e&rion
from French): I should first like to discharge the pleasant
duty of asking you, Mr. President, to transmit to Sir Geoffrey Howe, the Minister for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom, our congratulations and
profound gratitude for the exceptional way in which he
conducted the work of our last meeting, which was held to
commemorate
the fortieth anniversary of the United
Nations. I wish also to take this opportunity to tell you,
Sir, how privileged we are to be holding our deliberations
under your guidance once again.

24. In this connection we should like to emphasize th,e
following points: first, the commitment of the Govemnient
of Botswana to continue, as a signatory of the United
Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
signed at Geneva in 1951’ and the Convention of the
Organ&&ion of African Unity Governing Specific Aspects
of Refugee Problems in Africa concluded at Addis Ababa
in 19692, to honour its obligations as a State of asylum;
secondly, the co-operation between the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the Government of
Botswana in order to strengthen and improve the census of
refugees; thirdly, Botswana’s concern regarding the security of South African refugees, who are vulnerable targets
of acts of reprisal on the part of the racist police forces of
Pretoria; fourthly, the desire to improve the capacity of
refugee settlements in the Dukwe region and in other large
towns of the country, including the capital.

19. As Chairman of the Group of African States, I
should like to express to the Secretary-General our particular satisfaction for the diligence he displayed in dispatching
a fact-finding mission to Botswana under the terms set
forth in resolution 568 (1985). We should also like to thank
the Government of Botswana for the assistance it provided
the mission, thereby greatly facilitating its task.
20. It is not our intention to recall all the facts that led to
this mission to Botswana. They are well known and were
quite rightly condemned by the Council. Nevertheless, in
analysing the report now before us our attention has been
drawn to two particular points, namely, the economic
burden created by the assistance being provided by the
Government of Botswana to the refugees and the risk to its
own security being run by that country because of the
presence of those refugees on its territory. Those points
deserve emphasis in order that we may better understand
Botswana’s concern at the current development of the
situation inside South .Africa.

25. We are grateful to the Government of Botswana for
the tremendous efforts it has made to ensure the safety and
well-being of the refugees residing in its country despite an
unfavourable, if not hostile, economic and political environment. It is now our duty to decide on the assistance the
international community can give Botswana to help it step
up its capacity to receive and shelter South African refugees. Our recommendation is that the Council endorse the
recommendations and conclusions in the mission’s report.
The damage and loss of human life involved in the unprovoked attack by South Africa against Gaborone have been
assessed. We have to make sure that the Pretoria rkgime
makes reparation for that damage and the other harm that
has resulted as a result of its act of aggression committed
on 14 June 1985. Furthermore, the competent bodies of
the United Nations should also, each within its respective
purview, participate in that assistance to the Government
6f Botswana.

21. Indeed, notwithstanding its economic problems, particularly those created ,by the drought, Botswana, be&se
of its geographical situation and, as its representative has
noted, its African traditions and its international and
regional commitments, has found itself obliged to be a
land of refugees for South Africans victims of apartheid.
The Government of Botswana has just reaffirmed its allegiance to that policy in spite of the problems being encountered in satisfying the needs of those refugees and in spite
of the threats and pressure being exercised by the racist
regime of Pretoria to dissuade it from continuing.

26. It is in that spirit that the delegations of Botswana,
Burkina Faso, Egypt, India, Peru, Trinidad.and Tobago
and Madagascar have sponsored the draft resolution in
document S/17503.

22. We are ail’aware of the current practice to the South
African authorities of attacking neighbouring independent
States in an effort to cainouflage its own internal troubles.
Indeed, on 20 September last the Council condemned the
South African racist rigime for its premeditated and
unwarranted armed attacks against the People’s Republic
of Angola. What assurances do we have that the same
hostile acts will not be perpetrated tomorrow against
another front-line State? Today, the threats are real and
persistent, given the brutality with which the Pretoria forces of law and order daily repress anti-apartheid demonstrations, a brutality that may well produce a new influx of
refugees into the countries bordering on South Africa.

27. The solution to the problems of southern African can
only be’ found through the elimination of the policy of
apartheid in South Africa. South African refugees will cotitinue to be scattered throughout the countries of that
region of Africa as long as acts of brutality and violence
remain the daily lot of the long-suffering people of South
Africa. We believe that the Council should react forthrightly to the sort of situation that has just been experienced by Botswana, as is emphasized in the conclusion of
the mission’s report:

23. It is in that context that we considered the report
submitted by the mission to Botswana. The information

“At stake is the right of refugee asylum countries to be
secure from attack or coercion by refugee producing
countries: this is a fundamental principle of the interna3.

tionally agreed regime of international treaties and conventions dealing with refugees.” [Ibid.]
28. The PRESIDENT:
It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution contained in document s/17503. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

29. The PRESIDENT: There are.no further speakers for
this meeting. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on .the
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

NOTES

The &aft resolution was adopted unanimousIy /resoIution
572 (1985)l.

.

’ United

Nations.

Treutv

Series.

*Ibid.. vol. 1001, No. li691.

vol.

189, No.

2545.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Rations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depOsitaims
du mot& entier. Jnformez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies.
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAIC llOJlYW4Tb

H3&4HHH

OPl-AI-M3Al&iM

OIi’bwIX

w

E13m~~!4 0pMHli3aUEIi
O6aemniex.m~xHamdt~OxctiO
X)TIliTbBKEWKHbIXM~~HHaX
H~eHTCTBaXBOBCeXpaffOHaxMwpa.Haso~Tecnpasna
06~3m7mmxs BalIIeMXHli2KAOM
biarmme
mm mixmiTe no fmpecy:. Opratmsamm 06~ensinemibtx Hamitt, Cexmix no
nponiuKe H~JJ~A~~~.H~Io-~~O~KHJIR~CI~~B~.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas esutn en venta en librerfas y casasdistribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Gmebra.

Litbo in United Nations, New York

06360

90-61439-January

1995-1.925
