S/2020/1031

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 October 2020
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020) and 2533 (2020)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the sixty-ninth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), paragraph 6 of resolution 2393 (2017),
paragraph 12 of resolution 2401 (2018), paragraph 6 of resolution 2449 (2018),
paragraph 8 of resolution 2504 (2020), and paragraph 3 of resolution 2533 (2020), in
the last of which the Council requested the Secretary-General to provide a report at
least every 60 days on the implementation of the resolutions by all parties to the
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to agencies of the
United Nations system and obtained from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and other relevant sources. Data from agencies of the United Nations system
regarding their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the months of August
and September 2020.

II. Major developments
Key points
1.
The number of confirmed cases of coronavirus disease (COVID -19) continued
to rise, but remained low compared with some neighbouring countries. Limited testing
and a high degree of community transmission, with 92 per cent of confirmed cases
not traceable to a known source, indicate that the actual number of cases may far
exceed the official count.
2.
The impact of the economic crisis continued to be felt across the country. While
food prices decreased by 3 per cent in August, they remained at nearly 22 times the
pre-crisis average. Bread and fuel shortages prompted long queues and concerns over
civilians’ capacity to cope during the winter months.

20-13557 (E)

221020

*2013557*

S/2020/1031

3.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights verified
at least 117 incidents in which 108 civilians, including 7 women and 24 children, were
killed and at least 172 civilians, including 12 women and 21 children, were injured as
a result of the conduct of hostilities across the Syrian Arab Republic.
4.
In the north-west, almost daily ceasefire violations were reported in the Idlib
de-escalation area, although the ceasefire largely continued to hold. Water shortages
continued in Bab city and its surroundings, affecting some 185,000 people.
5.
In the north-east, an assessment mission deployed to Hawl in August following
the deaths of eight children at the camp between 6 and 10 August. Pumping at the
Uluk water station resumed as at 27 August, following a two-week disruption that
affected at least 460,000 people in Hasakah city, Tall Tamr and surrounding areas.
6.
In the southern part of the country, water shortages around Dar‘a city affected
over 65,000 people. In Rukban, some 12,000 people continued to live under harsh
conditions with very restricted access for humanitarian organizations. Incidents of
targeted attacks affecting civilians continued to be recorded.
7.
Humanitarian assistance by United Nations agencies continued throughout the
country. The humanitarian response reached an average of 7.4 million people every
month across the country during the first six months of 2020.
8.
An attack against a Turkish Red Crescent Society vehicle in northern Aleppo on
14 September resulted in the death of one humanitarian worker and the injury of
another. On the same day, a car bomb in Afrin killed two humanitarian workers.

Humanitarian update
3.
Available data continued to indicate widespread community transmission of
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in the Syrian Arab Republic, with over 92 per cent
of officially confirmed cases not traceable to a known case. As at 30 September, the
Syrian Ministry of Health reported 4,200 cases, including 200 deaths. Another 1,072
cases were reported in the north-west, including 6 deaths, and 1,557 cases were
reported in the north-east, including 62 deaths. Humanitarian entities continued to
receive reports concerning additional possible cases as well as of health-care facilities
in some areas unable to absorb all suspected cases, with some suspending surgeries
or adapting wards to accommodate the increase in COVID-19 patients.
4.
The economic crisis continued to affect civilians across the Syrian Arab
Republic. While the value of the Syrian pound on the informal market was relatively
stable compared with earlier in 2020, the final week of September saw daily
fluctuations of over LS 100. Food prices decreased by 3 per cent from July to August.
However, the price of a standard reference food basket remained nearly 22 times the
pre-crisis average. The World Food Programme (WFP) recorded bread shortages in
September, especially in the southern governorates, largely owin g to the scarcity of
wheat flour across the country and electricity cuts, as well as the ongoing fuel crisis.
The production of wheat, barley and olives and other tree crops was also affected by
wildfires; more than 16,000 hectares of wheat were thought to have been burned
during the 2019–2020 cropping season. While impact on food production is difficult
to assess with precision, losses on this scale would equate to around 32,000 tons of
wheat, enough to meet the annual needs of some 160,000 people. The Syr ian Arab
Republic consumes an estimated 3.7 million tons of wheat flour annually, which
exceeds current production by around 1 million tons.
5.
Fuel shortages prompted queues at public gas stations, with reports of people
waiting for two days in Homs and Hama. Black market prices for fuel surged by
2/19

20-13557

S/2020/1031

50 per cent. Over 86 per cent of surveyed humanitarian entities reported challenges
in sourcing fuel, and multiple scheduled aid convoys in Homs and Hama were delayed
in September as a result. Fuel shortages are of particular concern as temperatures
drop. Humanitarian planning for winterization continued, with 3.1 million people
estimated to require such support.
6.
In the north-west, the ceasefire in the Idlib de-escalation area largely continued
to hold, albeit with an increasing number of violations. Mutual artillery shelling across
lines of contact, notably in the southern part of the de-escalation area, took place on an
almost daily basis. Shelling on Jurin village in north-west Hama Governorate reportedly
killed 20 civilians in a single day on 24 September. Ground-based clashes occurred less
frequently and were limited in scope. Pro-Government aerial bombardments were
reported to the north and south of the M4 highway. Since the beginning of 2020, an
estimated 225,000 people had returned to areas in the north-west not under Government
control from which they had been displaced, with most having moved back to areas
south of or close to the M4 highway, such as Ariha and Ihsim, and to areas west of and
close to the M5 highway, such as Darat Izzah and Atarib.
7.
In northern Aleppo, water shortages continued to be reported in Bab city and
surrounding areas, affecting some 185,000 people. Some 30 per cent of COVID -19
cases in the north-west have been reported in Bab, making it the district with the
highest number of reported cases in the north-west. Since water supply through the
Ayn al-Bayda pumping station ceased in February 2017, the population has been
reliant on alternative sources, which have been assessed as in sufficient and unsafe.
Bab has been among the top four subdistricts reporting waterborne diseases across
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2017. Rehabilitation works on the main water
tank and the conflict-damaged water network in Bab city were completed in
September. While additional infrastructural repairs are needed, the repairs will not
resolve the water shortages, as the water feeding the network from local wells covers
only 15 per cent of basic requirements.
8.
In the north-east, several cross-line attacks were recorded along the southeastern contact lines of the Operation Peace Spring area, notably near Tall Tamr.
Attacks, which included the use of improvised explosive devices, vehicle -borne
improvised explosive devices and small arms fire, continued to be reported, including
against civilians. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) cells reportedly increased
attacks during the period. Multiple parties continued counter-ISIL operations.
Detention facilities reported more attempted break outs.
9.
On 8 September, local authorities in the north-east commenced the relocation of
internally displaced persons, who had been displaced during military operations in
October 2019, to the newly established Tal‘ah camp near Hasakah city. As at
30 September, 3,063 persons had been relocated to the new camp from collective
shelters in Hasakah city. Humanitarian entities continued to raise concerns regarding
the relocations, including with regard to their voluntary nature.
10. Water supply from the Uluk water station to Hasakah city resumed as at
27 August, following a two-week disruption that affected at least 460,000 people in
Hasakah city, Tall Tamr and surrounding areas. Power supply from the Tishrin Dam
and the Mabrukah and Darbasiyah electricity stations to the region where the Alouk
water station is located had resumed on 22 August. Water supply reached Tall Tamr
town the same day; however, owing to weak pumping pressure as a result of repeated
power cuts, water took longer to reach Hasakah city. Technic al teams were able to
carry out essential repairs at the station on 25 August. During the two -week
disruption, over a thousand cases of diarrhoea were reported in health centres in the
area as the local population resorted to using water from alternative a nd in some cases
unsafe sources.
20-13557

3/19

S/2020/1031

11. Some 64,600 people remained at Hawl camp, of whom 94 per cent were women
and children and, of those, 53 per cent were children under the age of 12. Following
the deaths of eight children in Hawl between 6 and 10 August, the World Health
Organization (WHO) led an inter-agency assessment mission to the camp on 24 and
25 August. Mission findings confirmed that COVID-19 and strict security measures
were among the factors limiting referral capacities to medical facilities out side of the
camp. Several facilities at the camp also reported shortages of some essential
medicines, including for newborns and for chronic diseases. Humanitarian
organizations continued to express concern over the security situation in the camp. A
rise in violent incidents was recorded in September, including the murders of
10 people. Hawl remained at risk of a wider COVID-19 outbreak, with four cases
confirmed among camp residents, including one fatality.
12. The south-west of the Syrian Arab Republic saw continued clashes affecting
civilians and the assassinations of fighters reconciled from former armed opposition
groups and of Government-affiliated figures, as well as continued localized protests
against Government raids, arbitrary detention, conscription drives and the lack of public
services. Intermittent clashes continued to take place, notably in the vicinity of Dar‘a.
13. Humanitarian needs in the south remained extensive. In Dar‘a Governorate, with
a population of some 1 million people, 41 per cent are food insecure and over a third
of the population are returnees. Over 65,000 people around Dar‘a city were affected
by water shortages, as the local dam has dried up owing to overuse. Although this is
an annual event, low rainfall in 2020 and an over flow into dams in Suwayda’ have
left residents and farmers without sufficient alternative sources of water.
14. In Rukban, which the United Nations has been unable to access since September
2019, some 12,000 people continued to live in harsh conditions. Me dical cases
remained unable to access the United Nations clinic on the Jordanian side of the
border since its full closure as part of COVID-19 preventative measures in March
2020. On 19 September, 286 people, including 118 children, arrived from Rukban at
the Mahmoud Othman shelter in Homs. So far, 19,769 people have left Rukban
transiting through the Homs shelters (see also paras. 38 and 45 below).
Update on overall developments
15. The Special Envoy for Syria convened a third session of the small body of the
Syrian Constitutional Committee in Geneva during the week of 24 August.
Discussions were mostly substantive and focused on the agreed agenda. There were
real differences on substance, however, and the Committee’s Co-Chairs were not able
to agree on an agenda for the next session. The Special Envoy, in accordance with his
mandate and with the agreed Terms of Reference and Core Rules of Procedure of the
Constitutional Committee, continued to facilitate efforts to support agreement among
the Co-Chairs on an agenda and date for the next session. The Special Envoy
continued consultations with international interlocutors on the margins of, and
outside, the Constitutional Committee session to urge constructive international
diplomacy with regard to the Syrian Arab Republic.
16. The Special Envoy continued to consult with the members of the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board. On the margins of the Constitutional Committee session
in Geneva, members expressed belief in the possibility of finding commonalities and
shared ideas on safeguarding the rights of Syrian women. They stressed that progress
in the political process should happen in parallel with tangible improvements in the
lives of Syrians, who have continued security and health concerns as well as urgent
humanitarian and economic needs. These messages were echoed by a broad range of
civil society actors with whom the Special Envoy and his team engaged.

4/19

20-13557

S/2020/1031

Protection
17. Civilians across the Syrian Arab Republic continued to suffer the direct and
indirect consequences of armed conflict and violence. Civilians were killed and
injured as a result of shelling and intermittent airstrikes in the de -escalation area in
the north-west, and as a result of fighting between and within various armed groups
in the north-west, northern and eastern parts of the country. Civilians also continued
to be killed and injured by attacks carried out with various types of improvised
explosive devices, including vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices, and as a
result of explosive remnants of war, including unexploded ordnance. Some
improvised explosive device attacks were carried out inside residential areas and local
markets, either targeting civilians or heedless of their impact on civilians.
18. From 1 August to 30 September 2020, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) verified at least 117 incidents in which
108 civilians, including 7 women and 24 children, were killed an d at least
172 civilians, including 12 women and 21 children, were injured as a result of the
conduct of hostilities across the Syrian Arab Republic, including shelling, airstrikes,
improvised explosive devices and explosive remnants of war, armed clashes and
targeted killings at the hands of various parties to the conflict or by unidentified
perpetrators. The majority of civilian deaths (64 per cent) were attributed to explosive
remnants of war in agricultural lands and to targeted killings. In the light o f the patterns
observed and the large number of incidents and civilians killed and injured in markets
and residential areas, it appears that parties to the conflict have failed to respect the
key principles, set out under international humanitarian law, of distinguishing civilians
from fighters and civilian objects from military objectives; of refraining from
indiscriminate attacks; of respecting proportionality in attack; and of taking constant
care to spare civilians and civilian objects in the conduct of military operations.
19. Both pro-Government forces and armed groups continued to arbitrarily detain
individuals in areas under their effective control. In the majority of cases documented
by OHCHR, detainees were denied information about the reasons for their detention
and other due process rights, or their families were denied information concerning
their whereabouts or their fate, raising concerns that in some cases such detentions
may constitute enforced disappearances. In areas under the c ontrol of the
Government, OHCHR continued to document cases of detainees dying while in
custody, allegedly due to natural causes. In many such cases, individuals appear to
have been subjected to enforced disappearance, and the fact that they were detained
by the Government did not become known until their deaths were acknowledged. The
bodies of the deceased were rarely returned to their families, who were also denied
the opportunity to question the official causes of death or to know the whereabouts of
the bodies. OHCHR has also documented cases of detainees and abductees dying
while in the custody of non-State armed groups, Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham and the Syrian
Democratic Forces.
20. In Dar‘a, OHCHR continued to record incidents of targeted killings of civil ians
and fighters reconciled from former armed opposition groups. The majority of such
attacks have been carried out by unidentified perpetrators. Targeted killings have also
been carried out by unidentified perpetrators in areas under the control of the S yrian
Democratic Forces in Dayr al-Zawr Governorate, except for a few killings that have
recently been claimed by ISIL.
21. Non-State armed groups in the north-western, northern and eastern parts of the
country continued to systematically target civilians, including those perceived as
being affiliated with opposing parties or alleged to be critical of those in control of
the territory, including through killings, the arbitrary deprivation of liberty, torture,
ill-treatment and kidnappings. Parties to the conflict continued to impose rules and
20-13557

5/19

S/2020/1031

codes of conduct on civilians living in areas under their control that were
fundamentally contrary to human rights, including the rights to life, liberty and
security of person, to freedom of movement and to freedom of expression, peaceful
assembly and association.
22. Various armed groups continued to target some humanitarian and health -care
services and personnel, in addition to media professionals. Some of the health -care
facilities and their personnel have been directly attacked or targeted. Under
international humanitarian law, parties to the conflict must respect and protect
humanitarian relief personnel and medical personnel exclusively assigned to medical
duties.
23. During the reporting period, access to education was impeded. In the northern
and north-eastern parts of the country, including in Hasakah, the local authorities took
decisions that denied people’s access to education, freedom of movement and other
basic rights. There was no agreement regarding the m ore than 100 schools that have
reportedly been closed by the local authorities since August 2020. United Nations
engagement on this issue continued, including on how to ensure that the best interests
of the child were upheld, and how to ensure that student s had access to good quality,
accredited education and related education pathways that offer opportunities for the
future at schools of their choosing. Other schools in Hasakah reopened at the end of
September, following a six-month closure due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
24. The security situation in the north-east and north-west, as well as mitigation
measures related to COVID-19, had a negative impact on the ability of women and
adolescent girls to access life-saving sexual and reproductive health services as well
as gender-based violence services. Information received by the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA) indicated heightened risks of gender-based violence,
including early marriage, linked to the economic crisis and the socioeconomic
impacts of COVID-19.
25. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) did not record incidents of
hostilities causing damage to educational facilities during the reporting period.
26. The WHO Surveillance System for Attacks on Health Care reported four
incidents affecting health care during the reporting period. Additional incidents have
occurred, but have yet to be verified as part of the WHO Surveillance System. A total
of 24 attacks affecting health care have been recorded since the beginning of the year,
including 41 injuries and 13 deaths. Such incidents continue to strain an already
weakened health system. Vulnerabilities of the health system across the country have
been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Humanitarian response
27. Humanitarian assistance by United Nations agencies continued throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic. The humanitarian response reached an average of 7.4 million
people every month during the first six months of 2020. The average reach increased
by an estimated 21 per cent between the first and second quarters. Assistance during
the reporting period included food assistance from WFP for 4.8 million people in
August and 4.9 million people in September, across all 14 governorates. Livestock
vaccinations supported by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations benefited over 63,100 vulnerable livestock-owning households. Protection
services provided through 244 community centres and mobile units provided by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNH CR) reached
13 governorates, and UNHCR-supported lawyers and legal outreach volunteers
provided legal services to 39,700 internally displaced persons, returnees and host
community members in 14 governorates. Legal services and referrals for some 700
Palestine refugees were supported by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
6/19

20-13557

S/2020/1031

for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Risk education teams trained by
the Mine Action Service delivered awareness sessions to 9,000 civilians and
UNICEF-supported partners reached 468,700 children and 184,300 caregivers with
risk education, promoting safer behaviours in communities most affected by
contamination from explosive ordnance. Billboards on explosive ordnance awareness
were installed in communities that had witnessed hostilities in Aleppo, Dar‘a, Hama,
Qunaytirah, Rif Dimashq, Homs, Ladhiqiyah, Suwayda’and Tartus governorates.
UNFPA reached some 582,700 people with reproductive health and gender-based
violence services, 33,400 of whom were reached in remote areas.
28. The United Nations continued to support COVID-19 preparedness and response
across the country, prioritizing containment of the virus by enhancing surveillance
and diagnostics capacity and procuring vital medical supplies and equipment,
supporting clinical readiness and protecting the delivery of essential health care.
COVID-19 awareness was also promoted at food distribution points, while food
rations included hygiene and informational products. As of the end of September,
WFP had provided food assistance to some 11,100 people in COVID-19 quarantine
centres in Aleppo, Hama, Homs, Dayr al-Zawr, Ladhiqiyah, Rif Dimashq and Tartus
governorates under the institutional feeding programme. Response modalities by
humanitarian entities were adapted for the safety of beneficiaries and humanitarian
workers and to enable the continuity of the broader response.
Table 1
Average number of people reached each month by the United Nations and other
organizations through all modalities throughout the Syrian Arab Republic:
August and September 2020
Organization

Average number of people
reached monthly

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

202 300

International Organization for Migration

68 100

Mine Action Service

4 600

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

443 700

United Nations Children’s Fund

2 640 500

United Nations Development Programme

1 388 931

United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East

318 800
25 200

World Food Programme

4 850 000

World Health Organization

472 000

29. Within the Syrian Arab Republic, humanitarian assistance provided by United
Nations agencies included delivery of food assistance by WFP for 3.5 million people
in August and 3.4 million people in September. WFP also distributed ready -to-eat
rations for some 14,000 people in Ra’s al-Ma’arrah in Rif Dimashq Governorate,
which was previously on full lock down due to COVID-19. This was conducted under
an emergency response plan aimed at preventing vulnerable people in locations that
were locked down as a result of the pandemic from slipping further into food
insecurity. Using the allocation of $23 million provided in May from the Syria
Humanitarian Fund, which focused on COVID-19 response, 3 million people received
hygiene kits, six health facilities servicing 93,000 people were being repaired and
300,000 people were provided with access to potable water. On 13 September, 103
UNRWA schools opened their doors to more than 50,400 students for the new term.
20-13557

7/19

S/2020/1031

30. In the north-west, cross-border humanitarian assistance delivered through the
Bab al-Hawa crossing included WFP food assistance for 1.3 million people in August
and 1.5 million people in September. Water, sanitation and health services supported
by UNICEF reached 1.8 million people. Some 88,000 children benef ited from
UNICEF-supported nutrition programmes in the north-west (see also para. 42 below).
Figure I
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners
through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, by cluster: August and
September 2020 (monthly average)
(Thousands)

Table 2
Number of beneficiaries targeted through cross-border deliveries, by sector and
by district: August and September 2020 (monthly average)

Health

Non-food
items/shelter

Nutrition

Water,
sanitation
and hygiene

Governorate

District

Education

Food

Aleppo

Afrin

187 375

210 010

–

22 635

–

–

Aleppo

I‘zaz

68 750

73 468

12 500

17 218

–

–

Idlib

Harim

1 161 471

1 065 423

435 425

379 767

–

37 710

Idlib

Idlib

1 200

–

5 000

6 770

–

570

31. During the reporting period, the Russian Federation sent informational bulletins
to the United Nations from the Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides and
Refugee Migration Monitoring, which outlined the provision of bilateral relief
assistance. Other Member States also continued to provide bilateral and other forms
of humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian access
32. The provision of humanitarian assistance requires timely, safe, sustained and
unimpeded access by the United Nations and all humanitarian partners to people in
need across the Syrian Arab Republic. Principled humanitarian action depends on the
ability to independently assess needs and deliver assistance, and to monitor and
evaluate impacts independently, including by engaging regularly and directly with
affected people. The access landscape in the country is complex, with different
geographical areas and different types of services requiring different operating
modalities. More than 1,800 United Nations staff members are in -country, with more
8/19

20-13557

S/2020/1031

than 600 deployed in nine humanitarian hubs outside Damascus, in Aleppo, Dar‘a,
Dayr al-Zawr, Hama, Homs, Ladhiqiyah, Qamishli, Suwayda’ and Tartus. A further
3,860 UNRWA staff are deployed across the country. The decentralized presence
contributes to greater access and proximity to affected populations. Across the Syrian
Arab Republic, aid is distributed and implemented primarily by national actors,
including non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
Access limitations related to the pandemic
33. Most land borders remained closed to individual civilian movements, with
measures in place to enable the importing of supplies and humanitarian assistance, as
well as the return of some nationals and in some cases per sons referred for medical
reasons. Access through crossing points inside the Syrian Arab Republic also
remained largely restricted, with some exceptions for humanitarian and commercial
cargo, humanitarian personnel, students and medical cases. Internationa l commercial
passenger flights remained suspended. Domestic cargo and passenger flights
continued to operate, including the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service.
Access in government-controlled areas
34. In Government-controlled areas, communities and enclaves that remained
difficult to access, owing to administrative and security approvals, included
Shaffuniyah, Mayda‘a and Kafr Batna in eastern Ghouta, and Bayt Jinn and Mazra‘at
Bayt Jinn in western Rif Dimashq. In the southern part of the country, insecurity and
administrative restrictions continued to prevent sustained access to areas formerly
controlled by non-State armed groups, in particular in Dar‘a al-Balad neighborhood
in Dar‘a city and in parts of western Dar‘a and Qunaytirah.
35. United Nations personnel and third-party contractors continued to mobilize to
field locations alongside national NGOs and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to conduct
assessment, monitoring and logistics and administrative support missions. In August
and September 2020, 2,092 regular programmatic movements took place with
programme or blanket approvals, a 36 per cent increase as compared with the June –
July reporting period, when 1,541 such movements took place (see table 3). 1 That
increase is mainly attributable to an easing of the curfew related to COVID-19 and to
adjustments to COVID-19 precautionary measures by implementing partners. The
increase consists mostly of monitoring missions and missions accompanying aid
deliveries, in particular in Dayr al-Zawr and Dar‘a and largely by third-party monitors.
36. Of those regular programme movements, 37 per cent were conducted in the
north-eastern governorates of Hasakah, Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr, which represented
an increase of 87 per cent as compared with the previous rep orting period. Another
21 per cent were conducted in the southern governorates of Suwayda’, Dar‘a and
Qunaytirah, representing an increase of 50 per cent as compared with the previous
reporting period (see figure II). There was a reduction in the frequency of some
missions in mid-September, as a result of fuel shortages. In some instances, that drop
in frequency led to reduced monitoring, implementation delays and budget
amendments by implementing partners.

__________________
1

20-13557

United Nations staff and third-party contractors operating at humanitarian hubs outside
Damascus obtain programme or “blanket” approvals to carry out movements as part of their
regular programming. These enable regular access and reduce bureaucratic requirements.
9/19

S/2020/1031

Table 3
Total number of missions conducted under programme or blanket approvals
from within the Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies and third
parties/facilitators, by type: August and September 2020
Type of mission

Blanket approval

Programme approval

Total

Assessment missions

54

1

55

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

56

–

56

1 965

3

1 968

13

–

13

2 088

4

2 092

Monitoring missions
Security, logistics and administrative
support missions
Total

Note: Missions conducted under programme or blanket approvals do not require specific
approval from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Figure II
Missions conducted under programme or blanket approvals from within the
Syrian Arab Republic by United Nations agencies and third parties/facilitators,
by governorate: August and September 2020

Note: Missions conducted under programme or blanket approv als do not require specific
approval from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

37. For missions requiring specific approval by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the
United Nations submitted 278 new requests, of which 64 per cent were approved (see
table 4). This represents an improvement of 9 percentage points as compared with the
previous reporting period, when 55 per cent of 251 requested missions were approved,
and an improvement of 16 percentage points as compared with the average approval
rate since December 2019 (48 per cent). United Nations agencies ultimately
conducted only 152 out of the 177 missions approved during the August –September
reporting period.
38. On 17 September 2020, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
coordinated a mission, led by the United Nations Resident and Humanitarian
10/19

20-13557

S/2020/1031

Coordinator, to Wahah and Dumayr in Rif Dimashq. The mission formed part of the
joint efforts by the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to support
civilians wishing to leave Rukban, while advocacy for durable solutions for all
civilians at Rukban continued. Preparations commenced for a United Nations
technical team to conduct a needs assessment in Wahah in October.
39. On 29 September 2020, the United Nations conducted a joint assessmen t
mission with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to areas that shifted control in northern
rural Hama, visiting Muhradah district, Murak in Sawran district and Kafr Zayta,
Lataminah and Latmin villages. The mission was approved by the Governor of Hama.
The Mine Action Service conducted 21 missions in September in eastern and western
Ghouta and Rif Dimashq to assess the explosive ordnance contamination in the local
communities.
Table 4
Missions from within the Syrian Arab Republic requiring specific approval by
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, by type: August and September 2020
Type of request

Number requested

Number approved

Percentage approved

Assessment missions

91

64

70

Missions accompanying aid deliveries

31

19

61

Monitoring missions

99

46

46

Security, logistics and administrative
support missions

28

19

68

Explosive ordnance assessment missions

29

29

100

278

177

64

Total

Note: Missions by United Nations personnel departing from Damascus or travelling cross -line
generally require specific approval from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Access in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
40. In the north-east, the United Nations maintained regular and sustained
humanitarian access in most parts of Hasakah Governorate, and some parts of Raqqah
Governorate, while other areas, including Manbij and Ayn al-Arab, remained difficult
to access from Damascus, owing to the lack of agreement between parties in control
and to insecurity. In the first half of September, multiple cross-line humanitarian
deliveries dispatched from Damascus, Homs and Ladhiqiyah to Qamishli were
delayed at the Tabaqah crossing point as a result of new bureaucratic procedures
imposed by the local authorities. More than 100 aid trucks were affected, all of which
were able to proceed as from 16 September. However, United Nations agencies
experienced significant delays in obtaining government approvals, which are required
to allow shipments to move onwards from Qamishli to their delivery locations in areas
outside of government control in the north-east.
41. Gaps continued to be reported with regard to deliveries of medical items to
facilities previously supported through United Nations cross-border operations from
Iraq. Overall, approximately 36 per cent of facilities that previously depended on
cross-border operations from Iraq were reached with medical supplies from cross-line
deliveries in 2020. All hospitals that previously depended on cross-border operations
have now received medical items from cross-line deliveries on at least one occasion.
There remains a gap in the number of primary health centres and mobile medical units
reached. The distribution of 85 tons of medical supplies from the most recent WHO
overland shipment to reach the north-east, in July, was completed by the end of the
reporting period. Facilities receiving supplies from that consignment to date included
20-13557

11/19

S/2020/1031

17 hospitals, of which 12 had previously been supported through cross-border
operations. Once final distribution data from this shipment becomes available, they may
show a further increase in facilities reached with cross-line deliveries. Local supply
chains for pharmaceuticals and medical supplies were also disrupted by the economic
situation, causing shortages in some key medicines, such as insulin. One NGO partner
that supports 38 health facilities reported a complete stock-out of insulin, as well as
shortages of critical medicines for non-communicable diseases.
Access in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic
42. United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners continued to address the
logistical and operational challenges resulting from the reduction to one authorized
border crossing following the adoption of Security Council resolution 2533 (2020). The
WFP-led logistics cluster expanded the trans-shipment hub at the remaining authorized
crossing at Bab al-Hawa. The expansion doubles the physical size of the hub from
5,000 m2 to 10,000 m 2 to meet increased staffing needs and ensure continued
compliance with COVID-19 physical distancing measures. While the initial
humanitarian convoys from Bab-al-Hawa to areas previously covered from Bab-alSalam faced some logistical challenges, agreements were reached with parties in
control for simplified bureaucratic procedures, enabling improved access for
humanitarian shipments to all destinations in north-west Syria. Concerns remained
regarding the conditions and capacity of roads connecting Bab al-Hawa with northern
Aleppo. Following an assessment, a United Nations-funded road rehabilitation project
was initiated with the aim of completing the most urgent repairs ahead of the winter
season.
43. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations as mandated under Security Council resolutions 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020) and
2533 (2020). From 1 August to 30 September, the Mechanism monitored and confirmed
the humanitarian nature of 22 consignments consisting of 1,021 trucks that crossed into
Syria from Turkey, all through the Bab al-Hawa crossing. This brings the total number
of trucks monitored since the beginning of operations to 41,055 (31,083 through Bab
al-Hawa, 5,268 through Bab al-Salam, 4,595 through Ramtha and 109 through
Ya‘rubiyah). There were no concerns or questions regarding the humanitarian nature of
those consignments. For every shipment that crossed the border, the United Nations
provided 48-hour advance notice to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic,
including information on the humanitarian goods to be delivered, the number of trucks,
the United Nations owner and the destination (district). The Mechanism continued to
benefit from the excellent cooperation of the Government of Turkey.
44. Humanitarian workers continued to actively pursue an all-modalities approach
to respond to the humanitarian needs of the affected population, including not only
through cross-border assistance but also through continued efforts to complement that
assistance with cross-line assistance to the north-west. Dialogue continued with all
parties concerned regarding the operational modalities for a first such mission.
Agreement on those modalities was not reached during the reporting period.
Access in the south-east of the Syrian Arab Republic
45. The last United Nations humanitarian convoy to reach Rukban from within the
Syrian Arab Republic was undertaken in September 2019. Since then, only a handful
of commercial trucks have reached Rukban, through informal r outes. Since the
decision taken by the Government of Jordan in March to close the border as a
COVID-19 preventive measure, medical cases from Rukban have been unable to
access the United Nations clinic on the Jordanian side of the border. Engagement

12/19

20-13557

S/2020/1031

continued with relevant parties to facilitate delivery of and access to humanitarian
assistance for the remaining Rukban population.
Visas and registrations
46. The United Nations continued to work with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to allow for the timely provision of visas to staff (see table 5).
Table 5
Requests for United Nations visas: August and September 2020
Type of request

Number
requested

Number
approved

Number
rejected

Number
pending a

Visas requested during reporting period

48

27

1

20

Renewals requested during reporting period

155

120

–

35

Visas pending from before reporting period

49

16

2

31

Renewals pending from before reporting period

38

33

–

5

Note: The United Nations withdrew one visa request that had been submitted during the reporting
period and eight visa requests that had been pending from before the reporting period.
a
The number of pending visa requests and visa renewal requests covers the period between
February and July 2020.

47. A total of 41 international NGOs are registered with the Government to operate
in the country.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
48. The United Nations and NGOs continued to implement programmes in areas
affected by frequent clashes among parties to the conflict, by air strikes and by the
regular exchange of indirect artillery fire and other attacks. Humanitarian relief
personnel also operated in areas highly contaminated with unexploded ordnance,
explosive remnants of war and landmines.
49. Since the beginning of the conflict, hundreds of humanitarian workers have
reportedly been killed, including: 24 staff members of the United Na tions and of the
entities of the United Nations system, 19 of whom were staff members of UNRWA; 66
staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent; and 8 staff members
and volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. Many staff members of
international and national NGOs have also been killed. On 14 September 2020, an
attack against a vehicle of the Turkish Red Crescent Society in northern Aleppo resulted
in the death of one humanitarian worker of the Turkish Red Crescent Society while
another was injured. On the same day, a car bomb in Afrin, which killed at least
9 civilians and injured at least 19 more, resulted in the deaths of 2 humanitarian
workers.
50. A total of 24 staff members of agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system, all from UNRWA, were detained or missing at the end of the reporting period.

III. Observations
51. I remain alarmed by the daily impact of armed conflict and violence on civilians
across the Syrian Arab Republic, including on humanitarian workers. The military
conflict continues in some areas, although to a lesser degree than previously
witnessed. Attacks that deliberately or indiscriminately harm civilians, including
improvised explosive device attacks in populated areas and markets, must cease
20-13557

13/19

S/2020/1031

immediately. The obligation to protect civilians and civilian objects under
international humanitarian law binds all parties to conflict. I underscore the need to
contain these violent and destabilizing incidents, build on the relative calm and
establish a nationwide ceasefire pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015).
52. The economic downturn continues to affect all civilians in the Syrian Arab
Republic, but is hardest on the most vulnerable. Food prices remain at 22 times their
pre-crisis level; consequently, many families are unable to afford staple goods. The
health and socioeconomic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are exacerbating needs
across the country. Humanitarian assistance and unimpeded humanitarian access
remain crucial in this context, and I remind all parties to the conflict of their
obligation under international humanitarian law to allow and facilitate the rapid and
unimpeded passage of impartial humanitarian relief for civilians in need, conduct ed
without any adverse distinction. United Nations agencies continue to work with their
humanitarian partners to overcome the operational challenges stemming from the
reduction to access to the north-west to a single border crossing. This includes the
expansion of the trans-shipment hub at Bab al-Hawa, which has already been
completed, doubling the physical size of the hub. Efforts have been and will continue
to be made to deliver cross-line assistance to the north-west.
53. I also remind the parties of their obligation under international humanitarian law
not to attack, destroy, remove or render useless objects, including drinking -water
installations and supplies, that are indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population. The COVID-19 pandemic adds to the urgency of action with regard to
access to water and sanitation. I further call upon all parties to remove practical
obstacles to education in territories under their control, in line with the human right
to education.
54. The Special Envoy continues efforts for the unilateral release of persons
arbitrarily deprived of their liberty, the majority remain detained by the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic. I call upon the Government and all other parties to
account for the fate and whereabouts of those they are detaining and to allow
humanitarian and human rights agencies access to all places of detention. Persons
facing prosecution should be afforded all minimum fair trial guarantees. Detaining
authorities should carry out prompt, effective, thorough and transparent investigations
to establish the cause and circumstances of deaths in custody, and if it is found that
such deaths resulted from criminal acts, the perpetrators must be brought to justice.
Families must be given information on the fate of persons who have died in custody
and receive full and adequate reparations within a reasonable period in the case of
wrongful death. Meeting those obligations would also build confidence, both within
society and between the parties and international stakeholders. A failure to address
the issue surrounding arbitrarily detained persons would leave credible justice, true
reconciliation and sustainable peace elusive.
55. Continued impunity for serious violations and abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law remains of grave concern. Perpetrators of serious
violations and abuses of human rights and international humanitarian law must be
held accountable. I remind all States, in particular those with direct influence over
parties to the conflict, that they are bound to take proactive steps to ensure respect for
international humanitarian law, including as it relates to the protection of civilians. I
call upon all parties to the conflict, in particular the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, as well as all States, civil society and the United Nations system, to
cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to
Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011, in particular by providing relevant information and documentation.
Accountability for serious violations and abuses of human rights and international
14/19

20-13557

S/2020/1031

humanitarian law is both a legal requirement and central to achieving sustainable
peace in the Syrian Arab Republic. I reiterate my call for the situation in the country
to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
56. In view of the ongoing serious concerns repeatedly raised with regard to the
protection of civilians and other human rights concerns in the country, I continue to
strongly urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, in line with Human Rights
Council resolutions S-18/1 and 19/22, to cooperate with the special procedures of the
Human Rights Council and with OHCHR, including through the establishment of a
field presence with the mandate to protect and promo te human rights.
57. I reiterate that any sustainable peace arrangement depends on including women
at the negotiating table as full partners. I continue to fully support the efforts of my
Special Envoy to advance the political process, including as he seek s to convene the
fourth session of the Constitutional Committee. I urge all parties to demonstrate their
commitment to that end, including by achieving a compromise on the agenda and date
for the next session. My Special Envoy continues to remind all inter locutors that the
Constitutional Committee can open the door to a wider political process in line with
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). This must meet the aspirations of all
Syrians. I continue to call upon parties to this political process to enter into
discussions in a spirit of constructiveness, with a view to ensuring that the interests
of Syrians, ending their suffering and ensuring sustainable peace, remain the
overriding priority.

20-13557

15/19

S/2020/1031

Annex
Reported incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights: August
and September 2020 *
Idlib Governorate
• On 3 August, three civilians were killed and one was injured by reported
airstrikes that impacted in a makeshift internally displaced persons camp near
the town of Binnish in eastern rural Idlib.
• On 11 August, a woman was injured in a reported ground-based strike that
impacted in Nayrab town in eastern rural Idlib.
• On 14 August, two civilians were killed and one was injured after a reported
landmine detonated in agricultural land near Nayrab in eastern rural Idlib.
• On 15 August, nine civilians were injured when a reported landmine detonated
in agricultural land near Khan Shaykhun in southern rural Idlib.
• On 24 August, a civilian died from injuries reportedly suffered in a reported
ground-based strike that landed in Barah in southern rural Idlib.
• On 1 September, two civilians were injured in a reported ground-based strike
that landed in Balyun in southern rural Idlib. On the same day, a civilian was
injured after a reported landmine detonated in agricultural land near Barah in
southern rural Idlib.
• On 3 September, 11 civilians, including 2 boys, were injured after a suspected
improvised explosive device attached to a motorbike reportedly detonated in
Ma‘arratmisrin in northern rural Idlib.
• On 7 September, one civilian was killed and another was injured after a reported
landmine detonated in agricultural land near Barah in southern rural Idlib.
• On 7 September, two civilians were killed and five, including a woman and a
boy, were injured after several ground-based strikes reportedly landed in the city
of Ariha in southern rural Idlib. On the same day, a civilian was injured when
reported ground-based strikes impacted in the town of Kansafrah in southern
rural Idlib.
Aleppo Governorate
• On 6 August, a boy was killed after several ground-based strikes reportedly
landed in the village of Hamran in eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 15 August, one civilian was killed and seven were injured when a suspected
improvised explosive device attached to a motorbike reportedly detonated inside
a market in the city of Jarabulus in eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 28 August, two civilians were injured when a suspected magnetic improvised
explosive device attached to a vehicle reportedly detonated in Bab in eastern
rural Aleppo.

* The list of incidents exemplifies human rights issues of concern raised in the report. Owing to
the changing patterns of conflict and the loss of networks of credible and/or reliable sources in
many conflict-affected areas, however, verifying incidents is increasingly difficult. The list,
which contains only those incidents that were reported to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and that have been verified according to its methodology,
should not be considered comprehensive.
16/19

20-13557

S/2020/1031

• On 31 August, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in the town
of Ra‘i in northern rural Aleppo.
• On 2 September, two boys were injured when a reported landmine detonated in
agricultural land near the village of Tall Sha‘ir in northern rural Aleppo.
• On 12 September, two civilians were injured in a reported ground -based strike
in the village of Burj al-Qas in northern rural Aleppo.
• On 14 September, 11 civilians, including 1 boy, were killed and 17 civilians,
including 2 women, 6 boys and 1 girl, were injured when a suspected vehicle-borne
improvised explosive device reportedly detonated in Afrin in northwest Aleppo.
• On 14 September, a member of the Turkish Red Crescent Society was killed and
another humanitarian worker was injured when unidentified gunmen opened fire
on their vehicle near the village of Tall Battal in eastern rural Aleppo. The
vehicle had the logo of the Turkish Red Crescent Society clearly marked.
• On 15 September, two civilians were injured after a reported roadside
improvised explosive device detonated in Baraziyah in eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 26 September, two civilians, including a woman, were injured after a
reported landmine detonated in agricultural land in the village of Qasim in
north-west rural Aleppo.
Hasakah Governorate
• On 11 August, a civilian man was reportedly killed at a checkpoint near
Qahtaniyah in northern rural Hasakah.
• On 27 August, 11 civilians, including 1 boy, were injured when a reported
roadside improvised explosive device detonated in Ra’s al-Ayn in western rural
Hasakah.
• On 12 September, five civilians, including four women, were killed and six
civilians, including one woman, were injured when a reported roadside
improvised explosive device detonated in Ra’s al-Ayn in western rural Hasakah.
• On 24 September, at least one civilian was injured when a suspected improvised
explosive device attached to a motorbike reportedly detonated in Tall Halaf in
western rural Hasakah. Approximately one hour later, two civilians, including a
boy, were killed and six civilians, including two boys, were injured when a
suspected vehicle-borne improvised explosive device detonated in the town.
• On 26 September, at least two civilians were killed and at least nine other
civilians were injured after a reported vehicle-borne improvised explosive
device detonated near the city of Ra’s al-Ayn in western rural Hasakah.
Hama Governorate
• On 6 August, two civilians, including one woman, were injured after reported
ground-based strikes landed in the village of Tall Wasit in western rural Hama.
• On 9 August, three boys were injured by a reported landmine that detonated near
the village of Breadg in northern rural Hama.
• On 13 August, seven civilians were injured after a reported landmine detonated
in agricultural land near the village of Khuwayn in northern rural Ha ma.
• On 24 September, two civilians, including one woman, were injured after a
reported ground-based strike in the village of Jurin in northern rural Hama.

20-13557

17/19

S/2020/1031

Homs Governorate
• On 11 August, a boy and a girl were killed when a reported landmine detonated
near the city of Palmyra in eastern rural Homs.
Dayr al-Zawr Governorate
• On 15 August, a boy was injured when a reported landmine detonated in Baghuz
in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 29 August, a girl was killed by reported sniper fire in the outskirts of
Suwaydan Jazirah in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 31 August, a civilian was injured in a reported drive -by shooting in the city
of Shahil in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 6 September, a civilian was injured in a reported drive-by shooting in the
village of Sabha in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 7 September, a woman was injured after a reported landmine detonated in
the town of Kashmah in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 11 September, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in the
town of Kubar in western rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 15 September, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in the
town of Dahlah in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 23 September, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in the
city of Basirah in eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr. On the same day, another civilian
was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in the town of Dhiban in eastern rural
Dayr al-Zawr. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant later claimed responsibility
for both attacks.
Raqqah Governorate
• On 4 August, a civilian man was injured in a reported ground-based strike in the
village of Afdko in northern rural Raqqah.
• On 6 August, 20 civilians, including 7 boys, were injured when a suspected hand
grenade reportedly exploded in the city of Tall Abyad in northern rural Raqqah.
• On 10 August, two civilians were reportedly injured by an armed group in the
village of Ali Bajliyah in northern rural Raqqah.
• On 26 August, a civilian was killed after a reported ground-based strike landed
near the village of Shaykh Hasan in northern rural Raqqah.
Dar‘a Governorate
• On 4 August, a civilian was killed in a reported drive -by shooting on the road
between Tafas and the town of Muzayrib in western rural Dar‘a.
• On 7 August, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in the city of
Dar‘a.
• On 13 August, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting on the road
between Ma‘raba and Ghasm in eastern rural Dar‘a. On the same day, three
civilians, including a boy and a girl, were killed in a reported drive -by shooting
in the village of Mudawwarah.
• On 16 August, a civilian with a disability was killed in a reported drive -by
shooting in Tafas in western rural Dar‘a.
18/19

20-13557

S/2020/1031

• On 24 August, two boys were killed and three other civilians, including one boy,
were injured after a reported roadside improvised explosive device explosion
and drive-by shooting in the town of Da‘il in northern rural Dar‘a.
• On 25 August, a female child was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in Jasim
in northern rural Dar‘a.
• On 27 August, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in the town
of Jallayn in western Dar‘a.
• On 28 August, a civilian was reportedly killed by unidentified perpetrators in
his home in the town of Yadudah in western rural Dar‘a.
• On 10 September, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in the
town of Jasim in northern rural Dar‘a.
• On 10 September, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in the
city of Dar‘a.
• On 12 September, a civilian was killed in a reported drive-by shooting in the
town of Muzayrib in western rural Dar‘a.
• On 12 September, two civilians were injured in a reported drive -by shooting in
the city of Shaykh Miskin in northern rural Dar‘a.
• On 26 September, three civilians were injured in a reported drive -by shooting
on the road between Yadudah and Muzayrib in western rural Dar‘a.
Damascus Governorate
• On 21 September, three women and a three-year-old girl were reportedly
arrested at a checkpoint near the town of Tayyibah in Rif Dimashq Governorate.
Their fate remains unknown to their families.

20-13557

19/19
