UNITED

NATIONS

/ NATIONS

SECU.RITY

UNIES

COUMCIL

OFFICIAL

‘.

RECORDS
NINETEENTH
YEAR
th UEETING: 28 FEBR UAR Y 1964
&w S&UCE: .28 FiiVRIER 1964
DIX-NEUVIÈME
ANNÉE

1099CONSEIL

DE SÉCURITÉ

DOCUMENTS

OFFICIELS

NEW

YORK

TABLE
Provieional

OF

agenda (S/Agenda/lO99).

CONTENTS
. . . . . . . . . , . , . , , , , , , . . .

I

Adoptionoftheagenda................................
Letter dated 26 Deoember 1963 from the Permanent Representative
of
Cyprus addresseci to the President of the Seourity Counoil (S/6488):
(a) Letter dated 16 February 1964 from the Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom addressed to the Presfdent of the Seourity
Counoil (W5543):
@) Letter dated 16 February 1964 from the Permanent Representative
of Cyprus addressed to the President
of the Seourity Counoil
(WS545) . . . . . . . . . . . ..*....*...........*.*......

TABLE

DES

1

1

MATIÈRES

Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/l099).
. . , . , . . . . . . . . , . , . ,
Adoption de l’ordre du jour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..a............
Lettre, en date du 26 dkembre
lY63, adrsss6e au President du Conseil
de sBourit6 par le repr&%xrtant permanent de Chypre (S/S488):
aJ Lettre, en date du 15 fevrier 1964, adressbe au Pr6sident du Conseil de securitb par le reprf3sentant permanent du Royaune-Uni
(W6543);
bJ Lettre, en date du 15 f0vrier 1964, adresse8 au President du Conseil de seouritb par le representant permanent de Chypre (S/5645)
(32 P. )

~. ,---

S/PV.1099

1
1

1
-

President:
Present:

NOTE
Relevant doouments of the Seourlty Counoil are published in quarterly
supplements to the Offfcfaf Records.
Symbols of United Nations
combined wfth figures.
Mention
a United Natfons dooument.

documents are compceed of capital letters
of euch a symM1 indicetes a reference t0

C

The r
Bolivia, Brneil, (
Coaet,Moroooo,
publfoa,UnitedK
Ireland andUnite
Proviw

*
*

Mr.

+

Les dooumentepertinents du Conseil de s$curit8 sont publi6sdansdes
suppl6ments
trimestriels aux Documents officiels.
Les cotes des documents de I’Organfsatlon des Nations Unies ae composent
de fettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mentfon d’une oote dans un
texte signfffe qu’fl s’agft d’un document de l’Organisation.

1. Adoptionof tl
a. Letter dated
nent Represe
PrtIsident of 1
(& Letter da
marientR
addresse
Counoil(8
(d) Letter da
marientRI
tbe Presic
A

The agenda wa5

Latter
doted 26
Representotlve
of the Security
1
(a) Latter
dated 1
Reprssentativ
the Presldm
(k) Lettsr
doted 1
Representatlv
dent of the SOC

1, The PRESIDE
deoieiontaken by
sentativesof Cyp~
in cur oonslderat
At the fnvftatfoi
MF. T. A
Rltsfos (Qreeoe) I
(CYPruS),

2. The PRESIDE
Wh ite oonsider

3. 1t Will be reoe
yestardoyafterno
a statement
befor
pl~ovlsionalrules
Urne,it is my intl
montat thi8 stage
4. 1 cal1on the r
a pointof order.

ONE THOLBAND

AND NINETY-NINTH

Held in New York, on Frlday,
MILLE

28 February

QUATRE-VINGT-DIX-NEUVIÈME

Tenue d New York,

le vendredl28

Mr. Carlos Alfred0 BERNARDES (Brazil).
Present: The representatives of thefollowingstates:
Bolivia, Brazil, China,Ceeohoelovakia,Franoe,Ivory
Coast,Moroooo,Norway, Unionof SovietSooialietRepublios,UnitedKingdomof CWeat
Britain andNorthern
IrelandandUnitedStatesof Amerioa.
agenda

1964, at 3.30 p.m.
SÉANCE
1964, II 15 h 30.

Prt%fdenf: M. Carlos Alfredo BERNARDES(Br&dl).
P&enfs: Les repr8sentant.sdes Etats suivante:
Bolivie, BrWl, Chine, COte-clWolre, Etat+Unis
d’Amt%ique,Franoe, Maroo, NorvAge,Royaume-Uni
de Qrande-Bretagneet d’Irlande du Nord, TohBooslovaquteet UnlondesRBpubliquessooialisteseovl&
Mquos.

Preeident:

Provistonal

t6vrler

MEETING

(S/Agenda/l099)

Ordre

du jour

provisoire

(S/Aganda/l099)

1, Adoptionof the agenda,
1. Adoptionde l’ordre du iOUr.
a. Letter dated 26 Deoember1063from the Perma2, Lettre, en date du 26 d&rembre 1063, adreseSe
nent Representativeof Cyprus addreesedte the
au Prgsident du Conseil de s0ourit4 par le
Preeidentof the Seourity Counoil(S/6433):
reptisentant permanentde Chypre (S/6438):
(A) Letter dated 16 February 1964from the Pera) Lettre, en date du 16 f&rier 1964,adrese8s
manentRepresentatlveof the UnitedKingdom
au PrBsident du Conseil de s8ourtt6 par le
addressedto the Presldent of the Seourity
reptisentant permanentdu Royaume-Uni(S/
Counoil(S/6643):
6643);
(‘g) Letter dattxl 16 Februa 1964from the Per&) Lettre, en date du 16 fbvrler 1964,adres&
manentRepresentativeo7 Cyp~ addressedto
au PrBsident du Conseil de r6ourit0 ar le
the Presidentof the Seourity Counoil(S/6646).
repr6sentant permanentde Chypre (8P6646).
Adoption

of the agenda

Adoptlon

TJmagendawasadt2pted.

de l’ordre

du iour

L’ordre du jour est adopt6.
Lettre,
en dote du 26 décembre
1963, adreso6r au
Président
du Consell
de sécurlt6
par
le rrpr6sentant
permanent
de Chypre
(S/5488)r
g) Lettre,
en data du 15 f6vrIer
1964, adress6s
au
Pr6sidsnt
du Conseil
de sécurtté
par le rspr6sentant
permanent
du Royoume-Unl
(S/5543);
b) Lettre,
en date du 15 février
1964, adress6o
au
Président
du Conseil
de sécurité
par le repr6sentant permanent
de Chypre
(S/5545)

Latter
dated 26 Dscember
1963 from the Permanent
Representatlve
of Cyprus
addressed
to the Presldsnt
of the Sewrity
Counctl
(S/5488)$
(g) Latter
datsd 15 February
1964 from the Permanent
Representative
of the Unltad Klngdomaddressed
to
the Prsstdent
of the Securtty
Council
(Q’5543);
(d) Letter
dated 15 February
1964fromthePsrmanent
Rspresentative
of Cyprus
addresssd
to the Prestdent of thr Securlty
Council
(S/5545)

1. The PRESIDENT:In aooordanoewith the previoue 1. Le PRESIDENT(traduit de l%nglaie): ConformBdeoieiontakenby the Counoil,1 ahallinvite the reprement A la d8oieion prine ant&ieurement par le
sentativeeof Cyprua, Turkey andCreeoeto partioipate Coneeil, j’invite lea repr4sentantsde Chypre, de la
in our ooneiderationof thie question.
Turquie et dela Or0oe Apartioiper Anosdglib&ationr,
At le intitatfon of tic Presfdent, Mr. S. Kflrfanou
Sur JVavitatfon du Prbaident, M S. Kyprfaaou
(Cyprus),Mr. T. Menemenoioglu
(Turkey) andMr. D. S. (C&pre), hf. T. Menemenofoglulhrquie) et hf. D. S.
Utsios (Qreeoe)took plaoesat tic Counoiltable.
BftsîosrfQr&oe) prennent plaoe (I la table cfuConseil.
2. The PRESIDENT:The Counoil will now prooeed 2. Le PRESIDENT(traduit de l’anglais): Le Conseil
with ite oonsiderationof the questionon the aF,enda. va maintenantpourliuivre l’examen de la questionA
l’ordre du jour.
3. It will be reoalledthat theSeourltyCounoildeoided 3. Vous voua souvlendreeque le Conseil a d6oid0
yesterdayafternconto invite Mr. RaufDenktasto make hier aprl)s-midi, oonform6mentA l’article 39 du
astatementbefore it in aooordanoewitb rule 39of the rAglement int6rieur provisoire, d’inviter M. Rauf
provisiona rules of proocdure. As 1indioatednt the Denktas A faire une d&olaration. Commeje l’ai dit
time, it 1smy intentionto ask him to makehis state- hier, Je me proposede demanderA M. Denktnode
faire maintenantsa d8olaration.
mentat thi8 stage.
4. I cal1on the representntiveof the Soviet Unionon 4. Je donne,auparavant, la parole au repr6sentant
apdnt of order.
de l’Union 8ovi&ique pour unemotiond’ordre.
1

5. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Sooialist Repul.+
lits) (translated from Russian): The Soviet delegation
would like to make the following statement on a point
of order. At yosterday’s meeting of the Security Council, the Permanent Representative of Greeoe, Ambassador Bitsios, asked the Counoil a question: does the
terminology used in the Councilby the representative of
Turkey, who oalled the Minister for Fore@ Affaira of
the Rspublio of Cyprus “the representative of the Creek
Cypriots’, refleot the offioial attitude of the repreaentative of Turkey, of the Government of Turkey? We
think that this ques Lionraised by the Permanent Representative of Qreeoe is highly important, andunless it is
fully olarified we aan hardly oontinue our work with any
suouess.
8. Already in his first statement to the Seourity Counoil on 18 February 1964, [1095th meeting] as oan be
seen from the records of the Council. the representative of Turkey SYW fit to say that thé pleniktentiary
delegationof the Ropublioof Cyprus in the Seourity
Counoil,headedby the Minister for Fore@ Affairs of
Cyprus, Mr. Kyprianou, oould in his view represent
only the Greek Cypriot oommunity. Thusthe representative of Turkey, invited to attendthe meetingsof
the Seourity Counoil, ha8 fmm the outsetconduoted
himself in a manneroontrary to theSeourityCounoills
deoisionunderwhiohthe Minietpr for ,ForeignAffaira
was invited to partioipate in the oonSiderationof the
questionas the plenipotentiary representativeof the
Republioof. Cyprus.
7. Need1againreoall that Mr. Kyprianouis partioipating in the workof theSeourftyCounoilin the capaoity of an offioial representative, as the Minister for
Fore@ Affaira of the Republioof Cyprus,with a mandatefrom the Headof theState,ArohbishopMakarios?
It le in this capaoity andthis oapacity alonethat Mr.
Kyprianouspeaksin the Counoilastheplenipotentiary
representativeof a StateMemberof theUnitedNations.
Sinoein this oasethere has obviouslybeenno slip of
the tongueor teohnioalreservation, theSeourityCounail is entitled to an explanationof thismatter from the
representativeof Turkey.

3. M. FEDORENKO(Union des RbpubliquessociaListessovi6tiques)[traduit du russe]: La d616gation
sovlt3tiquevoudrait prasenter une motiond’ordre. A
la s8anced’hier, M. Bitsios, reprhsentantpermanent
dela GrAoe. a ~088la questionsuivante:l’expression
Vepr6sentant desChypriotesgreos” dontusele reprdsentant de la Turquie au Conseil de s&!urit6 pour
qualifier le MinistEe des affaires BtrangAresde la
RBpubliquedeChyprereflbte-t-elle l’attitude officielle
du reprbsentant de la Turquie et du Gouvernement
turc? Cette questiondu reprdsentantpermanentde
la GrAoe noussembletr8s importanteet, Amoinsde
la tirer au olair, nousnepouvonsJoursuivreutilement
nostravaux,
6. DAs sa premi$re intervention au Conseil de
s8ourit8, le 18 f8vrier 1964 [1096Bmea8anoe],le
reprasentantde la Turquie s’estpermisded8olareraela est oonslan8au oompterendu st8nographique
de
la sl3anoe- qÜe la d810gationdltmenta>o&di& de
la R6aubliauede Chypre au Conseilde s8curlt8, ayant
A sat&e leMinistre&s affaires 8trangAresde Chypre,
M. Kyprianou, ne peut repr6senter foi quela oommunnut8 greoquedo Chypre, Ainsi, le reprdsentantde
la Turquie, invit Aparticiper aux s8anoesduConseil
de s8ourit8, a dAsle d8butadopt8une attitude qui est
en oontradiotion avao la d$oision du Conseil de
s6ourit8, oelui-cl ayant invite le Ministre desaffaires
6trangAres A prendre part A l’examende la question
A titre de representant aoor8ditf3de la RBpublique
de Chypre.
7. Faut-il rappeler A nouveauqueM. Kypriasouparticine aux travaux du Conseilde s6ourit8en tant que
rep&entant offioiel, en tant queMinistre desaffaires
8trannAresde la RBpublique
deChypredUmentmandat8
A oet-effet par le ohef d’Ëtat, le p&sident Makarios?
C’est en oette qualit& et en cette qualit seulementolest-A-dire en tant que roprbsentantaoor8dit6d’un
Etat Membredel’OrganisationdesNationsUnies- que
M. Kvurianou arend nart aux travaux du Conseil,S’il
ne s’agit pas‘d’un ia sus lin ae ou d’une erreür
teohniaue. le Conseil
-v de s ouriU3 est en droit de
demander des explioations au repr8sentant de la
Turquie sur oe point.

8. Aooordingly, and in view of the statementmadeat
yesterday’a meetingby the representativeof Greeoe,
the Soviet delegationfor its part proposesthat the
Counoil shouldstart by hearingan explanationof this
matter from the representativeof Turkey.

8. Pour cette raison et oomptetenu de l’intervention
faite A la s6anoed’hier par le repr8sentant de la
GrAoe, la d816gationsovl8tiquepropose quantA elle
que le Conseil de s6ourit6 entendetout d’abord les
explications quele repr6sentantde la Turquie voudra
bien donnerA 08 sujet,

9. The PRESIDENT:Theetatementmadebythe repreeentativeof the Soviet Unionis nota point of order, as
1bave mistakenlystated,but arequeatfor information.
On that ground 1 will oall on the repreaentativeof
Turkey whohasindioatedhia deefre to reply.

9. Le PRESIDENT(traduit de l’anglais): La d6olaration du repr8sentantde l’Union sovi8tiquene oonstitue pas une motion d’ordre, commeje l’ai dit par
erreur, mais une demandede renseignement&Je
vats
dono donner la parole au repr&sentantde la
Turquie, qui a manifesthle d8sir de &Pondre.

10. Mr. MENEMENCIOGLU(Turkay): In effeot, 1 do
not aee how there oouldbe a point of order whenthe
representativeof Turkey hasgiven an opinionandthe
ropresentativeof Greeceha8given an opin!on.Why it
shouldbe the representative of the Soviet Unionwho
decidesto raise a point of order wouldbe difficult to
understand.However,from thepointof view of!2forming the Council, I !&st say tliat the situation is as 1
explainedin the bagînningof my first statement.In
other words, we, Turkey, continueto haveanEmbassy
in Nioosia.Wedo not say thatthe Governmentas such
fa an illegal entity, nnd1 hnvenot said that here.

10. M. MENI%MENCIOGLU
(Turquie) [traduit del’anglais]: Je ne vois pascomment,en effet, il pourrait y
avoir une motion d’ordre btant do& que 10repr6sentant de la Turquie a oxpos6un point de vue et que
le representant de la Grèce en a fait autant.Il est
difficile de comprendrepourquoice serait le repr6sentantde l’Unlon sovi&ique qui di3ciderait de soulever une motiond’ordre. Cependant,pour l’information du Conseil, je cl6clare que la situationest telle
queje l’ai expos6eau d0butde ma premibre declnration, c’est-h-dire quela Turquie continued’avoir une
ambassadeA Nicoeia. Nousne pretondonspasquele
2

11. There is
of Cyprue: thé
sameConstit
uf oourse,the
the Turkish F
Brltish and
representativ
Foreign Minh
in London.Th
no question.
12. The ques
the Cypriot (
to the outer
now,aooordir
for questions
portanoe, the
Mini&ers ar
Presidentshc
President bal
beoauseit WI
perform hls
opinionswhio

13. Therefol
these opinion
made them,
Cypriots, of (
the Turkish C
stitution, botl
it is not the 0:
Wehave hear
Constitution,
say that they
to know then
they are, Thi~
1said that tht
thoso of one
been clarifie1

14. Mr. FE1
publics) (trar
by the FermI
have already

10. It shoulC
by the repres
pntentiary de
not only an el
oal aspeot.It
bers of theCI
the repreeen
fully t.0the sl
of Turkey. 1
whiohled hin
rized terminl
nndthe entlrl
of tha Unite
representati!
the obligatio:
Nationsassu

16. As to tll'
representotli
out that they

Laion
mA
ent
non
rdpur
la
Ille
,ent
de
i de
lent
~ de
1 le
FI de
I de
rant
me,
nude
seil
est
~ de
ces
tion
‘gue
(ar90
z-08
%
1t 3’un
que
S’il
l 8ilr
; de
1 la
,tion
.e la
elle
108

tdra

11. There le a Presidentaooordingtothe Constitution
of Cyprus: there is a Vioc-President aocordingto the
5ameConstitution; there are CabinetMinisters, and
uf oourse,there is a Minister of ForeignAffaira. And
the Turkish ForeignMinister, togetherwithothers,the
British and the Qreek Fore@ Ministers, and the
representativesof the Turkish community, and the
Fore@ Minister, Mr. Kyprianou, sat at a oonferenoo
in London.Therefore, from that point of view there is
noquestion.
12. Thetquestionhaearisen asto howtheopinionsof
the Cypriot Governmentas suohshouldbe explained
to the outer world. As the delegationshere knowby
now,aooordingto artioles 60and64of the Constitution,
for questionsof foreign affaira, espeoiallyof this impurtanoe,there must be a meeting of the Counoilof
Ministers and the opinion of the Turkish VioePreeidentshouldbe expressed.Nowtbe‘hrkidh
VluePresidenthas not even been able to go to his offioe
beoauseit was riddled by bullets. He waanot able t.o
perform his duties: he was not oonsultedwhen the
opinionswhiohwe heard here were expressed.
13. Therefore, it is only natural for me to say that
these opinionsre@;,:t only the opinionsof thosewho
made them. As they did no\ oonsult the Turkish
Cypriots, of ooursethey donot refleot the opinionsof
the Turkish Cypriots. And sinoeaooordingto the Constitution, bath opinionsmust oome together, of oourse
it is not theopinionof the Cypriot Governmentas suoh.
Wehave heardoertain opinionswhioh,aooordingtothe
Constitution, oan bind thosewhomadethem. 1do not
say that they are valueless;on the oontrary, we want
to know them. But 1just wantedto oall them for what
they are, This is the situation, This is the reasonwhy
1said that the opinionsthat wehaveheardhere refleot
those of oneside. 1believe nowthat the situationhaa
beenolarified by the explanetionwhioh1have given.

14. Mr. FEDORENKO(Unionof Soviet SooialistRepublios)(tranelatedfrom Russian):Thequestionrai&
by the PermanentRepresentativeof Greeoeis, as we
have already pointed out, of quite vital signifioanoe.

$2
we
1 est
prl3sou-

16. It shouldbe emphasieed
that theterminologyused
by thc representativeof Turkey to desoribetheplenipotentiary delegationof the Republioof Cyprus has
not only an ethioalbut, aswesec,animportant ~x>litioal aspect.It ie preoiselyfor this reasonthat the members of theCounoilwereentftledto anexplanationfrom
the representativeof ntrkey. Wehave listenedoarefully to tbe statementjust madeby the representative
of Turkey. This statementshedslight on the motives
whiohled him to use, in theSecurity Counoil,unauthorized terminology to dasoribethe headof adelegation
andthe entlre delegationof a aoveroign StateMember
of the United Nations. The motives adducedby the
representativeof Turkey have nothingin commonwith
the obligationswhioh States Membersof the United
Nationsa5sumeunderthe Charter.

tolale
El-at une
w le

16. As to tha tone andpurport of the etatamontby the
representatlveof Turkey, we ehouldfirst like to point
out that they clearly conflict with the appenlswhich

olamspar
t Je
0 la
l
‘an-

gouvernementtel qu’il est oonstitu8soit ill@l et je
n’ai jamais dit oela loi.
11. ConformementAla Constitutionde Chypre, il y a
un prbsident; en vertu de la m8meConstitution,11y a
un vloe-pr&ident, des ministres, dont, bien entendu,
un ministre desaffaires etrangares.Le Ministre des
affaires BtrangBresturc, ainsi queles Ministres des
affaires BtrangBresgreo et britannique, les repr0sentant5 de la oommunaut$ohypriote turque et le
Ministre des affaires BtrangAres, M. Kyprianou, ont
tenu une oonfbrenoeA Londres,Sur oe point, tout est
doncclair.
12. La question s’est Pos&ede savoir comment
faire oonnaftre au mondeext&!ieur le point de vue
du Gouvernementohypriote. Commeles d618gations
repr8sent8esici le saventcertainement,les artioles60
et 64 de la Constitutiondisposentquepour les questions portant sur les Hffaires dtrangbres, surtout
lorsqutil s’agit d’unequestiond’unetelle importanoe,
le Conseildes ministresser&mit et le Vice-PrBsident
turc exprime son opinion. Or, le Vioc-PrBsident
chypriote turc nIa m&ne pas pu 58 rendre A son
bureau, qui a 8t8 oribl8 de balles, Il n’a paspu
s’aoquitter de 58sfonotionset il n’a pasAtB oonsulti
5ur les opinionsqui ont BtBexprim0esici.
13. Il est dono bien naturel que je daolareque oes
opinions ne refl&ent que la pensaede oeux qui les
ont exprlm8es. Puisqueles Chypriotesturos n’ontpas
Bti oonsult$s,oe qui a 6tB dit ioi ne peut 8videmment
pasrefl&er leur opinion.Enoutre, puisqueauxtarmes
de la Constitution il faut tenir comptede l’opinion
desdeux communau%,il est doncEvidentquele point
de vue exposa ioi ne reprasente pas l’opinion du
Qouvernementohypriote proprement dit. Nousavons
entenducertaines opinionsqui, selonla Constitution,
peuvent engager oeux qui le5 ont formul&es. Je ne
Pr&ends pas qu’elles soient d0pourvuesde valeur:
au oontraire, nous souhaitons les oonnaftre. Je
voulai5 simplementbien pr8oiser de quellesopinions
il s’agit. Telle est donola situation, et olest pourquoi
j’ai d6olar8 que lee opinionsquenousavonsentendues
ici ne refletaient quele pointdevued’unede5parties.
Je pensequeoetteexplioationauraBolairoila situation.
14. M. FEDORENKO(Unionde5RBpubliques
sooialistes sovi&iques)[traduit du ruese]: La questionqui
a et6 souletie par le reptisantant permanentde la
Qreoe rev&, commenousl’avonsd4jA dit, unegrande
importance.
16. Il oonvient de soulignerqueles termes dontuse
le reprdsentantde la Turquie A l%gard de la dB&
gation damentaoorbditeede la RBpubliquede Chypre
pr85entent non seulementun inter& &hique, mais,
oommenouspouvonsle constater, unegrandesignlfioatlon politique, C’est pourquoi les membres du
Conseil Btaient en droit d’attendre de5 explioatlons
du repr&entant de la Turquie. C’estaveoattentionque
noua avons 8oout0la d8olaratfon que vient de faire
le repr0sentant. Elle 0claire le5 motifs dont il s’est
inspir8 lorsqu’il s’est permis d’user, au Conseilde
s0curit0, de termes qui n’y sont absolumentpas
admis A l%gnrd du ohef et de la d818gationd’un Etat ’
souverain, Membre da 1’Organlsationde5 Nations
Unies. Cesmotifs n’ontrien A voir aveoles obligations
que les Etats Membres assumenten vertu de la
Charte.
16. Quant au ton et au sens de l~interventlon,
nouB
tenonotout d’abord Anoter qu’ils sontenoontradiotion
flagrante avec les appels qu’il a lances lui-m8me

he himself made in the Seourity Counoil earlier, Let
me reoall that at the 1096th meetinn of the Seouritv
Counoil, on 18 February, the represeitative of Turkei
in his statement sxpressed a desire for certaintbings
whioh in his opinion would oontribute to the fruitful
work of the Council.
17. Chat were these desires, what was his main wish’i
1 quote him:
“In the first plaoe, it is our hope that no member of
tbe Counoil will render the Cyprus question insoluble
and more inflammatory by injeotingextraneous matter@-and 1 emphasize “extraneous mattersn-“or
by making a loold-war’ issue of this extremely unhappy situation.” [lOSSth meeting, para. 280.]
18. This thought. as oan be seen from the reoords of
thë meetings, &a; SOmuoh to the Iiking of the representative of Turkey that he repeated it in full at the
1097th meeting of the Counoil, on 25 February. 1 shall
not repeat that text, as it is absolutely identioal with
ane 1 have just quoted.
19, It would havebeen logiaalk expeot that the representative of Turkey, who has been advising others SO
insistently-1 quote-net to %nder the Cyprus question
more inflammatory by injeoting extraneous matters”,
should himself bave remembered his own advioe and
his appeal to those otiers. Unfortunately, he did net.
On the oontraru. it was the representativa of Turkey
who preferred 6 devota his en&gies preoisoly to o&
struoting the work of the Seourity Counoil with luestions whioh not only are extraneous but also oonsiderably oomplioate the cnr.sideration of the problem.

auparavant au Conseil de s0ourit0. A la 1096Bme
s0anoe. le 18 f0vrier. le repr0sentant de la Turquie
avait éxprim0 ce&&
vœüx qui, une fois prie- en
oonsid0ration, auraient oontribu8, selon lui, au suoo0s
des travaux du Conseil de 88ourit0.
17. Quels Btaient 088 vœux? @elle en Btait la
substance? JR le cite:
“Tout d’abordl’ - a d0olar0 alors le reprlsentant
de la Turquie - “nous avons I’esdoir qutauoun
membre du Conseil ne rendra la question de Chyprd
insoluble et enoore plus explosive en y introduisant
des 010ments Otrangerslf - je r0pBte “des 010ments
0trangers” - %ii en faisant de oette situution lamentable un 010ment de la guerre froide.” [10960me
s0anae, par. 220.1
18. Comme on peut le voir au compte rendu. oetb
pens0e a tellement plu au repr0sentait de la TÜrquie
Qu’il l’a r&0t0e textuellement le 26 fhrier. B la
i097Bme s0ànoe du Conseil, Je ne vous lirai pas les
paroles qu’il a pronono0es: elles sont semblables A
oelles que je viens de rappeler,
19. 11 serait logique d’attendre du repr0sentant de
la Turquie, lequel oonseillo instamment aux autres
de ne pas rendre “la question de Chypre insoluble et
enoore plus explosive en y introduisant des 010ments
Otrangersn, qu’il soit le premier A se rappeler les
oonseils et les appels qu’il a adress0s aux autres,
Malheureusement, il n’en est pas ainsi. Au contraire,
le repr&sentant de la Turquie a pr0f0r0 oompliquer
la tlohe du Conseil en introduisant non seulement
des 010ments 0trangers, mais enoore des questions
qui ont rendu l’examen du probl0me oonsid0rablement
plus difficile.

20. It was the Turkish side whioh made the suggestion
that Mr. Denktas should be invited to steak in the
Seourity Counoil as the representative of “one of the
interested parties” in the Cyprus question. As we know,
this suggestion did not meet with support in the Beourity
Counoil. Infaot, striotly speaking, what interestedparty
oan there be in Cyprus apartfrom the Cypriot Covernment itself? In Cyprus there is one lawful Qovernment
of the oountry, and the representatives of that Qovernment are reoognieed in international dealinga andin the
United Nations as the only lawful mpresentatfves of the
Republio of Cyprus.

20. C’est en effet la Turquie qui a pris 1Ynitiative
de la proposition tendant A inviter M. Do&tas A se
pr0senter devant le Conseil de s0ourit0 oomme
repr0sentant de je ne sais quelle partie int0ress0e
dans la question de Chypre. L$e Conseil, oomme on
le sait, n’a pas appuy0 oette proposition, Qui est
dono la partie int0ress0e A Chypre, sinon le Gouvernement ohypriote lui-m0me7 Il existe A Chypre un gouvernement 10ga1, et 68s repr0sentants sont reconnus
sur le plan international, notamment par l’Organisation
des Nations Unies, oomme 0tant les seuls repr0sentante 10gitimes de la RBpubYque de Chypre.

21. Althougb Mr. Denktas nevertheless suooeeded in
gaining entry to Seourity Counoil meetings as n private
individual, it may be noted that his olaimto represent
some sort of interested party in Cyprus oloarly did net,
and oould not, suooeed.

21. Si M. Denktas a r0ussi A obtenir l’autorisation
d’assister aux s0anoes du Conseil de s0ourit0 A titre
partioulier, il faut oonstater n0anmoins que ses
pr0tentions A repr0senter une partie int6ress0e A
Chypre n’ont pas abouti ni ne pouvaient aboutir,
22. D’autre part, le repr0sentant de la Turquie,
pr0voyant sans doute que sa th0se sur les deux
parties en pr0senoe A Chypre ne serait pas admise
par le Conseil de s0ourit0 - olest bien ce qui s’est
produit dans le oas de M. Denktas -, se permet de
reprendre arbitrnirement oette id& dans ses interventions et n’h0site pas A diriger ouvertement 883
attaques contre les pouvoirs de la d018gation de la
R0publique de Chypre. Dans con intervention d’hier,
en particulier, il e’est permis de qualifier le Ministre
de3 affaires BtrongBres de Chypra de repr0sentant
des Chypriote3 grecs [1098&ne a&moe, par. 1691.
Aujourd’hui encore, il a repris cette m6me idbe, tandis
que dans la lettre qu’il a adrsssbe au Conseil de
sQourlt0 il a appel0 M. Denktas le repr0sentant de
la communaut0 turque.

22. On the other hand, the representative of Turkey,
obviouely antloipating that his thesis about two parties
in Cyprus would not find support in the Seourfty Counoil
-whioh is in faot what happened in the oase of Mr.
Denktas-thinks fit arbitrarily to advanoe, in bis statements, the idea of two parties in Cyprus, and evan
openly attaoks the oompotenoc of tbe delegation of the
Republic of Cyprus. In partioulnr, in hi3 statement to
the Seourity Counoil yesbrday, the representative of
Turkey ventured to refer to the Ministor for Foreign
Affairs of the Republio of Cyprus as the representatfve of tbe Qreek Cypriote [1098th meeting pnra 1691.
And today the represontntive of Turkey oontinued to
stress the same iden. In his letter to the Seourity
Counoil, ho referred to Mr. Denktae as the representativa of the Turkish Cyprlot communlty.

23.

What

tempt ope
Cyprus. 1
attitude to
upon Cypi
senting ne
their negr
mer, it n
tried to
oompleteg
thefr posil
24. The :
here to bc
treatieo w
25. In thl
article 11
bits, m
Cyprus. T
“Qreec
undertak
aotivity
either u1
tion of tl
23. By vf
tion of Cyl
the reprel
aotivity, 8
faot prohil
27. We SI
oern that
Confereno
meetings I
resort toc
the soverl
plenipoten
23.

The

29.

This

30.

The

1

quite well
Fore@ A
eentative
dards reo
upon a11PI

to the pou
way he lil
the Securl
binding up
tioipate ii
bave been
tbe oase H
B

Kyprianou
take part
representc
dent to dx
faot that t
implement
31. The E
duot of bur
meeting th
extending
presont mi
has requer
of Turkey
speak f ror
no objectic
--I/ &hxl N

?68me
anplie
ris en
Plooi3s
ait la
l
Bntant
aUOUll

hJq33.d

aimant
zx3nts
tmenG3me

oette
nqnfe
r !A la
ES les
pies A
l
rnt de
iutros
‘ble et
jnents
r les
1atrea.
raire,
Liquer
sment

stions
bment
l

Itative
1 Bse
smme
esst3e
ne on
li est
lerne1 gouDIXlUS

bation
Bsensation
I titre
1 ses
s6e A
WJh
, deux
Smise
s’est
rot de
nter,t ses

de la
plier,
1istre

‘rntant
lG91.
andis
311 de
nt de

23. What does a11this mean? It ie nothing but an attempt openly to promote the ides of the partition of
Cyprus. The Soviet delegation has already stated its
attitude towards the unequal treaties whioh were foroed
upon Cyprus. Other members of the Counoil, representing neutral oountries, have also olearly stabd here
their negative attitude towards these treaties. However, it must be observed that even those who have
tried to justify these treatfes and present them as
oompletely harmless should also at least be logioal in
their position.
24. The representative of Turkey has shown himself
here to be one of the most aotive defenders of these
treatieo whioh were foroed upon Cyprus.
25. In this oonnexion, we should like to reoall that
article ri of the so-oalled Treaty of ffuarantee prohibits, inter alla, any aotivity aimed at the partition of
Cyprus. The relevant part of this artiole states:
“Greeoe, Turkey and the United Kingdom likewise
undertake to prohibit, SOfar as oo” )erns them, any
aotivity aimed at promoting, direcbly or indireotly,
either union of Cyprus with any otherstate or partition of the island.nU
26. By venturing to depiot the plenipotentiary delegation of Cvarus as rearesentineonlv the QreekCvnriots.
the représentative of Turkei is éngaging in the veG
aotivitu. aimed at the partition of Cvnrus. whioh is in
faot prohibited in the treaties to whic’h he’refers.

23. Que cherche-t-on. sinon 3 aoor6dibr llid6e d’un
partage de Chypre? Lad616gation de l’Union sovi6tique
a d6jA expos6 son attitude Al%gard des trait66 in6gaux
qui ont 6t6 impos6s A Chypre, D’autres membres du
Conseil, qui repr6sentent des pays neutres. se sont
aussi d6oiar6s nettement oon&% ces traités. Mais
m6me oeux qui ont cherch6 A les justifier et A les
pr6senter sous leur jour le plus anodin doivent 6tre
au moins logiques avec eux-m6mes.
24. Le repr6eentant de la Turquie s’est fait l’un
des d6fenseurs les plus ardents des trait66 fmpos6s
B Chypre.

25, A ce propos, nous voudrions rappeler l’artiole II
du Trait6 de garantie, qui intardit notamment toute
initiative de nature A aboutir R un partage de Chypre,
Le passage pertinent de oet art lole SQlit oomme suit:
“La GrBoe, le Royaume-llni et la Turquie assument
6galement l’obligation d’interdire, pour oe gui rel6ve
d’eux, toute aotivit6 ayant pour but de favoriser
directornent ou indirectement aussi bien l’union de
Chypre aveo tout autre Etat que le partage de l~Ile~~n
28. Ainsi, le d616gubde la Turquie, en se permettant
de pr6senter la d616gation dament aoor6dit8e de
Chypre oomme ne reatisentant sue les Chypriotes
gré&, d6ploie pr6oisament une aotivit6 qui, ayant
pour but de favorlser le partage de l’fle. est interdite
par les m6mes trait6s aÜxqueïs il se r6i6re.
2’7. Nous rappelons A oeux que cela.int&esse que la
question n’est pas examin6e A l’heure aotuelle par
la Conf6renoe de Londres, A huis olos, en petit
oomit6. IA d certains. comme les faits le orouvent,
ont pd’ se permettre d&er de pressions inadmissibles
A 1’6gard d’un Etat souverain - la RBpublique de
Chypre - et de ses repr6sentants dament aoor6dit6s.
28, La proo6dure A employer au Conseil de s6ourlt6
pour s’adresser aux repr6sentants est oonnuede tous:
on stadresse A un ministre des affaires 6trang6res
ou A tout autre repr6sentant dtlment aoor6dit6 selon
des r6gles Btablies par le Conseil et obligatoires
pour tous oeux qui partioipent A ses travaux.
29. Cette proo6dure interdit qu’on d0finisse les
pouvoirs des repr6sentants des Etats selon son oaprioe.
Si oes r6gles s’appliquent aux membres du Conseil,
elles s’appliquent A fortiori A oeux qui ont demand6
R 6tre autoris6s A partioiper 6 l’examen d’une question
et qui ont 6t6 admis A le faire, comme olest le oas
pour le repr6sentant permanent de la Turquie.

27. We should like to remind those whom it may oonoern that the question is not now before the London
Conferenoe, behind the olosed doors of oiroumsoribed
meetings at whioh some peo~le oould. as the facts show.
resort 10 unaooeptable nïettiods of pr&sure etc. against
the sovereign State of the ReDublio of Cvarus and its
plenipotenti&y representativës.
-.
28. The mode of address in the Seourity Counoil is
quite well known. It requires that the Minister for
Fore@ Affairs or any other plenipotentiary representative should be addressed aooording to the standards reoognized by the Counoil, whioh are binding
upon a11partioipating in ita work.
29. This prooedure prevents anybody from referring
to the powers of the representatives of States in anv
way hemlikes. If these &les apply to the members of
the Seourity Counoil themselves. they are still more
binding upoh those who have asked permission to partioipate in the oonsideration of a question and who
have been allowed to take a plaoe here, as le at present
the case with the Permanent Representative of Turkey.
30. The Mlnister for Fore@ Affairs of Cyprus, Mr.
Kyprianou, has been invited by the Seourity Counoil to
take part ln the Counoil’s work as tha plenipotentiary
representative of the Cvariot Stnte. We ask the President to draw the atte&on of those oonoerned to the
faot that the deoision of the Seourftv Council must be
implemented.
31. The PRESIDENT: Having in mind the oriierly conduot of business, 1 should Iike to reoallthat at Its last
meeting the Counoil took a decision on the question of
extending an invitation to Mr. Rauf Denktas. At the
presont meeting the representntive of the Soviet Union
hos requested some clarifications: the representntive
of Turkey has spoken; nnd 1 now have a request to
speak from the representative of Cyprus. Since Ihear
no objeotfon, 1now cal1 on the representative of Cyprus.

30. M. Kyprianou, ministre des affaires 6trang6res
de Chypré,- a 6t6 invit par le Conseil de s6ourit6 A
prendre part A ses travaux en qualit de repr6sentant
aoor6dit6 de 1’Etat de Chypre. Nous vous demandons,
Monsieur le PrBsident, de bien vouloir attirer l’attention de oeux que visent oes observations sur la n6cess:t6 de respeoter les dboisions du Conseil.
31. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais): Pour la
bonne marche de nos travaux, qu’il me soit permis
de vous rappeler quIA sn dernlbre s6nnce le Conseil I
a pris une d6oision touchant l’invitation A adresser
A M. Rauf Denktns. Aujourd’hui, lb repr6sentant de
l’Union sovi6tique a demand6 oertaines pr6clsfons.
Le repr6eentant de la Turauie a Dar16 et le repr&
sentait de Chypre demande- A aon’ tour A prendre la
parole, S’il n’y a pas d’objection, je donnerai dono
la parole nu reprf3sentant de Chypre.

--if

lhltcd

Nntlons.

7hty

Soi-lcu.

VOL 332 (1960).

No. 5475.

u

6

Nations

Unlas,

Recuoll

dos Trnl~,

vol. 362.

1960,

No 5475.

.32. Mr. KYPRIANOU (Cyprus): 1 should like to make
one or two oomments on the reply made to the representative of the Soviet Union by the representative of
Turkey-whom 1 shall continue to describe as such.

32. M. KYPRIANOU (Chypre) [traduit de l’anglais]:
Permettez-moi de faire quelques observations sur la
ri3ponae donn8e au repr8sentant de l’Union sovi6tique
par le repr$sentant de la Turquie - auquel je vals
oontinuer A m’adresser en oettc qualit&
33. Je ne crois pas qu’il appartienne au representant
d’un autre pays de dire quelles vues je reprbsente.
Je pense que olest Amongouvernement qu’il appartient
de dire qui je représente ici. Le Conseil de s6ourit6
a bien voulu admettre que je repr0sentais mon gouvernement.
34. Tout au long des d6bats du Conseil, j’ai note la
façon dont j’ai $03 qualifi6 par le repr0sentant de la
Turquie. Je ne m’en suis pas plaint car je m’en suis
tenu A la d8oision prise par le Conseil lui-m6me, J’ai
estim6 aussi que l’offense n’atteignait pas seulement
ma personne, mais anssi le Conseil de s6ourit6.

33. 1 do not believe that it is for the representative
of another oountry to say which views 1represent here.
1 think that it is for my Government to say which viaws
1 represent here. ‘lhe Security Cou~&l has kindly
aooepted the faot that 1duly represent my Government.
34. 1 have been aware throurrhout the Counoil’s deliberations of the manner ‘in which 1 have been
described by the representative of Turkey. 1 have not
made any complaint, because 1 have relied on the deoision taken by the Counoil. 1 have also felt that the
insult is not only to me but also to the Seourity Counoil.
36. Mr. MENEMENCIOGLU (Turkey): 1 think thatmy
statement olearly set forth my oase. 1do not know what
we are now disoussing. The representative of the Soviet
Union, despite the olarity of my statement, has made a
further statement, whioh had nothing to do with the
explanations 1 gave. He has desoribed a prooedure
whioh should be adherod to in addressing members. 1
take it that his delegation is going to adhere to that
prooedure from now on, But his remarks had nothing
to do with what 1 had said.

36. M. nlENEivIENCIOGLU (Turquie) [traduit de l’anglais]: Je OrOis avoir olairement eXpOS8mon point de
vue dans ma d0olaration. Je ne sais pas de quoi nous
discutons maintenant. Malgr8 la olart6 de ma d$olaration, le représentant de l’Union sovi&ique a fait
une autre intervention qui n’avait rien A voir aveo les
explioations que j’ai donn6es. Il a d0orit la proo8dure
qu’il conviendrait de respeoter en s’adressant aux
membres du Conseil, Je suppose que sa d618gation
s’en tiendra d8sormais A oette proo$dure, mais il
n’en reste pas moins que ses observations n’avaient
rien A voir aveo 08 que j’avais dit,

36. Furthermore, the representative of the Soviet
Union made that statement as though he were defending
one of the oountries involved against the other. That is
not very nioe. If my statement was not suffioiently
olear, 1am sure that my goodfriend, the representative
of Greeoe, would have said SO, It is not for any third
oountries to oome between neighbours and allies. We
might have differenoes, but we oertainly do not need
the Soviet Union ooming between us and maldng
speeches that tend to separate us,

36. De plus, le repr8sdntant de l’Union sovi&ique
est intervenu oomme s’il d8fendait un des pays en
oause contre l’autre. Ce n’est pas trAs gentil. Si ma
d6olaration manquait de olart6, je suis oertain que
mon excellent ami, le repr6sentant de la OrAce,
n’aurait pas manqu8 de le dire, Ce n’est pas A un pays
tiers, quel qu’il soit, qu’il appartient d’intervenir entre
des voisins et alli&s. Sans doute, des divergenoes
peuvent surgir entre nous, mais nous n’avons oertainement pas besoin que 1VJnion sovi&ique s%iterpose
entre nous et fasse des d8olarations tendant A nous
diviser.

37. In any case, 1 have made my positionclear. 1 have
taken note of the observations that have been made by
other representltives. 1 shall not take any further part
in this kind of debate.

37. En ce qui me oonoerne, j’ai bien pr6ois8 ma
position et j’ai pris note des observations faites par
les autres repr8sentants. Je ne participerai désormais
plus A des disoussions de cette nature.

38. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Sooialist Republics) (translated from Russian): 1 rmst once again
draw attention to the mode of action and the terminology
to which the representative of Turkey is still resorting,
and note another new element in his behaviour, whioh
is the.t he has assumed the very unfitting responsibility
of leoturing the members of the Seourity Counoil about
how they should oonduct themselves in the matter of
Security Cr,uncil prooedure.

38. M. FEDORENKO (Union des RBpubliques sooialistes sovi&iques) [traduit du russe]: Je me voisdans
l’obligation d’attirer une fols de plus l’attention du
Conseil sur l’attitude que le repr6sentar.c de la Turquie
oontinue A dhfendre et sur les termes qu’il continue
A employer: je suis Bgalement oblig6 de relever, ce
qui est nouveau, qu’il assume une responsabilit6 hors
de propos en donnant aux membres du Conseil une
leçon sur la façon dont ils doivent envisager la
proc6dure du C’onseil de s&urit&
39. Le reprbsentant de la Turquie, rappelons-le, se
trouve ioi aveo l’autorisation des membres du Conseil
de s6curit8. Il doit donc se conduire avec toute la
courtoisie voulue et se conformer au rAglement int&
rieur du Conseil de sécurit&

39. In this case, it is legitimate to recall that the
representative of Turkey is here wlth the permission
of the members of the Security Council and this alone
lays upon him the obligation to comport himself within
tbe bounds of courtesy and in accordance with the
established procedure of the Counc,il.
40. Allow me once again to draw attention to the fact
that the Turldsh representative’s conduct and manner
of expressing himself here are, as the Miniter for
Fore@ Affaira of Cyprus, Mr. Kyprianou, rightly

40. Permettez-moi encore tuie foi6 de souligner
que l’attitude et la maniore de s’exprimer du rapr&sentant de la Turquie constituent, comme le Ministre
des affaires &trang&es de Chypre, M. Kyprianou,
G

pointed
our Ori
41. Tl
taken t
ask Mr
then to
At tht

place a

42. MI
thank a
opportu
Cyprus
800 del
be mos
rendert
for the
beenlil
ber 19
deliber
that yor

will be
again0

43. 1 1
somea
in valt
either I
homele
siegea
the oon
bloodsl
of doinl
say tha
hasbec
have dc
the Gn
disserv
the trer

44. wl
beingk
plete di
fused t
Cyprus
Kingdo
from E
in Cypr
in the
soreen
the Sec
ty of t1
intentio
thon to
declare
and tha
the Grc
the Tur

45. M
ceivabl
plato t.
Well, il

.nglais]:
8 sur la
vi&ique
je vais
)Sentant
%ente,
partient
s&uriti
on gounote la
nt

de

la

ken suis
ne. J’ai
ulement
te.

‘de l’anpoint
de
loi
noue

i cl6ola8 a fait
LVQO les
oof3dure
,ant
aux
1@3gation
#mais
il
; avaient

vi&ique
pays en
J. Si ma
:ain que
Grike,
un pays
$r entre
rgenoes
ertaine$erpose
: A nous

?ist3 ma
ites par
3ormais

3 sooia‘01 s dans
ition du
Turquie
3ontinue
over, ce
it6 hors
seil
ager

une
la

s-le,

80

Conseil
toute la
Int in%

ouligner
1 reprbi/Iinistre
prianou,

pointed out, an insult not only to Cyprus, a Member of
our Organization, but also to the Seourlty Counoil.
41. The PRESIDENT: In aocordanoe withthedecision
taken by the Counoil at our last meeting, 1 would now
aak Mr. Denktas to be seated at the Counoil table, and
then to proceed with his statement.
At the !nvffatfon of tbe President,
place at the Counoil table.

Mr.

Uenktas fook a

42. Mr. DENKTAS: Mr. President, 1 thank you and I
thank a11 the representatives for having given me the
opportunity to addreos you on the tragic events in
Cyprus. My community, which haa suffered more than
800 dead or wounded in a matter of two months, will
be most grateful. Twonty thousand of them have been
rendered homeless or workless and look upon charity
for their living, The whole Turkish oommunity has
been living under virtual Greek siege sinoe 21 Deoember 1963. AIl these people have been following the
deliberations
of your Council with anxiety. The faot
that you have consented to hear their side of the story
will be a great relief to them, and 1 thank you onoe
ngain on their behalf.
43. 1 bave followed the long deliberations here with
some anguish beoause every hour whioh has pnssed
in valuable argument has meant to my oommunity
either another lost life or some more people rendered
homeless. Eaohday for them has been another day under
siege and under terror. But 1 was relieved to find that
the oonseneus of opinion in this Counoil is to bring the
bloodshed in Cyprus to an immediate end, t.~ find means
of doing 80 quiokly and effeotively. On this point, may 1
say that the Guarantor Powers, under the treaty whioh
hae been the subject of attaok in this Counoil, oould
have done this oonjointly, quickly and effeotively, but
the Greek Cypriots did not want it as this would be a
disservice to their cause. They wanted to do away with
the treaties and with the Constitution.
44. While innocent Turkish women and ohildren were
being killed or wounded, Archbishop Makarios, in complete disregard of a11 that was goingonin Cyprus, refused to have an immediate peaoe-keeping force in
Cyprus offered by the United States, by the United
Kingdom and by Greeoe and Turkey to be dispatohed
from European oountries. While a11 this was going on
in Cyprus, the representative of ArohbishopMakarios
in the United Nations tried twioe, under the smokesoreen of invasion by Turkey, to get a resolution from
the Security Counoil in general terms on the inviolability of the integrity and independence of Cyprus. The
intention was to get such a resolution hurriedly and
then to interpret it in their own wny and be ablo to
declaro thnt the trentios were dead and of no effect
and thnt the Gunrnntor Powers could do nothing while
the GreekP deatroyed the Constitution nnd annihilntecl
the Turkis,l community.

46. MI‘. Kyprlnnou 11~s nskecl tho Council: Is it conceivnble, is it possible thnt the Creeks shoulcl contomplato the nnnihilntion of a hundred thousatld Turks?
Well, it will tnke some time tocomplete the exterrninfl-

l’a fait remarquer
A juste titre, une offense non
seulement pour Chypre, Etat Membre de notre organisation, mais aussi pour le Conseil de s6ourit6.
41. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais): Conform&
ment A la d6cision prise par le Conseil de sf3curit6 lors
de la derniere s$anoe, j’invite maintenant M. denktas
A prendre place A la table du Conseil et A faire sa
d6claration.
Sur Pinvit,tien
&E Président,
M. Lhktas prend
plnoe à la table du Conseil.
42. M. DENKTAS (traduit de l’anglais):
Je vous
remercie, Monsieur le PrBsident, et je remeroie tous
les repr6sentants de m’avoir don& la possibilit6 de
vous parler des bv6nements
tragiques de Chypre. La
communaut6 que je repr&ente,
qui a subi des pertes
s’6levant A plus de 800 morts et blessbs au oours
des deux derniers mois, vous en sera trbs reoonnaissante. Vingt mille personnes appartenant A notre
oommunaut6 sont maintenant sans abri ou sans travail
et doivent vivre de charitb. Depuis Ie 21 dsoombre
1963, la communaut6 turque tout entiere est pratiquement assi6gBe par loa Grcos. C’est aveo angoisse
qu’elle suit les debats du Conseil. Le fait que vous
ayez aooept6 d’entendre notre version de oette affaire
lui sera d’un grand r6oonfort et je vous remeroie
une fats enoore en son nom.
43. C’est avec une certaine inqui6tude que j’ai suivi
les d6bats prolong6s du Conseil, car, chaque heure
qui passait en discussion, si utile soit-elle,
oobtait
A ma oommunautî3 une vie de plus ou privait quelques
personnes de plus de leur foyer, Chaque jour qui
passait Btait pour eux une journ6e de plus de siBge
et de terreur, Mais j’ai 6th soulag6 de oonstater que,
de I~avis g6n6ral du Conseil, il fallait mettre fin
imm0diatement
aux effusions de sang A Chypre et
trouver le moyen de le faire rapidement et effioaoement, Sur oe point, ja voudrais pr6ciser
que les
Puissanoes garantes, en vertu du Trait6 qui a 4t6
attaque devant le Conseil, auraient pu agir oonjointement de façon rapide et effioaoe, mais les Chypriotes
grecs ne l’ont pas voulu parce que cela n’aurait pas
servi leur cause. Ils voulaient se debarrasser
des
trait& et de la Constitution.
44. Tandis que des femmes et des enfants turos innooents &aient bless6s ou tu&, ltarohev6que Maknrios,
au m6pris total de tout oe qui se passait A Chypre, a
refus6 d’accepter l’offre faite par les Etats-Unis, le
Royaume-Uni,
la GrAoe et la Turquie en vue de
llenvoi imm&llat,
par des pays europ6en6, d’une
force oharg8e du maintien de la paix. Tandis que
oes BvBnements se dI3roulaient A Chypre, le repr&
sentant de llarohev8que Makarios aux Nations Unies a
essay6 par deux fois, en pr6textant une menace
dYnvasion de la part de la Turquie, de faire adopter
par le Conseil de s0ourit6 une r6solution r6dig6e
en termes g6n6raux sur l~inviolabilit8,
l’int6grit6 et
lQ~d6pendance de Chypre. Leur intention btnit d’obtenir
l’ndoption hlitive cl%no telle r&olution,
quIIle aurnient
ensuite interpr6t6e A leur manibre, oe qui leur aurait
permis de cl6claror que las trnit6s btnient caducs et .
c- ~3 effet et qua les Puiesanoos garnntesnel~ouvuient
pas intervellir,
cependant que les Groce auraient
supprimb la Constitution et anbanti In communaut0
turque.
46, M. Kyprinnou a clomancl6 nu Conseil s’il L)tnit
concevnble, s’il Qtnit possible que les Grecs onvisagent l’anénntissement
de 100 000 ‘I’uros. 11 fnuclrnit
certainement
du temps pour cxturmlner
lu0 000

tion of a hundred thousand Turks, but may 1 say that
it is not necessary that a11of us nhould be killed. It is
sufficient if life is made impossible fer us in Cyprus,
and that is tbe objeot of tbe attaok on us.
46. 1 have listened vsry carefully ta the speeches
delivered several times by Mr. Kyprianou. My conviction is thnt they do not want a peace-keeping force in
Cyprus. This conviction has been confirmed by the
speeches 1 havt, heard from him. Mr. Kyprianou has
confined his endeavours to leaving the killingof Turks
in Cyprus by what he called the Qecurity forces” out
of focus and to blaming others for thoae evente, while
attempting to get the very resolution whloh Mr.
Rossides twioe before attempted to get from the Council under a false alarm.

Turcs, mais il n’est pasn6oessairequenoussoyons
tous tuf&. Il suffit de nous rendre la vie impossible
A Chypre, et @est 18pr0cis6mentle but de l’attaque
lunc6econtre nous,
46. J’ai Bcout6avec beaucoup
d’attentionlesdiscours
: prononc6sA plusieurs reprises par 81. Kyprianou.
j Je suis convaincu que les Grecs ne veulent pasA
j Chypre d’une force Charg$edu maintien de lu paix,
I et les dbclarations quo j’ai entenduesn’ont folt que
i renforcer cette oonvictlon. En effet, tous les efforts
i de M. Kyprianou ont tenduAd&ourner l’attention du
/ massacredes Turcs chypriotes par oe qu’il appelle
1 les “forces de s6ourit6” et Arejeter laresponsabilit13
1 desBvBnementssur d’autres,cependant
qu’il essayait,
: comme M. Rossidesavait d6jA te& Adeux reprises
, de le faire, d’obtenir, Ala faveur d’unefaussealerte,
/ quele Conseilde sBcurit6 adopteune r&solution.
41. Mr. Kyprianou has said that if the shadow of the / 47. M. Kyprianou a Jit que si les traites qui ont
Treaiies wbioh brought about the Republio of Cyprus ; donne nalssanoeA la RBpubliquede Chypre 6taient
~a8 removed, then tension would be ellminated in the
abroghsla tensiondiminuerait et tout irait bien dans
island and a11 would be well. TO prove his point he IYle. Pour prouver le bien-fond8de sa thAse, il a dit
mentioned that aince the day this matter bas been he+e depuisle jour oh la questiona Bt6 Port&edevact
fore the Council, the fear of Invasion by Turkey haa le Conseilla crainte d’une invasion de la part de la
dlminiehed, and, therefore, the tension has been reTurquie a diminue et que, par con&quent, la tension
duoed and there have been only isolated incidents in
a BtBrhduito et qu’onnesignaledansl’fle quequelques
the lslund.
incidentslsol&3.
48. For persans who have absolute oontrol over the
48. Pour ceux qui exeroent un contrale absolusur
Qreek gunmen, be they oalled security foroes or not,
les tueurs greos, qu’ils les nomment nforaes de
suoh statements are easy to make. It shows that they
e6ourit6fl ou autrement, de telles d8clarations sont
have given orders to their gunmen to lie in wait while
faciles A faire. Cela signifie qu’ils ont donn8Aces
these proceedings go on, Under the guise of isolated
tueurs l’ordre de se *enir tranquillespendantquese
incidents, Turkish villagers have, however, beenunder
deroulent ces debats. Sous le couvert d’incidents
oonstant threat and isolation. Turks have oontinued to
isol$s, les villageois turcs ontoependant
et6 oonstamment meuao& et oern6s. Les Turcs ont oontinueA
die and mystariouely vanish. Quns andammunition are
etill rolling in. Turks are still stranded and under
mourir ou Adisparaftre mystf3rieusement.
Desarmer
et des munitions continuent d’arriver. Les Turcs
eiege.
sonttoujours isol& et assi8g6s.
49. We know the pattern of thesemachinations.We 49. Nous oonnaissons
bien toutes oesmachinations,
saw them in the years 1955and 1958.Eachtime the car nous en avons d6jA fait l’exp6rience entre 1966
Cyprua caseoamebeforetheUnitedNations,theGreek et 1968. Chaquefois que l’affaire de Chypre btait
terrarists, under the sameleaders they now enjoy,
Port&edevant les NationsUnies,lesterroristes grecs,
sousles ordres de leurs dirigeanteactuels,tiraient
either pulledthetrigger or waited,accordingto orders.
ou ne tiraient pas, selonles ordres reçus.
50. Mr. Kyprianouhassaidthat if the resolutionwhich 60. M. Kyprianou a dit que si la r0solution qu’il
souhaite n’est pas adoptt3erapidementla causedu
he seekeis not forthcoming,then the root of evil will
oc::tfnueto be there, meaningthattension
will rise and mal subsistera,olest-A-dire que la tensionmontera
et que le sang oontlnuerade couler. Je suis certain
bloodehedcontinue, 1 feel sure that this Council will
not be blackmailedinto anirresponsibleaotionor one- gue le Conseil ne se laieeera pas entralher, par
sidedresolution.1 have absolutsfaith as to that.
ohantage,A commettreun aote irrbflbohl ou Aadopter
une r&olution unilat6rale. Ma confianceAcet Egard
est absolue,
61. It ie very significant that ArohbishopMakarioson 61. C’est un fait tri% significatif que le 18f6vrier
18 February 1964had this to say to a correspondent 1964l’archevAqueMakarios ait dit Auncorrespondant
of UPI:
de I’UPI:
‘1 do not think a largrr pence-keepingforce on
“Je ne crois pas qu’une foroe de maintien de
Cyprus is necessa ry. If theGreekCypriot resolution
la paix plus importante soit n&essalre A Chypre.
demandingguaranteesagainstaggressionis adopted
Si la r6solutlon des Chypriotes grecs &mandant
by the Unitcd NationsSecurity Council, the needfor
des garanties contre l’agressionest adoptbepar
a pence-lteepingforce witl be ellminated. The main
le Conseil de s6curit6 des Nations Unies, 11ne
questionnowis to abrogatethe CyprueTreatles that
sera plus n6cessairede cr0er uneforce demaintien
give Britain, GreeceandTurkeytho right to intervene
de la paix. La questionessentielle,maintenant,est
in Cyprus affaira.”
d’abroger les trait& de Chypre qui donnentA
la Grande-Bretagne,A la GrAce et A la Turquie le
droit d’intervenir dansles affaires de Chypre.01
52. This statementby ArchbishapMakarios andthe 52. Cette d0clarationde l’arohev9queMakarloset les
manoeuvresby bisrepresentativesherein thisCouncil manœuvree de ses repr&entants ici, au Conseil,
are sufficient proof of the fact that the Greok Cypriote prouvent amplementquelesChypriotesgrecsessaient

I

are trying to abusett
While the only urge
suchactive measurr
violenceandreturn i
keepingforce, the QI
a resolutionthe way
in or for Cyprus.

53. This attitudean(
lute proof of the alre
on the Turks was
*vasons,andthat BU(
witnessedin the last
of the Qreek authorit
Had this not been E
foroefully ar.dcatego
1 ask for is given,
neoessary”?He will
pret it as havin ah1
the guaranteeing~OH
of your resolution,ht
he thinke best. If vi
prooms,he ~111resc
ashe did in Deoembc
are dealingwith som

54. This is the patl
my utmost falth in 7
in with suchmentalité
the problem in its ef
standthesq,it is neo
the Republioof Cyp
generisprovisions i
absoluteneoessityfc
about.
56. Each country, e
and individual ohar
dangerous
to apply gt
regard of suchpeoul
caseto be decided(
you will decide the
peculiarities and inh
Otherwise,the resul
theseare the fa&.

56. Turks and Qree
sinoe1671. They ha*
Turks. They have eac
religion, tradition ar
effect Turkey andQr(
Turkish and Greek
attemptsto makethe
havemet with strong
Cyprus. They each11
together,yet always
village there have a!
2nd Turkish authoril
tlieir communitiesse
ayuality and justice.
80011
6s one-side n
politically, trouble b
momentar~ily
estrang
to dominatethe Turk~
for unionwith Greecc
the Turks oppoeingi
Greecemet with coun

are trying to abuse fhe authority of thie august Counoii.
mile the only urgent need in Cyprus ie the taking of
auch active measures aa would ensure a oessation of
violence and return to normality by moving in a peaoekeeping force, the Greeks maintain that unless they get
a reaolution the way they want to, nothing cari be done
in or for Cyprus.
55. Titis attitude and these declarations are also abaolute proof of the already well knownfaot that the attaok
on the Turka waa an organized one for politioal
reasons, and that suoh murder and violenoe as we have
witnesesd in the last few months 1s a tool in the hands
of the Greek authorities forgettingtheir pclitioal ends.
Had this not been BO, how oould the Arohbishop 80
foroefully and categorioally eay that “if the resolution
I ask for is given, no peaoe-keeping foroe will be
neoesaary”? He will get hia resolution: he will interpret it as havin abrogated the Treaties: he will defy
the guaranteeing ‘owers: and then under the umbrella
of ycur resolution, he will deal with the Turks the way
he thinks best. If violenoe is neoesaary durina this
prooaaa, he wrll iesort to violenoe and tel1 the Gorld,
aa he did in Deoember last, that hia Qeourity for,cesn
are denling with eome Turkish rebels.

54. This is the pattern of Greek mentality. 1 repeat
my utmost faith in your Council’s wisdom not to fa11
in lvith such mentality. Permit me, therefore, to taokle
the problem in its essenoe and essentials. TO understand theac, it is neoessary to understand thebasie of
tho Republio of Cyprua and ttie reasons for the G
generis provisions in its Constitution, as well as the
absolufe neoeseity for the Treaties whioh brought it
about.
56, Each oountry, each State, has its own peouliar
and individual oharaoteristioa. That is why it la
dangerous to apply general prlnclples in oomplete disregard of suoh peouliarities. Gn the prinoiple of eaoh
oaae to be decided on its own merits, 1 am sure that
you will decide the issue before you on the merlta,
peculiarities and inherent charaoteristios of Cyprus,
Otherwise, the result wlll be ohaotlc. Very briefly,
these are the fac&
56. Turks and Greeks have llved in Cyprus together
einoe 1671. They have BO llved always a8 Greekz or
Turka. They have eaoh stuck to thelr separate oulture,
religion, tradition and national herltage. They are in
effect Turkey and Greeoe projeoted lnto Cyprus for the
Turklsh and Greek populations respectively. Any
attempts to make them anything but Greeka or Turka
have met with strong oppoeitior from these groups in
Cyprua. They eaoh llved a8 autonomous oommunities
togemer, yet always sepnrnte. Down to the smnllest
village there bave always been, and there is, Graek
and Turklsh authorities looklng after the offairs of
their. communlties sepnrately. As long ns they enjoye?
equolity
and justice, they Hved together hnppily. A8
80011ns one Ride nttempted to dominato tho other
politically, trouble brewed nnd their relntions were
momentarily estrnngcd. Greeks stnrted this nttempt
to dominnto the Turlts nfter the British rule. Petltions
for unlon wlth Greece met with counter-patitiona from
the Turks oppoaing it, Démonstrations for union with
Grcece met wlth counter-demonstrotions by the ‘I’urks.

d’abuser itautorit8 de oe oonseil. La seule n6cessite
urgente, A Chypre, est de prendre les mesure6 effloaoes qui feront oesser les actes de violence et
assureront le retour h la normale en faisant intervenir
une force de maintien de la paix, maie les Greos
soutiennent que, h moins quWs n’obtiennent une
tisolution oonforme & leurs d8sirs, rien ne pourra
8tre fait A Chypre ou pour Chypre,
63. Cette attitude et oes d8olnrations sont Bgalement
la preuve absolue d’un fait d8j& bien connu, B savoir
que l’attaque oontre les Turcs u Bt8 organis8e pour
des raisons politiques et que les meurtres et la
violence dont nota8avons 8t8 t8moins au oours de oes
derniers mois sont un instrument arAoe auquel les
autorit8s greoques esperent arriver B leurs iins sur
le plan polltlque. Si1 n’en avait pas 0t6 aine& comment
l’arohev8que Makarios nurnlt-il pu, si fermement et
si oat8goriquement, d8olarer que as1 la r8solution
que je demande est accord&, auouneforoe de maintien
de la paix ne sera n8cessniren7 Il obtiendra sa r8aolutlon; il l’interpr&era
oomme ayant abrcg0 les
trait&, 11d8fiera les puissances garantes, pulo, BOUE
la proteotion de votre r8solutlon, il traitera les Turcs
somme 11le jugera bon, Si la violence est alors n8cessnire, 11 reoourra A la violence et il dira au monde,
oomme il l’a fait en d8oembre dernier, que 888
“foraes de s8ourW B’oooupent de quelques rebelles
turcs.
64. Telle est la mentalit8 greoque. Je r8p&e que
j’ai entiere oonfianoe on la aagease de votre Conseil,
qui ne se laissera pas gagner par cette mentalit8;
Permettez-moi donc dlabcrder lee 818mente fondamentaux du probli3me. Pour les oomprendre, il est
n8oessaire de comprendre les bases sur lesquelles
renose la RBaubliuue de Chvnre et les raisons des
dispositions Êui generis de sa oonatitution, ainsi que
le oaraotere absolument n8oessaire des trait&! cui
lui ont donna naissance.
66. Chaque pays, ohaque Etat a ses oaraot8rietiques
propres, C’est pourquoi il est dangereux d’appliquer
des prinoipes g0n8raux sans tenir oompte de ces
oaraot8ristiques. En partant du prinoipe selon lequel
ohaque oaa doit 0tre examln8 compte tenu de fies
qualit& lntrit&ques,
je suis sdr que vous d8olderez
de la question dont vous Btes saisi en vou8 attaohant
aux oaraot0ristiques propres Q Chypre, Sinon, on
aboutirait au chaos. Voioi, tr8s bribvement, quels
sont les faits.
66. Les Turoo et les Greos vivent o6te B 08te B
Chypre depuis 1671. Ils ont toujours v0ou en tant
que Greos ou en tant quo Turos. Ils ont chacun
oonserv8 leur oulture, leur religion, leurs traditions
et leur patrimoine national. Pour les populations
turque et greoque respeotlvement, Chypre est une
projeotlon soit de la Turquie, soit de la Gr8ce. Toute
tentative de faire de oespopulations autre ohose que
des Greos ou de8 Turcs s’est heurtes il une forte
opposition de leur part. Ces deux groupes ont &OU
en communnut8s autenomea, ensemble, mais toujours
s8par6es. Dana les plus petits villages, ilya toujours
CXI - et 11 y a encore aujourd’hui - . dae. autoril&
grecques et turques qui sloocupent s6parBment des
affaires de leur oommunnutb respective. Tant quWs
ont oonnu l%gnlit6 et la justioe, 1113
ont v8ou heureux
ensemble. Des que l’une des oommunnutt3s a essaye
de dominer l’autre politiquemont, les troubloo ont
ooinmeno8 et les rapports 88 sont momentnn8ment
tendus. Le8 Grecs ont essny6 de dominer les ‘ILroe
dbu la fin du r6glme brltanniqu?. Dea p&ltlons pour

,

When the Greeks took up arms in 1955, not for indepsndence-that is very important for the Seourity
C!ounoil andfor the United Nationa, not for independenoe
-but for the union of Cyprus with Greeoe, it was inevitable that the Turks would oppose them, beoauae the
Turks were thus being put from the rule of one oolony
under another. Thls oppositlonbroughtviolenoe. Turks
reaoted, inter-communal relations becameestranged,
bitter and full of mietrust and enmity. The Cyprus
question oame before the United Nations aeveral times
during 1966 and 1958.

57. Graek Cvariots tried to set a rosolution in oompl&e disregard of the Turkrsh Cypriot faotor. The
United Nations refused to fa11into this trao. and advised
the parties, that is to say the Greec ‘nnd Turkish
Cypriots who were warring against eaoh other for
different political nims, and greeoe and Turkey, their
reoognized and nvowed motherlands, to find a just and
peaceful solution by negotiation. That is how the Zurioh
Agreement was reaohed. Arohbishop Makarios and
Dr. KUpUk, representing the two oommunities, were
in oonstnnt touoh with their respeotive motherlands
during this tlme. At a11stages they oonsented to what
was being,agreed to as a oompromise solution. There
should be no viotors and no vanquished. Peaoeful
settleqent neoessitated that tho two sfdes should make
mutual saorifiaes.

68. The fight arose beoause Greeks wanted union and
offered the Turkish Cypriots the position of a mlnority.
The Turkish Cypriots refused this and demanded union
with Turkey, or at least partition, We would never
aooept to live at the meroy of the Greek Cypriots. We
had good examples of what life would be under them.
The EOKA gunmen had repeatedly deolared that onoe
the fight against the Brltish was brought to a viotorious
end, the fight against the Turks would be sharp and
short, Our struggle on the Island was a oonstant danger
to peaoe between Turkey and Greeoe,

59. SO the oompromise was reaohed fairly and responsibly. A Government of partnership was born. The
two oommunities sat at a oonferenoe table and agreed
upon the terms and oonditions of this partnership. An
eminent jurlst of international law from Switzerland
presided over our deliberations. Greece and Turkey1 repeat, the fwo motherlands-had their representatives there, and we, the two oommunities, hadours. It
was a settlement botween oquals, not betwoon the
majority and minority. The notion of majority and
minority would have arisen hnd there beon n Cypriot
nation. There waa not even thc slightest notion of such
a nation, Out of thls pnrtnership this notion might
arise by a process of evolution when, in time, mutual
goodwill, trust and friendship became the rule rather
than the exception,
,
80. Thls notion of unlty of Cypriotism could hnve
arison if the largr community hnd wanted it and had

l’union aveo la GrBoe ont entrafn6 des contrep&itions de la part des Turcs qui s’y opposaient. b
Des manifestations pour l’union aveo la GrBoe ont
provoquI3 des oontre-manifestations de la part des
Turos. Lorsque les Grecs ont pris les armes en
1966, non pas pour l’ind8pendanoe - ce point est
tr8s important pour le Conseil de seaurit et pour
les Nations Unies -, mals pour l’union do Chypre
avec la GrBoe, les Turos, inevitablement, se sont
oppos6s B cette tentative, parce qu’ils sernient alors
~~FIE$Sd’une domination ooloniale & une autre. Cette
oppositlon a entralh6 des violenoes, Les Turos ont
r0ati. les relations entre les oommunaut0s se sont
te&&,
l’amertume, la mbfiance et la haine les
ont emsoisonq6es. La question de Chypre a Bt6 port&
devant ‘llOrgunisation des Nations Ütdes B pluËleurs
reprises en 19GEet 1968.
57, Les Chypriotes groos ont ossay6 d’obtenir une
r&solution au m6pris total de 1%16ment chypriote
turc. L’organisation des Nations Unies a refus8 de
tomber dans le pibge et a conseil16 aux parties,
o’ost-h-dire aux Chypriotes grecs et turos qui luttaient
les uns oontre les autres pour des buts politiques
divOrge&& ainsi qu’& la Greoe et à la Turquie qu’ils
reconnaissaient et respeotaient oomme leur m8re
patrie, de trouver une solution juste et pacifique par
la voie de la n6gooiation. C’est ainsi que 1lAooord
de Zurioh a BtB oonolu. L’arohevBque Makarios et
M. KUçUk, repr6sentant 10s deux oommunaut&, sont
rest& constamment en oontaot pendant tout oe temps
aveo leurs patries respeotives. A oha e 8tape des
disoussions, ils ont aooept6 013 qui Y tait propos6
comme solution de compromis; il ne devait y avoir
ni vainqueur ni vainou, et un rbglement paoifique
exigeait que les deux parties consentent des saorifioes
mutuels.
68. La lutte a oommeno8 paroe que les Greos
voulaient l’union et offraient aux Chypriotes tiros
la situation d’une minorit8. Lea Chypriotes turos
ont refus8 et ont demande l’union aveo la Turquie
ou, au moins, le partage. Nous n’aooepterions jamais
de vivre B la meroi des Chypriotes greos. Nous
avions de bons exemples du genre de vie qu’ils
nous auraient r8serv6. Les tueurs de 1’EOKA (Organisation nationale des aombattants ohypriotes) avaient
d6olar8 B maintes reprises que, une fois la lutte
oontre les Britanniques terminale dans la viotoire, la
lutte oontre les Turos serait violente et br8ve. Notre
lutte dans l’fle oonstituait un danger constant pour
la paix entre la GrBoe et la Turquie.
69, Ainsi, un oompromis juste et raisonnable a ht6
atteint, Un gouvernement d’association est n0. Les
repr8sentants des deux oommunaut8s se sont assis
B la table de oonf6rence et ont arr&8 les termes
et oonditions de cette assooiation. Un 8minent juriste
suisse, sp&oialiste du droit international, a pr8sid6
8 nos discussions. La arece et la Turquie, je le
r&p&e, les deux m8res patries, avaient aussi leurs
repr&entants, et chacune de nos deux communaut6s
les siens. Il s’agissait d’un rbglement entre Bgnux
et non pas entre une mnjorit8 et une minorit& La
notion de majorit0 et de tninorith aurait t%Bvalable
s’il y avait eu une nation chypriote. Mais oette notion
de nation chypriote n’avait pas la moindre r6alitb.
Par un processus d’Bvolution, cette notion aurait pu
naître d’une telle assooiation, la bonne volont deiproque, la confiance et l’amitib devenant par la suite
la regle et non plus l’exception.
60. Cette notion d’unile, de nchypriotismen aurait
pu naftre si la communaut8 In plus importante l’avait
10

di

worked for it. B1
the beginning we
what we believed
for the Greek Cyy
for aohieving unit
had triok-tied us
now want to use
their own ends.

61. 1 would like 1
made by the Aroh

“These achie,
but the present
circle of our pu
He continues as fl
“The realizat
not oomplete UI
ments. We havl
point for peaoe
we shall oontir
summating viotl
This WRS a publi
who was beoominl

62. Then, on 20
“Taking into
the people of CJ
tional provisiot
regular funotior
There was a oon
Constitution for
Cyprus. An eminl
it, with Qreek anI
in suite of that.
wouid disregard L
from the head of

63. On 5 JanuarJ
“The noble s
an end. These
transformation,
of the people 01
and London A1
oourse of this
a starting poin
with the objeo
aohieved for fu:
64. On 12 Febru;
“Even if the 1
am doing on mu
not respeot any

65. On 1 April 1
“As we kneel
hear them shouf
nrmed struggle
r”erent form SO
and the futuro c
66. On 27 July .l
*Tho agreemt
prosent but not

worked for it, But that has not been the oase. From
the beginning we were told in no unoertain terms that
what we believed to be an honourable oompromise was
ior the Greek Cypriots the beginning of a new struggle
for achieving union with Greeoe. In other worda, they
had triok-tiéd us down by international treaties and
aow want to use the positive parts of the treaties for
their own ends.

d6sir6 et y avait travail& Mais tel n’a pas Bt6 le
cas. Db8 le dbbut, on nous a dit tres clairement que
oe que noua pensions etre un oompromis honorable
n%tait pour les Chypriotes greos que le commenoement d’une lutte nouvelle pour parvenir h l’union
avec la Gri3ce. En d’autres termes, par la ruse, ils
nous avaient 116s en vertu de trait& internationaux
et ils entendent maintenant utiliser les parties posii!ves des trait& pour servir leurs propres desseins.
61. J’aimerais citer certaines d6olaratlons faites
en diverses oooasions par Parohev8que Makarios
depuis le ler avril 1960. Il a dit notamment:
“Ces rf3alisations ne sont pas, bien entendu,
absolues, mais la r6alit6 pr6sente ne ferme pas
oompletement le oerole de nos efforts.a
Il poursuivait:
“Nos espoirs et nos aspirations ne se trouvent
pas totalement r6alisBs par les Aooords de Zurioh
et de Londres. Nous avons gagnb
- - un bastion et un
point de depart pour des campagnes paoifiques. Da
oes bastions, nous poursuivrons la lutte afin d’obtenir
la viotoire.”
Il s’agit d’une dbolaration publique faite par un homme
ayant le sens de ses responsabilit&
et qui allait
devenir le chef d’un Etat nouveau,
62. Puis, le 20 d6oembre 1961, il a d6olar6:
“Compte tenu de lYntir& g&&al du peuple de
Chypre, j’6oarterai toute disposition oonstitutionnelle qui, si elle prbtait il des abus, risquerait de
gbner le bon fonotionnement de 1’Etat.”
Il existait une oour oonstitutionnelle cr86e en vertu
de la Constitution pour connaftre des abus et de
oertaines infraotionË oommis B Chypre, Un aminent
juriste allemand en$tait le prasident, et des Chypriotes
greos et turos ypartioipaient. Cependant, ltaruhev6que
Makarios ddolarait ouvertement qu’il ne tiendrait pas
oompte des dispositions oonstitutionnelles, et oette
d6olaration 8manait du chef d’un Etat tout nouvellement
or66.
63. Le 6 janvier 1962, il a d&olar&
“Les nobles luttes d’un peuple ne prennent jamais
fin. Ces luttes subissent des transformations mais
ne se terminent jamais. La lutte du peuple ohypriote
se poursuivra, elle aussi. Les Accords de Zurich
et de Londres constituent un jalon dans le oours de
cette lutte, mais, en m6me temps, un point ds d6part
et un bastion pour d’autre8 luttes dont l’objectif
sera d’utiliser 08 qui a 6tB acquis pour d’autres
oonqu6tes.”
64. Le 12 fbvrier 1963, il a d6olar6 ce qui suit:
aMBme si la Cour oonstitutionnelIe deolare que
oe que je fais B propos des munioipalitas est
antioonstitutionnel, je n’en tiendrai auounement
0ompte.a
66. Et le ler avril 1963:
“Lorsque nous nous agenouillons devant les tombes
de nos martyrs, nous les entendons crier: “en
nvnnt, par-delh les tombeaux”
. , . La lutte armbe
a pris fin, mais elle se poursuit sous une autre
forme, pour permettre d%aluer le prbsent et de
oonqubrir l’avenir.”
66. Le 27 juillet 1963, il n dit:
“Les aocords ne sont pas un but: ils sont le
pr6sent mais pas l’avenir. Le peuple chypriote

61. 1 would like to quote some statements repeatedly
made by the Arohbishop asfrom 1 April1960. He said:
“These achievements are not, of oourse, absolute,
but the present reality does not oompletely olose the
oircle of our pursuits.n
He oontinues as follows:
“The realiaation of our hopes and aspirations is
not oomplete under the Zurioh and London Agreement& We have aoquired a bastion and a starting
point for peaoeful oampaigns. From these bastions
we shall continue to struggle with a view to oonsummating viotory.”
This was a publio statement from a responsible man
who wns becoming the head of a newly born State.
82. Then, on 20 Deoember 1961, he said:
“Taking into oonsideration the general interest of
the people of Cyprus, 1 shall disregard any oonstitutional provision whioh, if abuse& may obstruct the
rrgular funotioning of the State.”
There was a oonstitutional oourt oreated under our
Constitution for abuses and for other matters in
Cyprus. An eminent German jurist was at the head of
it, with Ureek and Turkish Cypriot partioipation, And
in spite of that, this was an opsn deolaration that he
would disregard any oonstitutional provisions, This is
from the head of a State newly born.
63. On 6 January 1962, he said:
“The noble struggles of the people never oome to
an end. These struggles, although they undergo
transformation, are never terminated. The struggle
of the people of Cyprus, too, will go on. The Zurioh
and London Agreemente form a landmark in tbe
oourse of this struggle, but, at the same time, are
a starting point and bastion for further struggles,
with tbe objeot of oapitalizing on what has been
aahieved for further oonquestsa
64. On 12 February 1963, he said the following:
“Even if the Conetitutional Court says that what 1
am doing on munioipalities is unconstitutional, 1will
not respeot anything of these thingsa
66. 0111 April 1963, ho said:
“As we kneel before the graves of our martyrs, we
hear them shout: IForward, beyond tha graves’. , .The
nrmed struggle ended, but it is continuing in a dif.foront form 80 that the present may be flppraised
nnd the future oonquerecl.H
66. On 27 July 1963 he snid:
“Tho agrecmonte do not form the @al; they are the
prosent but not the future. The Greelc Cypriot people
5..

11

I

will continue their nationnl course and shape their
future in aooordnnoowith their will. The Zurichnnd
LondonAgreementshave a numberof positive elements, but also negativeones,andthat areeks will
work to take advantageof the positive elementsand
get rid of the negativeones.”

greo oontinuera sa course nationale et façonnera
son avenir oomme il l’entend. Leo Accords de
Zurich et de Londrescontiennentcertains 313ments
positifs, mais aussi des 313mentsn3gatifs. Les
Greosferont desefforts pour profiter des313ments
positifs et pour se d3bnrrasser des 318ments
n0gatif8.n
There are numerousother quotations,but 1 shall not Je pourrais oiter bien d’autres d3olarationsde ce
delay the Councilby readingthem.
genre, mais je ne veux pas retarder les d3batsdu
Conseilen en poursuivantla lecture,
67. Will the United Nations endoreesuohconduot? 67. Les Nations Unies appuieront-elles oe comCan a man, R party to a simple transaotion,take portement?Un hommepartie Bunesimpletransaotion
advantageof the positive elementsand refusoto abide peut-il profiter des 310mentspositifs et refuser de
by the negativeelements?Evenin private life this is
s’inoliner devant les 313ment.s
n3gatifs’l Marnedans
not allowed.Howwill the Seourity Councilhelp Arohla vie Priv$e, 08 n’est pas permis, Commentle
bishop Makarios, if, in his own words, Qreeks are
Conseil de s3ourit6 pourra-t-il aider l’arohev3que
goingto workto take advantageof the positive elements Makarlos si, pour reprendre ses nropres mots. les
and get rid of the negativeonesby oompletelydisreQreos font dës effor‘ts pour profiter des 313mënts
garding the Turks and their rights in Cyprus?What positifs et pour se d3barrasserdes313mentsn3gatifs
will the fate of other international treaties be if
sanstenir aucuncomptedesTuros et de leurs droits
Clovernmentswhioh sign them freely are allowedto
h Chypre? Quel sera le sort d’autres trait36 interadvanoethe exouseswhioh the Qreek Cypriots are nntio&x si-l’on permet aux gouvernementscluiles
nowodvancingfor abrogatingthesetrenties?
signent de leur plein gr3 d’invoquer les pr3textes
qu’invoquentmaintenant les Chypriotes greos pour
abroger oestrait&.?
68. Archbishop Makarios havingagreedto the inde- 68. Llarohev3queMakarios ayant aooept.3la or3ation
pendentRepubiiosolely for the pur-$se of usingthis d’une ind3pendanoeuniquement pour en faire le
Reuublio as a sprinaboard for wEnosisn-unionof
tremplin de 1t”Enosis” - union de Chypre aveo la
Cybrus with Qrèeoeihis administration oould do are00 -, son administration ne pouvait faire autrenothingbut serve his purpose.Al1 Turkishrights were ment que de favoriser ses desseins,On a recouru
deniedor refusad under humiliatingaoousations.Al1 A des accusations humiliantes pour d3nier leurs
governmentorgansset aboutdoingnothingbuttracking droits aux Turcs. Tous les organesgouvernementaux
out a11Turkish rights. In spite of the guaranteesand ne font rien d’autre que d%liminer tous lesdroits des
the speoialrights workedinto theConstitution,everyTuros. En d3pit desgarantieset desdroits sp3oiaux
thing possiblewasdoneto reduoeus andtreat us as a 3nono3s dans la Constitution, toutes les mesure8
mere minority. Nothing was doneto stop the rising possibles ont $03prises pour nous r3duire A l%tat
tide towards the oondemnatlonof the Agreementsby de simple minoritb et noustraiter en oons3quence,
the Graeks. Churohesandsohoolsbeoamea training RiennIa 3t3 fait pour arr3ter le flot de oondamnations
ground for anti-Turkish, anti-Constitutionupbringing des trait& par les Cireos. Le8 @lises et les Boole8
of youth. A polioe state was olampeddownuponus. sont transform3es en terrains d’entrafhementoh
Humanrights andoonstitutionalsafeguardswereoom- l’on apprend A la jeunesseA devenir antiturque et
pletely disregarded. Turkish Cypriots, while neoes- antioonstitutionnelle. Un Etat polioier nous a 3tA
sarily doing their utmost to keep up the morale of impos3.Les droits de l’hommeet les garantiesoonstheir people,bent a11their energies to bringing the titutionnelles ont 3t3 oompl8tementm3pris3s. Le8
Ureek leadershipto reason.
Chypriotes turos, tout en s’efforçant Bvibemmentde
maintenir le moral de leurs oompatriotes,ont mis
toute leur 3nergle A faire entendre raison auxdirigeantsgreos.
69. Dr. K11çUk~s
messageto ArohbishopMakarios 69. Le messagede M. KUçUkAl’arohev3queMakarios
gives a goodpioture of the Turkish stand.It is dated donneuneid3e justedelapositionturque, Ce message,
10 February 1964.This wasan openletter addressed en date du 19 f3vrier 1964, est une lettre ouverte
to ArohbishopMakarios. It says:
adress3eA l’arohev3que Mnkarios. Voici oe qu’il
d3olare:
“Your broadcast lest night reminded me of the
“Votre message radiodiffus d’hier soir m’a
constant efforts whioh were madeduring the short
rappel3 les efforts constnnts qui ont 3t3 faits
life of the Hepublioin order to oreate oonditionsin
pendant la brbve existence de la RBpubliqueflfin
whioh the two communitiescould Iive to@thar in
de or6er des conditions qui permettraient aux
peace nnd proeperity and co-operate in a-spirit of
deux communaut3s(IG vivra ensemble dans la
friandship with goodwill nnd understanding.Lest
paix et lu prosp3rit3, et de collaborer dansun
you have forgotten my concrete appealsto you and
esprit d’amitib, de bonnevolont et de oomprdhel~sion. De crainte que vousn’ayez oubli0 mesappels
the n&gative and evusive attitude whiohyou nlways
ehowedtoward them, may1list belowafew instances
oonoreto et l’attitude nbgative et bvasive nvec
of thie andthe rosponsewith whI,chtheywere met by
laquelleVOUS les aveztoujoursaccueillis,Jevoudrais
you?
rappeler loi quelquesexemplesde mespropoeitions
et de VOEraactions.
“You will no doubtrecollect that 1 hadto appenlto
“Vous voue rappellerez certainement quej’ai d@
you manytirnos, both orally nndin writing, that you
voue adresser de nombreux appels, tant oraw
nnd cartain Clreelcministors ehould refrain from
qu%crits, pour quevous-memeet certninsministre6
12

taking leadir
againstthe
Constitution
onthe oontn
the oampaig

“1 had as1
of Ministers
lio that, as 1
sanctionsin
tles and p
Constitution
You refused
ment of leg
had reques
Republiorel
publishing8
of ill-will bs
or persans(
of our orir
Attorney-Ge
ders, of who
whomyou a1
to you.

“1 hadpro]
press oonfe
fluenoe joul
flammatory
trust, and
oommunitie

“1 hadsug
shouldvisit
habitants to
togetherin c
You refusec
visited mixe
alike, advo
onlledupon:
andthedeois
You refusec
public deola
gard oonstit
respeotdeo

“1 had as1
stop the c:
broadoastin
sulting to th
nature as tc
to take effet
oast of suot
whioh a six
olaring that
by bringing I

nI had to
fluenoson tl
vent him 0
Statein000
refused to c
fi11t11eforoc
of ploinclotli
to you mnn
the Greek m
sandsof BC

grecs vous absteniee de jouer des r8les Eminents
dans la oampagne de l’ngnosis”, oontre 1esAooords
de Zurloh et de Londres et contre la Constitution.
Vous aves refus8 dUtendre mes appels et, au
oontraire, vous aves poursuivi et m6me intensifi8
Cette oampagne.
“Je vous ai demand8 maintes fois, et j’ai demand8
Bgalement au Conseil des ministres et au Prooureur
de la RBpublique, que, oomme dans tous les autres
pays, des sanctions soient pr0vues dans notre
oode p8nal pour emp8oher les aotivit8s et la propagande destin8es fi saper notre constitution et l’ordre
Etabli en vertu de cette derni8re. Vous avez refus8
de prendre les mesures n8oessaires pour promulguer les dispositions 18glslatives pr8voyant de telles
sanotions. Je vous avais demand8 A plusieurs reprises, ainsi qu’au Prooureur de la RBpublique, de
poursuivre oeux qui avaient publi8 des d8olarations
destin8es A or8er des sentlmentsd~inimiti8 entre les
diverses alasses, les diverses oommunaut8s ou les
divers oitoyens de la Rbpublique, en violation du
paragraphe 61 de notre oode p8nal. Sur vos instruotions, le Prooureur a refus8 de poursuivre 086
d8linquants, dont 10plus notoire 8talt Nikos Sampson,
que vous avec toujours voulu prot8ger pour des
raisons que vous oonnaissee.
aJe vous avais propos8 de tenir fr8quemment des
oonf8renoos de presse oommunes pour essayer
d’influenoer les journalistes afin yutile stabstiennent
de publier des d8claratione inoendialres de nature
A or8ar 11inimiti8, la m8fianoe et des souroes de
friotian entre les deux oommunaut8s. Vous rives
refus8 de le faire,
“Je vous ai sugg8r$ bien des fois de visiter ensemble des villages mixtes pour oonseiller aux
habitants d’oublier leurs divergenoes et de vivre
dans un esprit d’amiti8 et de bon voisinage, Vous
avez refus8 de le faire. Cependant, de ma propre
initiative, je me suis rendu dans des villages
mixtes et j’ai par18 aux Grecs oomme aux Turos,
les enoourageant A oultiver une amiti8 mutuelle.
Je vous avais demand8 de respeoter la Constitution
et les d8oisions de la Cour constitutionnelle supr8me. Vous avez refus8 de le faire. Au oontraire,
vous aven fait publiquement des dt3olarations indiquant que vous passeriee outre aux dispositions
constitutionnelles et ne respeoteriee pas les dispositions de la Cour oonstitutlonnelle.
“Je vous avais demandl3, ainsi qu’au Conseil des
ministres, d’emp8oher la radiodiffusion ohypriote
de diffuser, oomme elle le faisait, des informations
offensantes et insultantes pour la oommunaut8
turque, et de nature A faire naître la haine oontre
les Turos. Vous n’avez pan pris de mesures effioaoes et vous avez m6me permis la diffusion
d%missions aussi critiquables gue oelle au oours
de laquelle un enfant grso de six ans d8olare qu’il
paiern ses dettes envers sa mi3re en lui apportant
la @te de six Turos.
“Je vous avais demande A mnlntes reprises d’user .
de votre influenoe aupr8s du pr&endu Ministre de
l’int8rieur pour llemp8oher de faire des forces
de sI3ourit8 de 1’Etat une orgnnisation terroriste
du type de la Gestapo. Vous avez refus8 de le faire,
et le Ministre a eu le loisir do garnir leo rangs defi
foroea de s8ourit0 de terrcristes grecs dbguis8s
en hommes de la brigade sp8oiulo. Foi d6 rne
plaindre mainted fois nupr8s de VOUBde ce que
Ylorkntzis rivait 8quip8 las membres greos des

taking leading parts in the oampaign for ‘Enosis’ and
against the Zurioh and London Agreements and the
Constitution. YOU refused to entertain my appeals nnd
on the oontrary oontinued to direot and even intensify
the campa@.
‘1 had asked you repeatedly and nlso the Council
of Mini&ers and the Attorney-General of the Repubho that, as in a11other oountries, you should provide
sanotions in our oriminal code for deterring aotivitles and propaganda aimed at undermining our
Constitution and the order established thereunder.
You refused to take neoussary steps for the enaotment of legislative provisions for suoh sanotions. 1
had requested you and the Attorney-Genernl of the
Republio repeatedly to proseoute those who had been
publishing stntements oaloulated to promote feelings
of ill-will bet.veen different olasses, or oommunities,
or persona of the Republio, in violation of seotion 61
of our oriminal oode. On your instruotions, the
Attorney-General refused to proseoute suoh offenders, of whom the most notorious was Nikos Sampson,
whom you always wonted to proteot for rensons lmown
to you.
“1 had proposed to you that we should hold traquent
press oonferenoue together and thereby try to influenoe journalists to refrain from publishing inflammatory material likely to oreate enmity, distrust, and oauses of friotion between the two
oommunities. You refused to do SO.
“1 had suggested to you on many oooasions that we
should visit mixed villages together and advise inhabitants to put aside their differenoes ond live
together in a spirit of friendship andneighbourliness.
You refused to do it. But, on my own initiative, 1
visited mixed villages and spoke to Greeks and Turks
alike, advooating friendship between them. 1 had
oalled upon you to show respeot for the Constitution
and the deoisions of the Supreme Constitutional Court.
You refused to do RO. On the oontrary, you made
public deolarations to the effeot that you would disregard oonstitutional provisions and that you would not
respeot deoisions of the Constitutional Court.
“1 had asked you and the Counoil of Ministers to
stop the Cyprus Broadoasting Corporation from
broadoasting material whioh was offensive and insulting to the Turkish oomrnunity and was of suoh a
nature as to breed hatred toward Tu&s. You failed
to take effeotive aotion and even allowed the broadoast of suoh objeotionable material as a sketoh in
wbioh a six-year-old Greek boy 1s depioted as deolaring that he would repay his debts to his mother
by bringlng to her the beads of six Turks.
“1 had to request you repeatedly to use your influence on the sc-oalled Mini&er of Interior toprevent him from turning the security forces of the
State inlo a Goatopo-lilte terrorist organizotion. You
refused to do 80, nnd the Minister wns left free to
fi11 the foroes wlth Greok terrorists ünclor the guise
of plainclothes specinl branoh men. I had to oomplain
to you mnny timos thnt Yiorkatzis has been nrming
the Greek membnre of the security forces nnd thousands of EOKA men with henvy nutomotio weapons.
72;.

13

These rumours, 1 had said, were oausing tension in
the oountry and making Turks feel inseoure and
anxious about the future, You refused to pay uny
attention to my warning. 1 hnd to make representntiens to you that Yiorkatzla’ men hsd been moleating
with ever inoreasing force Turkish oitiaens by oubjeoting them and their houses and thelr places Of
work to unlawful and unneceesary searohes 80 that
they were pmvoking, intimidating and terrorizing
them. You again failed to listen to me.
“1 had ter mnke several approaohes toyouo-noerning the non-implementation of those provisions of
the Constitution whioh gave tous oertain rights. 1 had
represented that the Publio Servioe Commission was
wflfully violating the Constitution and aoting arbitrarilp in an insultina mannor. In many instances in
government departients,
and espeoially in the
Foreian Ministry. Turkish offioers were disoriminated agninst and were deliberately pushed aside and
prevented from performing any duties oompatible
with their stntus. You refuséd to tnko nooosenry
aotion to romedy tho situation,
“Three major constitutional orlses ooourred during the life of the Republio: taxation legislation,
munloipalities, and the Cyprus Army.”
70. He thon deals with these separately. 1oan give thls
letter to the Seoretayiat, to be inoorporated in my
speech, beoause it is a long letter. It ends this way:
“1 oannot oonolude this letter without stresoingthe
differenoe of attitude whioh you and 1 adopted in our
approaoh to the problems whioh have oonfrontsd us
sinoe the independenoe of Cyprus. As lllustrated
above, while you did your best to maintain a world
of hatred toward Turks and thus destroy ~11hopes
of ooexistenoe in peaoe andfrlendship, 1,on the other
hand, as you well know, toiled hard to keep alive our
Constitution and to oreate oonditions in whioh the
two oommunitles oould live and Prosper together.

“It is most fltting toquote here from a letter whioh
1 sent to you on 22 Auuust 1962 in an effort to bring
you to thé path of reason and goodwill: ‘Your Beati;
tude ie no doubt aware that the oampaign for the
abrogation of the agreements and for the amendment
of our Constitution by unilateral aotion has reoently
assumed euoh proportions that it is no longer posslhl~
to aooept the rapfd spread of the feeling of uneasiness, inseourlty, distrust, and enmity. As a result,
we have been drngged to the verge of a oonstitutional
orisls, from whloh rune the rfsk of falling into an
abyss of calamity nnd devastation’.
“In the oiroumstnnoes, 1 found myself oompelled
to appeal again to Your Bentitude nnd to request you
to end euoh a oampaign. In thot matter, 1 also said:
‘1 wish to express the vlow that, desplto what haa 80
far been done, reason will preveil and in the end it
will be poeoible to snve Cyprus from plunglnghaadlong lnto a state of chaos, anarohy. and dlsnster. 1
sincerely hope that Your Beatltude wlll riae to the
occasion and abandon such plnns nnd Intentions which

foroes de s6ourit0 et des milliers d’hommes de
1’EOKA nveo des armes automatiques lourdes. De
telles rumours, avais-je dit, or6aient une tension
dans le pays et inquietaient les Turos sur l’avenir.
VOUS avis -refus6 de pr9ter attention A mes avortissemonts. J’ai d0 vous faire des repr6sentations
lorsque les hommes do Yiorkntzis harcelaient de
plus on plus les oitoyons turos en leur imposant
dos perquisitions 1118gales et inutiles de leurs
foyers et de leurs lieux do travail afin do les
provoquer, de les intimider et de les terroriser.
LB encore, vous avez refus8 de m’boouter.
“J’ai dfi vous entretenir B plusieurs reprises
do la non-ex0oution des dispositions de la Constitution qui nous donnaient oortains droits. Je
vous avais fait remarquer quo la Commission
de
la fonotion publique violait h dessein la Constitution
et agissait orbitralromont et de façon insultante.
Dans hier des oas, dans les servioos gouvernementaux et surtout au MinistBre des affaires Btran@res, il y a eu disorimination envers les fonotionnnires turos, qui 6tnient dNib6r6ment 0oart6s et
que l’on ompbohait de slnoquittor de leurs fonotions.
Vous avez refus6 de prendre les mosures n6oessnires pour remadier h cette situation.
“Trois oriaos oonstitutionnolles majeures se sont
produites depuis la or6ntion de la &ublique: la
18nislation sur les fmpBts, les munioipalit6s et
ltarrn8e de Chypre en oit et6 les oauses.i
70. M. KUçUk traite ensuite oes sujets 86pnr$ment,
Je peux donner au SeorBtariat cette lettre, qui est
longue, afin qu’elle soit ins6r6e dans mon disoours.
Elle se termine ainsi:
“Je ne peux oonolure cette lettre sans souligner
l’attitude divergente que vous et moi avons adopt6e
dans notre façon d’nborder les probl&mes auxquels
nous nous sommes heurtl3s depuis l~ind6pendanoede
Chypre, Comme il est d8montr8 oi-dessus, tandis
que vous faisiez de votre mieux pour maintenir une
atmosph8rs de haine ii l%gard des Turos et d&ruire
ainsi tout espoir de ooedstenoe dans la paix et
l’amit& moi, de mon O~N, oomme vous le savez
bien, je m’efforçais de ne pas laisser pbrir notre
oonstitution et de or6er des oonditions telles que les
deux oommunaut& puissent vivre
et prosperer
ensemble.
“Il semble partioulibrement opportun de alter loi
un extrait d’une lettre que je vous ai adressde le
22 aoQt 1963 pour essayer de vous amener sur la
voie de la raison et de la volant& *Votre BBatitude
n’est oertes pas 68316savoir que la oampagne pour
l’abrogation des aooorde et la modifioatfon de notre
oonstitution par une aotion unilat&rale a pris r&emment de telles proportions qulfl n’est plus possible
d’aooeptor la propagation rapide des sentiments
d’inqui&udo, dtins130u.vlt6,de mbfiance et d’inimiti6.
Nous rivons BtB entrafn6e nu bord d’une orise
constitutionnelle, qui risqua de nous pr6oiptter
dans un abtie de malheur et de d6vnstntion.”
“Pans ces oonditions, jo me vois dans l’obligation
de m’adresser de nouveau A Votre BBatitude on lui
demandant de mettre un tormo h oette oampagne,
A oo propos, j’ai bgalement d6olnrb: “Je tiens h
dire qu’h mon avls, malgr8 tout ce qui slost pas66
jusqu’ici, la raison prl3vaudrn et il sorn possible
on definitivo dtemp&oher Chypre de eombror dnns
le ohaos, l~annrohio ot 10d6snstre. PespBre sIn&rement quo Votre BBntitude se montrera b la Irnuteul’

are against
and thus a\
Cyprus. For
that Turks a
ter-commun
the pvovisio
tien’.”

The lettor is 8
71. This was
propaganda rr
world that the
bility of the (
were removec!
of a mere mi
at the meroy c

72. Arohbishc
his people tha
aohieving “En(
told us, on the
up a11our righ
78. We asked
we told him : If 1
are unworkabb
you and oonsid
out mnking an)
they are unwo
We- told him t
But he had no 1
to ohange the (
and thus to be

74. His Minis
the lines of ar
youth was il1
auspioes.
76. His own s
ment of the M~I
for our safety
“With our t
is the symbo
tien and strel
our Qreek oo
fluenoe. we a
oable goal. T
Will remain
annihilation,
Our anolent
Qreek epirit
whfoh fa wate
nRealieing
we shall, de]
forward withc
tt, mnteriali
with tho nat
Cypriot Qree
76. Al1 those t
with under the
lwomise ngreel
on by the most
fmxu’~? How oc

77. About Mal
deolnred that 1

are again& the establiehment of oonstitutional order,
and thus avert the danger whloh 1s looming over
Cypruri. For our part, 1 wieh to emphasize here also
that Turks are in faveur of the solution of oertain inter-communal disputes entirely in aooordanoe with
the pvovieions of the agreement and the Constitution’.”
The letter is signed by Dr. Fazil KUçUk.
71. Thie was the Turkish stand. But the Qreek Cypriot
propaganda maohine was direoted to oonvinoing the
world that the ro0t of a11the trouble waa the unworkabllity of the Constitution: that, if a11 Turkish rights
were removed and the Turka reduoed to the position
of n mere minority, aooepting the position of living
at the meroy of the Qreeks, a11would be well,
72. Arohbishop Makarios, who, on the one hand, told
hla people that he would use the present r@imo for
aohieving nEnosisw, the union of Cyprus with Oreeoe,
told us, on tho other hand, to help him do 80 by gjving
up a11our rights.
73. We asked him to try ta apply the Constitution, and
we told him: If we find out, after this attempt, thnt thore
are unworkable parts, we shall oertainly sit down with
you and oonsider them. But do not diotate to us-without making any nttempt to apply these provisions-that
they are unworkable, beoause we oannot aooept that.
We told him that he muet first prove his gond faith.
But he had no goodfaith toprove. He had one intention:
to ohange the Constitution, to abrogate the agreements,
and thus to be free to move on to “Eno&“.
74. His Minister of Interior organieed the poll0e on
the lines of an EOKA terrorist organieation. Oreek
youth waa illegally armed and tralned under hia
auspioes.
‘76. Hic own statement, dated 29 July 1963,the statement of the Minister of Interior, the person responsible
for our safety and for law and order in Cyprus-ie this :
#With our eyes always turned toward Qreeoe, whioh
ie the symbol of freedom, we exhibited our oiviliz~tion and strength to those who maltreated ua. Keeping
our Qreek oonsoienoe away from every possible influenoe, we always remained devoted to our ineradioable goal. Thie oountry ha8 alwaye been Qreek and
will remain 80. Even though destiny onuse our
annihilation, Cyprua will always remind ua of Oreeoe.
Our anoient monuments Will be a proof of Qreeoe.
Qreek spirit and heroism will gush out of thie earth,
whioh ie watered with blood.
“Realising our responeibilitiee towarde our people
we ehall, depending on the strength of right, stride
furward without hesitation and with determination for
ttAGmntorinllenlion of our aspirations in oonformity
with the national expeotntions nnd drenm of the
Cypriot Greek peop1e.n
76. Al1 those thinga whioh we thought weredone uwny
with under tho Agreemants In order to reaoh a oompromise agreement w8re thus cnrried out nndonrried
011by the most reeponeible people. How oould we feel
Eecura? How oould w0 fael hnppy?
77. About March lDG3, Archbishop Maknrios openly
deolnred thnt 1964 would bo n deoisivoyear. In 1963

des oiraor~etanoeset renoncera A tous plans et
intentionsqui vont contre 1~0tablissement
d’unordre
oonetitutionnel,6oartant ainsi le danger qui plane
sur Chypre, Pour ma part, je tiens A souligner
Egalementque les Turos sont d’avis de r8soudre,
oonform8mentaux dispositionsde l’aooord et de la
ConsMtution,certains des dif%sendsqul s0parent
les 0ommunaut6s.n
La lettre est sign$epar M. Faeil KUçUk.
71. Telle Btait dono la position des Turos. Maia
lrappareil de propagandedesChypriotesgreos oherohait Aoonvainorele mondequetoutes les diffioult$s
provenaient de llimpoesibiliti d’appliquerla Conetitution; autrement dit, si l’on supprimait toue les
droits desTuros, ei l’on imposaitaux Turos le otatut
d’une aimple minorit6 et 8%~ aooeptaientde vivre
A la meroi desOre~s, tout irait bien.
72. L’arohevBqueMakarios, qui, d’unepart, disait A
son peuplequ’il 80 servirait du r0gime aotuelpour
r6altser 1’”Enosis”- l’union de Chyprenveola Oreue
-, nouedemandait,d’autre part, de l’aider Ay parvenir en renonc;antA tous no8droits.
73. Nous lui avons demand8d’essayer d’appliquer
la Constitutionet noualui avonsdit: si nousoonstatons,
aprAs oette tentative, que la Constitution0ompopt.e
des parties inapplicables, noua les examinerons
aesur8mentaveo vou8, Mais ne nous affirmer, pas,
sanu marne essayer d’appliquer 088 dispoeitions,
qutelles sont inapplioables, oar noua ne pouvons
l’admettre, Nous lut avons dit qu’il devait d’abord
prouver sa bonne foi, Mais il ne pouvait le faire,
n%tant pas de bonne foi, Il n’avait qu’une seule
intention: modifier la Constitution, abroger les aooords, pour Btre libre ainsi de passerA l’wEnosia~,
74. Son ministre de ltint8rieur a organis8la polioe
sur le modbled’une organisationterroriste EOKA.
La jeunessegreoqueBtait ill6galementarm8eet formae
aveo sonappui.
76, Voioi oe que d6olarait, le 29 juillet 1969, le
Minietre de l’int&ieur, la personneresponsablede
notre s6ourit.6et du maintiende l’ordre AChypre:
“Les yeux toujours tour& vers laOrAoe, symbole
de la libert0, nous avonemontti notre oivilieation
et notre foroe A oeux qui nous maltraitaient.
Qardant notre oonsofenoegrecqueA l’abri de toute
influenoeposeible,nwa 8omme8toufouredemeurbs
fid8les Anotre obfeotif immuable,Cepayaatoujours
Bt6 greo et reetera grec. Marne ei notre deetin est
d%tre a&ntis, Chypre nousrappellera toujourela
Or&%. No8 monuments
ancien6serontunt&moignage
greo. L’eeprit et ltht3roibmegreos surgiront de
oette terre qui est arroolle de sang.
“Comprenant no6 responeabiliteeenver notre
peuple, comptant sur la foroe du droit, nou8irons
de l’avant absolumentet t%ns h!%itation afin de
r0alieer no8 aspiratione oonform6mentaux aspirations nationaleset au r6ve du peupleohypriote
greo.”
76. Toutes oe6ohoses-18,
qui, peneions-noue,
avaient
d0sormoisdisparu grlloe aux aooordeoonolusen vue
de pnrvonir A un oompromis,continuaientdonod’0tre
miseson pratique pnr les geneles plu8ref~ponsables.
Comment pouvions-nous n0u6 @entir en e&uriUB?
Commentl~uvions-nousBtro hourem?
77. Aux envlrons du moiEdemars 1963,l’nrohovQque
Mnknrloe d&olnrait ouvertement que 1964sornit une

he had foroed
the Càerman
President
of the Constitutlonal
Court
to reslgn
beoause
this professor
of lnternational
law had refused
to glve judgement
against
the Turks
at Creek
diotation.
He chose his law and
hls ronsoienoe.
That
was no1 good enough
for the
Creeks.
Ciroumstanoes
were
created,
and he was
forced
to reslgn.
In an interview
glven on 27 Deoember
1963 by Professor
Porster
to an Assoclated
Press
oorrespondent
in Heidelberg
thls la what he said, very
briefly
and to the point,
He said that he himself
was
oonvlnoed
that if the Covernment
of Cyprus
had been
able to stlok to the Constitution
for five ysars most
of the problems
would have been mastered.
“1 have
told Makarlos
that tlme and again”,
he said. But the
Cyprus
Government
had no intention
of stloking
to the
Constitution,
beoause
stlokingto
the Constitution
would
bring
about trust
and oonfidenoe,
understanding
and
friendship,
and p8ople
would settle down to h normal
life.
That was not what he wanted.
Ho waltted the
people to be separated:
he wanted
people todr&t
eaoh
other 80 that he could guide hls own polloy of a?noqating the Agreements.

78. It is a result
of this predeterminedpolioy
that t11e
polioe pressure
on the TurksofCyprus
inoreasedfrom
day to day. Illegal
searches
beoame
a rule of the day.
Resentment*arose,
naturally.
In the last three years
they had tried several
times by deliberate
provooation
to make
the Turks
oom.o out with an sttaok
on the
Qreeks
SO that they would fi1.d the exouse
to bit ~8
baok with a11 their might. We dld not fa11 lnto that trap,
and they knew we would not do SO. SO, on the nlght of
21 Deoember
1963, they found the exouse.
A Turkish
family
golng to its house was stopped
on the way by
armed
Greek
youngters.
They pretended
to be polioemen.
They never
disolose
their
identlty.
They said
“We are the men of the Ministry
of the 1nterior.a
At
gun point they tried to searoh
the Turkish
women
and
men. The women
refused,
They said! “You must take
UB to the police
station if we are to be searohed.*
Then
people,
hearing
this alteroatlon,
gathered
round,
It le
said
that about fifteen
peraons
gathered
round,
and
while the alteroation
was going on, two Greek offioers,
this
time
in uniform,
oame to the soene,
shooting
their way in and Mlling
a Turkish
womanand
man and
wounding
five other
Turke.
We did our best to keep
this
as a polloe
affair,
and we tried
to looalize
the
matter,
but again that was not good enough for the
Government
of Cypru~.
When this event happened
a11 Greek
polioemen
were oalled to the polloe stations
and fully
armed,
No arma were lssued to the Turks,
and the following
day, when we issued the statsment
by Dr, KUçUk oalling
upon the people to remain
quiet
and oalm,
the Cyprus
Broadoasting
Servi~e,
whioh
again WRS under the Same Mînlstry,
refueed
topublish
lt. They said, ‘We shall publish
onlypolioe
bulletins”,
and we soon began to sec what those bulletina
were to
be. By the evening
tboy started
telling
the world tbat
thnre
waa rebellion
going on in the Nioosia
area and
thnt the security
foroes
were denling
wlth tho rebels.
In fnot. we were
a11 eurrounded
by Greek
polioomen,
hold in by prlvnte
Greek
nrmlos
of whose existence
we did not know until then, and we were nttaoked
witlr
automatic
rifles.

ann6e d0oisive.
En 1963, il avait oblig6 18 PrbSident
allemand
de la Cour
constitutionnelle
h donner
aa
d8mlssion
parce
que ce professeur
de droit
lnternational
avait
refus6
de prononcer
oontre
les Turcs
un $ugement
dlot6 par les Grec&
Le professeur
avait
ohoisl
sa loi et sa oonsolenoe.
Mais cela ne suffisait
nas aux Greos.
On s’est arrang6
Pour qu’il soit obllg6
de d0misslonner.
Dans une %&rview
aooord0e
je
27 d6oembre
1963 par le professeur
Forster
h un
correspondant
de 1~Àssoolated
Press
h Heidelberg,
volol brlbvement
oe qu’il a dit h oe sujet, Il a dbclar6
qu’il 6tnlt lui-m6me
oonvalnou
que si le Gouvernement
de Chypre
avait Bt0 oapable
de respecter
la Constltutlon pendant
olnq ans la plupart
des prohlomes
auraient
6th surmont&%
“Je l’ai dit a Makarios
a plusieurs
reprlsesR,
a-t-il
afflrm6.
Mais
le Gouvernement
de
Chypre
n’avait
pas
la moindre
intention
de s’en
tenir
ft la Constitution,
parce
que le respeot
de la
Constitution
aurait
susult6
la oonflanue,
la aompr&
henslon
et 11amiti6,
et la population
serait
revenue
a
un8 vie normale,
Or, 08 n’est pas ia 08 qu’il voulait,
Il d6slralt
que la population
soit divl&e,
que les
gens se mefient
les uns des autres,
afin qu’il puisse
mener
a bien sa propre
politique
d’abrogation
des
Aooords.
78. C’est
du falt de oette politique
pr86tablle
que
la pression
polici8re
sur les Turos de Chypre
s’est
aoorue
ohaque
jour.
Les perquisitions
1116gales sont
devenues
r8gle g$n&ale.
Naturellement,
le ressentlment
a grandi.
Au oours des trois derni&es
annh,
on a essay8,
a plusieurs
reprises,
au moyen
de
provocations
d6lib6r68s,
de faire attaquer
les Greos
par
les Turos
afin que les premiers
trouvent
une
8xouse
pour
rlpoeter
de toutes
leur6
foroes.
Nous
ne sommes
pas tomb6s
dnns oe plBg8 et ils savaient
que nous ne nous y laisserions
pas prendre.
Aussi,
dans
la nuit du 21 d6oembre
1963, ont-ils
trouv6
18 pr8texte
dont ils avaient
besoin.
Une famille
turque
se rendant
a son domioile a bt6 arr&&e par de jeunes
Greoe
armas
se pr&endant
membres
de la polloe,
Ils n’ont jamais
r6vI316 leur identit&
Ils ont d6olar6:
“NOUS sommes
les agents du Minist8re
de ltlnt9rieur.*
L’arme
B la main, ileont
essay6defoulller
les Turo8,
hommes
et femmes.
LIS femmes
ont r8fUS6
8t Ont
ri3pondu:
“Vous
devez
nous oonduire
au poste de
police,
si nous devons Btre fouill9es.”
Des passants,
entendant
l’alteroation,
firent
Jerole.
On dit guIUne
quinzaine
de personnes
se trouvaient
ainsi r$unies
et,
tandis
que l’altoroation
se poursuivait,
deux
offiolers
greoa,
oett8
fois en uniforme,
arrivbrent
Sur les lieux
et tlr8rent
des coups de feu, tuant deux
Turos,
une femme
et un homme,
et en blessant
oinq
autres,
Nous avons
fait de notre
mieux
pour qUa
oette
affaire
reste
dans les limites
d’une
affaire
polloi8re
et nous avons
essay6
de olroonsorlre
lea
ohoses,
mais
une fois de plus o8la n’a pas suffi aU
Gouvernement
de Chypre,
AprBs cet 8v&ement,
bUa
les polioiers
grecs
ont 6t6 appel6s
dans les divers
oommissarlats
et ont 6th d6ment
arm6s.
Les Turcs
n’ont
pas reçu
d’armes
et, le lendemain,
lorsqUa
nous avons publi6 la dbclaratlon
de M. I<UçUk lançant
un noue1 au oalme.
10s services
de la radiodiffusion
ohyDriote,
toujours
SOUS les ordres
du morne mlnlat8re.
ont refus6
de la diffuser.
Ils ont d6olarb:
aNOUa
pubiierons
seulement
les bulletins
de policen,
a1
nous avone blentot
eu un aperçu
de ces bulletins.
La
soir,
il.8 ont lano
la nouvelle
qu’une r9belllon
aval1
Heu clans In r6gion
de Nicosia
et que les forces da
s6ourlt6
s’oocupalent
dos rebelles.
En fait,
noua
6tlone
oern6s
par des policiers
grecs et gard6s par
Une arm6e
prlv6e
grecque
clont juoqu’h
ce jour noUa

79. The
appeal tc
and te’li
tape waa
Broadcas
believe
ti
in faot w
who dare
taken as
80. 1 ah
suffered.
Our telel
Presiden
hands of
tlnuously
they werc
graph se:
respondel
were con
the fifth 0
Tu&
to
for the 11
appeal
a1
ultimatun
who had
number
t
Surrende]
with mort
that the 1
and took
who were
whioh the
that that \

61. 1 und
a result
0
prevented
and our ir
appreoiatc
here. Tha
look to thi

82. A grc
the movir
one Shot, 1
oontingenl
oUt from
airfields
people we
had done
time the E
and Comm
an admlrl
these
POU
their othe
and bring
the reaso
net to insl
OUI’ own
Council,
a
or GreekE
of bIoodsh
PartiOular

Ldent
ir sa
aterIuros
avait
Iisait
blig6
k3 le
ii un
&l,ré
Iment
3titu:aient
Heurs
zit de
s’en
do la
$pl*B-

nue B

~ulnit*
le 188
piSI

n

des

0

we

s’est
3 sont
sentiknbs,
Bn de
Greos
at une
Nous
vllient
‘lUSSi,

‘rouv6
,urque
leunes
balio%.
olar&
leur.”
ruroa,
:et ont
ate de
M3ant8,
gu%ne
lbrlies
, deux
,v&ent
bt deux
nt cinq
ur que
kfftlire
.re les
uffi au
p, tollB
,divers
Turcs
,orsque
1a11çlll1t

,fZusion
minia“NOUS
IF “, et
;ns. Le
m avnit
Poea do
Go nom
30s par
A.I- noua

79. The next day Dr. KUçUk wns made to record an
appeal tG the Turkish oommunityagainto keepcalm,
and te’ling them that there was a cerise fire. This
tape was taken away and was usedby the Cyprus
BroadcastingCorporationrepeatedlymakingtheTurks
believethat there wasnothingpoingon, whileshooting
in faot was goingon in the Nioosiaarea andany Turk
who dared to approaohNioosia was either killed or
takenas a hostap,
80. 1 shall not elaborate on the horror which we
suffered. For five daysweweretut off from the world.
Our telephones,inoludingthe telephoneof the ViceProsident, were disoonneoted.The radio was in the
handsof the Greeks, and they issuedbulletins continuouslysayiny that a rebellionwasgoingonandthat
they were dealingwith the rebels. The wireless telegraph servioe waain their handsandno foreign oortespondentoouldoometo OUTside of the world as we
were oompletely.surroundedandtut off, It wasafter
the fifth day, after a last appealhndbeenmadeby the
Turks to a11the Guarantor Powersoalling for help
for the last Urne-previously they hadnot heededOU~
appealat all-telling them that we had reoeived an
ultimatum from Mr. Pandelidis,the polioe offioer,
who had started the wholething andwhohadtold his
numbert%voon the Turkish sidethat if we did not a11
surrender they would smashus out from our homes
with mortar bombsby next morning-it wasafter that
that the Turkish oontingentmovedout of its barraoks
andtook a positionas the result of whiohthe Greeks
who were attaokingus hadto leave unfinisheda work
whiohthey were doing thoroughly. It was only after
that that we were saved.
81. 1understandthe rssentmentof Mr. Kyprianouas
a result of the movingout of the Turldsh oontingsnt.It
preventsdthem from oompletinga very thoroughjob,
andour inslstenoeon the Treaty of auaranteemustbe
appreoiatedbeoauseit hassavedus. That is why 1am
here. That is why SOmanythousands
of Turks oanstill
lookto this Counoilwith hops.
82. A greatdealof oomplainthasbeencenteredaround
the moving of this contingent,whiohdid not tire even
oneshot,butit is onreoordthat at the time the Turkish
oontingsntmovedout, the Qreekoontingsntalsomoved
out from the other stde, taking over ohargeof the
airfields and other parts of the Qreek town. These
peoplewere there to maintainlaw andorder, andthe!
haddoneSOwithout firing a singleshot. In the meantime the British foroes cameandtookover the oontrol
andcommandof thesetwo oontingsnts.Theyaredoing
nn ndmirnhlejob. 1 think they deserve thanks. It 1s
these Powers whioh hnve neededfurther help from
their other allies in order to maintainpeaoein Cyprus
andbring sanity nndreasol.to a11of us, 1 think that is
the renson we nrè a11here-not to changeTreaties,
not to insist on conditionswhichweshallInter usefor
OUI’own ends. Thnt is the urgent work before this
CWIOII, andthnt fa why 011Cypriots in Cyprus, Turks
Or Oreeks, who wantpeaoeandwhowant a cessation
Ofbloodshedlook to the Councilfor n decisionon that
particulnr issue.

ignorions ltexistenoe, et nous avons et6 attaqu6s
avec des armesautomatiques.
79. Le lendemain,M. KUçUka 6tB oblig0 d’adresser
un nouvel appel Il la communaut6turque pour qu’elle
garde le calme, lui disant qu%an
oessez-le-feuBtait
intervenu. Cetto d6claration enregistr0e sur bande
magn6tique a 6t6 emport$e et utilisbe B maintes
reprises par la radiodiffusion chypriote pour faire
croire aux Turos que rien ne se passait,alors qu’en
r6alit8 la fusillade oontlnualt dans la r6gIon de
Nfoosia et que tout Turo qui se hasardait Zten
approcherBtait soit tu& soit pris oommeotage,
80. Je ne m’6tendrai pas sur les atrooit6s quenous
avons oonnues.Pendantoinq jours, nousavons 13t4
ooup6sdu reste du monde.Noslignes t616phonIques,
y compris cellesdu Vice-Pr&ident, nefonetionnaient
plus. La radio btait aux mains des Qreos, qui publiaient oonstammentdes bulletins annonçantqu’il y
avait une r8bellIon et qu’ils s’oooupaientd’y mettre
fin. Il9 oontrôlnient Bgalementles transmissions
tI316graphiques
et auoun correspondantBtranger ne
pouvait venir ohee nous: nous Btions entibrement
oern6s et ooup0sde tout. Ce n’est qu’au oinquibme
jour,
aprbs un dernier appol lano par 16~1 Turcs h
toutes les Puissanceagarantes pour demanderde
l’aide pour la dernibre fois - oelles-oi n’avaientpas
tenu compte de notre pr0o6dentappelleur deolarant
que nous avionsreçu un ultimatumde M, Pandelldia,
fonotionnairede la polioe, qui avait d6olenoh6toute
l’affaire et avait dit B son adjoint du 08t6 turo que
si nousne nous rendionspas tous ils nousferaient
sortir de nos maisonssousle feu des mortiers le
lendemninmatin -, oe n’est donoqu’aubout de oinq
jours que le oontingentturc est sorti de sesoasernements et a pris position, de façon telle queles Greos
qui nousattaquaientont Btt3emp8oh6sdemenerBbien
un travail exoellement oommeno8.Ce n’est qu’alors
quenousavons6t0 sauv6s.
81. Je comprends le ressentiment Bprouv6 par
M. Kyprianou du fait de la sortie du oontingentturo.
Cette inItiatIve ne leur a pas permis d’aohever la
tâoheentreprise, et notre insistanoepour faire appliquer le Trait6 de garantie doit &re appr0oi6e,paroe
que 08 trait6 nous a sauv6s. C’est pourquoi je suis
ioi; olest aussi pourquoitant de milliers de Turos
peuventencoretourner vers oeoonsellunregardplein
d’espoir.
82. On s’est beauooupplaint de l’intervention de os
contingent,qui n’a pas m6mstIr6unooupde feu, mais
olest un fait auesf que lorsquele oontingentturc est
sorti de sescasernementsle contingsntgreo ena fait
autantet a oooup6les a6rodromeset d’autres parties
de la ville grecque. Ces foroes Btaient oharg6esde
maintenir l’ordre publio et l’ont fait ssnstirer un
seul ooupde feu. Dansl’intervalle, les forces britanniquesBtaientvenueset avaient pris le oontrbleet le
oommandementde oes deux oontingents.Elles ont
fait un trnvnil admirableet je crois qu’ellesm6ritent
nos remerciements,Ce sont ces puissanoesqui ont
besoinde l’aide de leurs autres alli8s pour maintenir ,
la paix h Chypre et nousapporter h tous le bon sens
et la raison, Je crois que telle est la raison pour
laquellenoussommestousici - et nonpour modifier
des traitf3s ou pour insister sur des oonditionsque
nousutiliserons pluy tard k nos fins propres. Cost
ia le travail urgent qui s%nposea ce co~mil,et
C’est pourquoitous les Chypriotesh Chypre, turos et
grecs, qui souhaitentla paix et veulent queprennent
fin les effusions de sang, attendentdu Conseilune
d0cisitn sur cette questionparticulL8re.

83. There is one very important faotor whiohIshould
like the Seourity Council to understand. Innooent and
unarmed people may die in a fight: that may be the
result of any fight and it oan be explained. But in our
oase, women and ohildren have been Mlled deliberately
and brutally in their houses. Sevenhundred people were
taken as hostages by the so-oallod security foroes. 1
have before me a Greek publication, Cyprus Today,
Supplement No, 2, November-Deoember 1963: the
aotual date of the issue is 3 January 1964. This is a
publication of the Greek Communal Chamber. 1 shall
read out part of paragraph 13, as follows:

83. Il est un faoteur important que je voudrais que
le Conseil de s6ourit6 oomprenne.Des innooentset
des gensnon armas peuventmourir dansun oombat.
C’est lh le r$sultat de toute bataille et oela peut
s’expliquer; mais, aansnotre oas,desfemmeset des
enfants ont $t$ tu& d6lib$r6ment et brutalement
dans leurs maisons, Sept oe\,ts personnesont Bt$
emmen$esoommeotagespar les pr6tenduesforces
de s8ourit0. J’ai Ih une publicationgreoque,CYPZWS
Tokay” (SupplBmentNo 2, numt%rode novembredboembrelB63), parue le 3 janvier 1964,publication
produite par la Greek CommunalChamber, et je
voudrais vous lire un passagedu paragraphe13:
“On the question of hostapes. IMr. Yorgadfisl said
. . . “Sur la auestiondesotages.IM. Yorgadjisl adit
the Turkish leaders have bëen.i&ormedoffi&aily by
que les dirigeants turos - okt . BtB offioiéll&nent
the President of the Reaublio that aaaroximately 700
informas par le PrBsident de la RBpubliqueauo
TUrkiFh oitizens have tieen evaouatèd frOm areas in
700 oitoyèns turos environ avaient èt6 BvaoüBs
whioh fieroe fighting was taking plaoe and have been
des r$gions oil les oombatsfaisaient rage et qu’ils
removed and housed in Greek sohools in safe
avaient 8tB log6s dans des I3oolesgrecques en
are88 . . . . n
lieu sQr . . .”
84. New, the information oame to us offioially after
84. Or, on nous a informbs offioiellement apr8sle
the oease-fire that they had approximately 700people.
oessee-le-feuqu’il s’agissaitd’environ 700personnes,
When we demanded the release of these people, we
Lorsque nous avonsr6olam6leur lib&%tion, on nous
a dit qu’ils avaient 6tl3 emmen6spour leur propre
were told that they had beentakenfor safety purposes.
Only 634 were returned to us. We asked what had
s8ourit8. Cinq oent trente-quatre seulementont 8t6
lib0r08. Nous avons alors demand0oe qu’il 8tait
happe& to the others. The answer waa: we have no
others: that is the number we had. But there were
advenu des autres, La r0ponse a 0t6 la suivante:
nous n’en avons pas d’autres, otest Ih le nombrede
British eye-witndsses who saw some of these hostages
lined up and shot. Later we saw several of them
personnesquenousavions,Maisdestbmoinsooulaires
buried in mass graves. fully olothed, women
and britanniques ont vu fusiller des otages. Plus tard,
ohildren inoluded.As 1bave said, the information oame
nous en avons daoouvert plusieurs, y compris des
to us offioially that the number was approximately 700.
femmes et des enfants, enterrbs tout habill6s dans
des fosses communes.Commeje l’ai dit, on nous
In any oase, 6 responsible seourity f&oe should have
known the number of people they had removed; we
avait d8olar$ officiellement que le nombredespersonnesemmeneesBtait approximativementde 700.
should not have been given an approximate number.
We have asked what happened to the missing. It is no
En tout &at de oause,desforoes de s6ourit8pleineuse insisting that the total number was delivered to
ment responsablesauraient cl0 oonnai’trele nombre
us, We want ta know what happened to the missing,
des personnesemmenees
et l’on n’aurait pasd0 nous
the people who did not return to their homes, +o have
oommuniquerun ohiffre approximatif. Nous avons
not been found, who have vanished. Their fam TPare
demandaoe qu’étaient devenusles manquants,oar il
entitled, in the name of humanity, to know ul least
est parfaitement inutile de nousdire quetous ont 8t@
where the graves of these people are.
lib&$s. Nous voulons savoir oe qu’il est advenude
OBUXqui ne sont pas revenus dansleurs foyers, qui
n’ont pas BtB retrouv!&, qui ont disparu. Leurs
familles ont le droit, au nomc@la oharit6 humaine,
de savoir au moins oQ se trouvent les tombesdes
disparus.
85. Turks that were il1 have been removed from the
86. Des maladesturos ont &6 enlev& desh8pitaux.
hospitals. They have vanished. We want toknow where
Ils ont 6galementdisparu, Nousvoulons savoir ob.
they are, or at least where their graves are. In a11 ils sont, ou du moins oonnaftre l’emplacementde
humanity, we are entitled to know.
leurs tombes, Au nom de la oharit6 humaine,nous
avonsle droit de le p1yoir.
86. Of course, this is not one of the Security Counoil’s
86. Bien entendu,tout oelan’entre pasdansle cadre
de la tllohe du Conseilde s4curit8. mais olest ce!%ntasks, but it is materlal to the issue before the Counoil.
It helps the Counoil to understand why WR insist on dant un point important au regard de la questioi que
disoute actuellementle Conseil. Il aide le ConseilIt
these treaties, why we insist on these rights. Without
them we shall just vanish.
oomprendrepourquoi nousinsistonssur oestrait&%
pourquoi ~OUF:
insistons sur nos droits. Qu’ils dlsparaissent et nous n’avons plus qu’& disparaftre
nousaussi.
87. .After the cease-fire and after Fore@ corree87. A@s le cessez-le-feuet upr8i; quele6 oorre8ponde& ca. tnto our sector andthe horror wasdis- pondant6Etrangers furent venus dans notre secteur
olosed,thel 18 no morefighting in Nicosia.But it is et que toutes les atrocit68 eurent et6 r&Ues, il
very significunt that the housesof the 700peopleand n’y a plus eu de oombntsdans Nioosia. Mais il est
of other personswhohadfled from the Greeksectors tr8s significatif que les maisonsdes 700personnes
were completely destroyed, eithor gutted by fire or dont nous avons par16 et d’autres personnesqui
pulled down by bulldozers. This happeneda11over avaient quitt8 les seoteurs grece aleut BtB comCyprus. Wherever the Turks hadto leavetheirbomes, platement d&ruites, soit qu’elles aient btl3d0vor8es
thosehomeswere guttedor pulleddown.
par les flammes, soit qu’elles aient BtE raseesper
.8

88. Th
to bow
to leav
Cyprus
mental1
gunsin
a longt

89, W:
whioh1
peopIe7
which \
someth
penden
Turks :
in Cypr
penden
by the ,C
90. As
followir
for a n
seoretI
the res
invalid,
good. ?
men: dc
go awa!
their ht
argue t
the Seo
onthat

91. 1t
1 may t
nowthe
COunOi
92. Thc
now litt
normal,
signedC
my info:
to be UI
running
medioin
as far
plaoes,
the quef
in huma
have liv
meroy c
mere m
400yell
hrgnin
Us?T~RI
today.

93. 1t
Greeks
Crimina

1 que
ts et

nbat.
peut
t des
ment
t &6
mm3
E
ation
3t je
a dit
ment
z quo
%OU68
@‘ils
18 en
aa le
nnes.
nous
ropre
}t 6t6
I Btait

Vante:
re de
aires
) tard,
9 des
dans

noue
) per700.
Bile-

bmbre
t nous
avons
oar
il
ht 0t4
nu de
SD qui
Leurs
naine,
bs des

litaux.
sir ofi
,nt de
nou8
‘cadre
iepen>n que
H3eil
B
y$

rnftro
0lrei33cteur
h3, il
il est

88. The meosage which this teaches ue is: you have
to bow to our will or to die if you defy us-or you have
to leave Cyprus for good. There is no room for us in
Cyprus. 1 cannot say who is behind this, but this is the
mentality of the psople who hold the power and have the
guns in their hands today, and stand there to do SOfor
a long time to oome.
89. Will the Seourity Counoil, thon, adopta resolutlon
whioh will leave us oompletely at the meroy of these
poople? It is hald that in order toaohieve a resolution
whioh will be aooeptable to the Cyprus Government
aomething must be said about the integrity and independenoe of Cyprus, ‘I%ey eay: in order to make the
Turke feel seoure, let us have a United Nations foroe
in Cyprus, but tha resolution muat state that the independenoe and integrity of Cyprug are to be maintained
by the Security Counoil.
90. As we sec it, the triok in suoh a position i~1the
following. The United Nations foroe will go to Cyprus
for a matter of three mont\%, But they bave made no
eeoret of the faot that they will immediately interpret
the resolution as rendering the Treaty of Guarantee
invalid, and that resolution will be in their hands for
good. Thus, for three montha they will tel1 their gunmen: do not shoot. Then the United Nations foroe will
gu away, and, with the Seourity Counoil resolution in
their hands, they will defy the guarantor Powere and
argue that the Treaty of Gunrantee is invalid beoauae
the Seourity Counoil has adopted this resolution. And
on that basis they will deal with us AWthey please.
91. It may be said that 1 am a very suspioiou~ Turk.
1 may have been suspioious before the inoidents, but
now the faots have oonfirmed what 1 have just told the
Counoil.
92. The other day Mr. Kyprianou said that there fs
now little or no aotivity in Cyprus, that everything is
normal, that in some parts Greeks and Turks have
signed deolarations that they will keep the peaoe. Well,
my information from Dr, KUçUk is that Turks oontinue
to be under a state of siege. In some plaoes they are
running short of food. In some plaoes they cannot get
medicine, No one cari go to work. Life is at a standstill
as far a8 the Turks are ooncerned. In 8omb small
PlaceB, there may be Turka working. But that is not
the question. The question is: are we entitled to live
in human dignity as free people in a land where we
have lived for 400 years, or are we to be put at the
meroy of the Qreek Cypriots and to be treated as a
mere minority when we have never had that statua in
400 yaars?
Aye WC to be trlclretl out of our I’ight to
burgain
equally just because they have killed some of
us? That is the main iesue before tha Socurity
Council
today.

ionnee

)H qui
compr6es
k?i par

It must
not be forgotton that it wa6 becnuse
Greeks feared partition and Tu& feured C;reelt discrimination and eventuol union wlth Greece that theee

93.

10s bulldozers. Il en a 6t6 ainsi dans toute l’fle.
Chaque fois que les Turcs ont do quitter leure
foyers, leurs maisons ont 6t6 r6duites en oendros ou
ras6es.
88. L’enseignement que l’on veut nous donner est le
suivant: voua devez vous incliner devant notre volont
ou mourir, ou bien vous devez quitter Chypre pour
toujours. Il n’y a pas de place pour noue dans l’fle.
Je ne sais pfls qui est derribre tout celu, mais telle
est la mentalit6 de oeux qui aujourd’hui d6tiennent
le pouvoir et ont les armes A la main et qui ont
l’intention de aontinuer h agir ainsi pendant longtemps
enoore.
89. Le Conseil do sbourit6 adoptera-t-il alors une
r6solution qui nous laisaorait entibrament h la meroi
de aes gens? Onestime que pour obtenir une r6sohltion
aocoptable pour le Gouvernement de Chypre il fnut quY1
y soit question de l’ind6pendnnoe et de l%~t6grlt6 de
Chypre. Ile disent: pour que les ‘I’urOs 80 sentent en
s6ourlt6, anvoyons une foroe des Nations Unies h
Chypre: mnis la rbsolution doit prboiser que l’indQpendanoe et l’int6grit6 de Chypre doivent 6tre maintenues par le Conseil de ebourit6.
90. L’artiflae d’une telle position est le suivant: lu
foroe dos Nations LI~&Sse rendrait a Chypre pour
tu-10 p6riode de trois mois environ, maio ils ne 80
cront pas oaohbs pour dire quYls interpr6teraient
imm6diatemont la r0solution oomme rendant le TraitB
de garantie invalide et que la rbsolution serai1 entre
ltiure maine pour de bon. Ainsi, pendant trois mois, ils
donneront des ordre8 pour qu~auoun aoup de feu ne
soit tir6. Puis la force des Nations Unies quittera
Chypre et, la r6solution du Conseil de s6ourit6 en
main, ils agiront au m6prie dee Puissanoee garante8
et pr6tendront que le Trait6 de garantie n’est plus
valide depuis ltadoption de oette r6solution par le
Conseil de s6ourit6, Partant de 08 point de vue, ils
noua r6servaront le sort qui leur semblera bon.
91. On dira peut-6tre que je suis un Turo tr8s
m6fiant. J’ai pu 6tre m6fiant avant les inoidents,
mais maintenant les faits ont oonfirm6 oe que je
viens de dire au Conseil.
92. M. Kyprianou nous a dit l’autre jour qu’il y avait
peu ou pas d’aotivlt6s terroristes
maintenant h
Chypre, que tout 6tait normal, que dans oertaines
parties de l’fle lee QreoP et les ‘ruros avaient sign6
des d6olarations selon 1c;quelles ils maintiendraient
la paix. or, les renseignements que je tiens de
M. KUçUk indiquent que les Turos sont toujours
maintenus dans un Btat de si6ge. En oertains endroits,
ils oommenoent h manquer de nourriture; end’autres,
les m6dloaments font d6faut. Personne ne peut aller
travailler. La vie s’est entibrement arr6t6e pour les
Turcs. En oertains endroits, quelques Turcs travaillent peut-8tre encore, mais lh n’est pas la question.
La questfon est celle-oi: avon8-nous le droit de vivre
dans In dignit6, en tant que peuple libre, sur une
terre 011nous vivons depuis 400 nn8, ou va-t-on ~IOUEI
laisser h la meroi des Chypriote; grcas et ~IOUEI
trniter oomme une simple minoritb, alors qne noue
nt~von8

jnnmis

ou oe statut

pendant

400 ans? Vn-t-oll,

par la ruse, ~OUB fnire perdre notre droit h trnlter h
6galit6 simplement paroe qu’on u tu6 certaine d’entre
nous? C’est lh la principale qcleetion dont le Conseil
de s6curltb est saisi aujourd’hui,
93, Il ne faut pas oublier que c’est par00 que la8
Grecs craignaient le partage et quo les Turos avaient
peur de In Iliscrlmination et du rnttnchanmnl final

gua.rantees had to be worked into the Constitution. It
these guarantees are now removed, there will be no
authority whatever to rule out the union of Cyprus with
Greece. They may sny, “Let us enter into another
treaty”. But the assurances of people who have defied
treaties within a few days of signing them oertainly
cannot satisfy us.
94. In spite of thcse guarantees we have suffereddisorimination, we have suffered indignity, andfinnlly we
have suffered the killings and the destruotion of
property. They now want you to tel1 them, “Bravo for
a11 this, you have done well”, and they want you to
honour them by giving thsm a free licence to argue
that the treaties are invalid and, under this illusion,
continue to subjugate the mrks, take awny oui’
oonstitutional rights and, if neoaasary, resort to
furt.her violenoe.

h la GrBoe que oes garanties ont dQ Qtre insorites
dats la Constitution. Si l’on supprime maintenant 08s
gnranties, rien n’emp&ohera le rattachement de Chypro
h la GrBoe. Ils diront peut-8tre: “Conoluons un autre
traite”; mais les assuranoes de ceux qui ont contrevenu
aux trait66 quelques jours seulement apr8s les avoir
sîgnBs ne saurnient nous inspirer oonfinnoe.
94, En d6pit de oes garanties, nous avons et6
victimes d’actes de dlsorimlnation, nous avons subi
des traitements indignes, et enfin nous avons vu
les n8tres massaorbs et leurs biens d&.ruits. Ils
voudraient maintenant que vous leur dloiez: “Bravo
pour tout oela, vous avez fort bien agi”, ot Ils voudraient que vous reconnaissiez leur merite en les
laissant libres de Pr&endre que les trait68 sont sans
valeur et, grhoe h oette illusion, de oontinuer h subjuguer les Turos, h supprimer nos droits oonstitutionnels et, si naoessaire, a recourir enoore une fols
a lu vlolenoe.
96. We a11 stand for the rule of law; there is a rule
96. Nous sommes tous en faveur du r&ne de la
of law in Cynrus, that is the Constitution. If it is
lf3rrnlit6. La lbrralit6 h Chur>re, olest la Constitution.
neoessary thii it ihould be ohanged it oan be ohanged Si1 est n&oes&ire que la-constitution aoit modifibe,
only by nrgument and by maklng the otl.>r side seo
elle ne peut 1’6tre qu’d. Ia suite de pourparlers et en
your point of view, It cnnnot be changed by killing,
faisant comprendre son point de vue h l’autre partie,
by massacre: it cannot be ohnnged in this way.
On ne peut la changer par des tueries, par des
massaores; oe n’est pas ainsl qu’il faut agir.
96. Before 1 oonolude-and 1 apologize for having
96, Avant de oonolure - et je m’exouse d’avoir
taken up SO muoh of your time: time is valuable for
abus6 de votre temps, U>Itemps prI3oieux pour vous,
pour moi et pour ma oommunaut6 -, je voudrais
you, for me and for my oommunity-1 should like to
deal with one or two points which Mr. Kyprianou
traiter d’un ou de deux points soulev6s par M. Kypriadealt with. HO has shaken in his hand sinoe the London
HOU. Celui-ci, depuis la r6union de Londres, a brandi
meoting some seoret and mysterious doouments
des documents seorets et myst6rieux endlsant que les
stating that the Turklsh leadershlp has put its signadirigennts turos avalent appos6 leur signature a
ture to oertain doouments whioh prove beyond any
oertains doouments qui d8montralent, sans l’ombre
doubt that there was a plot between the Turkish
d’un doute, l’existenoe d’un complot entre les dlrileadership and the Turkish Government in order to
geants luros et le Gouvernement turc aux fins de
partition the island and he has read parts of this
partager llfle, et il u lu des extraits de oes documents.
dooument. In London 1 ohallenged him to produoe these
A Londres, Je l’ai mis au d6fl de produire oes dooudoouments for the pub110to read as a whole and to
ment8 afin que le pub110puisse les lire en entier et de
prove in whose oustody they were at the time they oame
prouver entre les mains de qui ils se trouvaient au
into their hands-who gave it to them, when they got
moment oh ils sont parvenus en sa possession: je
them, who signed them. Allthesethings must be proved
voulais qu’il dise qui les lui avait donn68, quand on
les lui avait donnes, quelles signatures ils portaient.
before documents oan be discussed. 1 challenged this;
Tout oela doit 8tre prouva nvnnt que oes doouments
nothing was produoed. Now 1 ohallenge again. If they
got these doouments before these inoidents, then they
puissent faire l’objet d’une disoussion. J’ai lano oe
should have done their duty as a responsible Governdefi, qui n’a pas &6 relev6. Je lance oette fols enoore
le m6me d8fi. S’ils se sont proour6 oes doouments
ment and taken some action against these people. If
they m>t them after the incidents-and 1 think that
avnnt les lnoldents, ils auraient dQ, en tant que gouva; their oase in London-then they must tel1 us
vernement responsable, agir et prendre des sanotions
contre oes gflns. Slls les ont reçus apr8s les inoiwhere and how they got them, They must produoe
dents - et Je pense que tel 6talt le oas B Londres -,
proof and then rest on it. But the faots disprove the
ils doivent nous dire oà et quand 11s les ont reçus.
document:.
Ils doivent prouver l’origine des doouments et ensuite
s’en servir. Mais les faits sont oontraires aux dooument6 en question.
97. Si les leaders turos B Chypre oomplotalent
97. If the Turkish leadership in Cyprus was involved
ainsi aveo les dirigeants de la Turquie pour le
in suoh a plot for partition in conjunction with the
partage de llfle, les combats qui 08 sont d6roulês
leaders in ‘I’urkey, the two months’ fjght in Cyprus
pendant deux mois B Chypre ne se seraient prie terwould not have ended in the way it did; the faots in
mln6s comme ils se sont termint3s. La situation a
Cyprua would not be as they rire today: some Turks
Chypre ne serait pas ce qu’elle est nujourdlhui;
armed mostly with shotguns and a11 Greelts armed
on n’y verrait pas des Turcs arm6s pour la piupnrt
thoroughly: Turks shrieking for hclp from Turkey
de fusils de chasse et tous les Grecs fortement
and Turkey, adamant to corne in without being sure
thut n wholesale massacre is taking plncs nnd thon a11 armes; des Turos appelnnt dbsesp6r6ment la ‘I’urquie
it does le to give a warning nnd tiothing more: it 1s h l’aida, 1~ Turquie refusant rbsolument d’intervenir
tant 4pWle
n’et3t
pas &Ire qu%m miu36aore g0n5rnla
a cal1 to the Guarnntor Powors to take a hand.
lieu; ot, m&mealors, elle ae oontentede lanoarun
avertissement et rien de plus. C’est un appel aux
Puisannoesgnrantes pour qu’elles viennent& l’aide.

98. Do these faots
between the Turki
Government?Do thc
such a plot? Therc
wanted to abrogate
orook, by murder
provedlts oase.Tha

99. Today no Cons
Noneof the provisil
oompliedwith or ap
have been oreated
oommunitieshave f8
Mr. Kyprianou that
instruotionsfrom DI
to havethis dlsouss
The Oreek gunmen
other slde and the
But with duerespeo
or that he oan 01~
humanitythat he oa
tint he oan fully re
Counoll.Ho oannot.

100. Mr. President
giving me this hear
youour slde of the s
and1 thankyou for y
helpto me andit will
as 1hopewhat I have
in your deliberating

101. The PRESIDE
for the statement 1
membersof the Cou
oontainedin hls sts
serves.
Mr. Denktas witbd!

102. Mr. LIU (Chir
18almost redundan
is fraught with dan@
olear that the chain
oember,if allowedtc
the peaoe of the SI
with it the peaceof t

103. As the organ r
interndtional psaoe,
boundto bring lts
orisis and pave the
the basloissuesthat
communfties on th
Admittedly, thfs 1sn
have taken plaoein
oubide the Counoil
apart are the positio
We niseflll uwnrt, of
tary-General in exp
undpencefulsettlen
COUI~C~~ on 26 Febn
enrnestdesiro on tl
a peacefulsolution,
011 8ome Issuee, whl
sisted.

93. Dc these faots prove the exietenoe of a plot
between the Turkieh leadership and the Turkish
Government?Do they prove that we were ready for
suoha plot? There was one eide in Cyprus whioh
wantedto abrogate the Agreementsby hook or by
orook, by murder if neoessary, and that side has
provedits oae.8.That is the oasebefore you.

93. Ces faits prouvent-ils ltexistence d’un oomplot
entre les leadersturos de Chypre et leGouvernement
turo? Prouvent-ils que noua Btionspr&s pour un tel
oomplot? Il y avait B Chypre une partie qui voulait
abroger les traites par tous les moyens,y oompris
le meurtre si n6oessair6,et cette partie a montra Oa
elle voulait en venir. C’est l’affaire qui voua est
soumise.

99. Today no Constitution is in effect in Cyprua,
Noneof the provisions of the Constitutionare being
compliedwith or applied.In the oiroumstanoeswhioh
have been oreated it oannotbe applied. SOthe two
communitieshave fallen apart. It is not t’.a fault of
Mr, Kyprianou that he hae not been able to get full
instruotionsfrom Dr. Kiiçtlk andthe TurkishMini&ers
to havethie disoussedfully in theMinisterial Counoil.
The Greek gunmenwill not let the Turks gc to the
other side and the ministerial function 1s finished.
But with due respeotto him, 1 do not think he oan say
or that he oan olaim in justioe and fairneas and
humanitythat he oan represent the Turkloh voioe,
thnt he oan fully represent the Turklsh side in thls
Counoil.Ho oannot.

99. AujourdQui, il n’y A pas de ocnstitution en
vigueur & Chypre. Aucune des dispositions de la
Constitution n’est respeot4eni appliqu6e.Dan8 les
oonditione qui ont 6t6 orf3$es,il n’est pas possible
de l’appliquer. Aussi lesdeuxoommunautes
sont-elles
s6parbes.Ce n’est pas la faute de M. Kyprianou s’il
n’apurecevoir des instructionsoompl8tesdeM. KtiçUk,
ni la faute des ministres turos si oette questionn’a
pu &re disoutee pleinement au Conseil les
ministres. Les tueurs grecs ne permettent.pas aux
Turos de penetrer dansl’autre oamp,et les fonotions
minist$rielles sont r6duites il nbant. Mais, aveo tout
le respeot que je lui dois, je ne pensepasquV1
puissedire ou qu’il puisseaffirmer en toute justice,
en toute 6quit6et en toute humairit& qu’il reprgsente
la voix turque, qu’il reprgsente pleinementle point
de vue turc en oe Conseil.Il ne le peutpas.

100, Mr. President, 1 thank you mOittalnoerely for
glving me this hearing. 1 have done my best to tel1
youour sideof the story. 1thankyou for your patienoe
and1 thankyou for your kindnees.It hasbeena great
helpto me andit will bea great help to my oommun’ty,
aa1hopewhat 1hnvejusttold you may be a helpto you
in your dellberating and in reaohingyour deoisione.

100. Je vous remeroie tri38sin&ement, Monsieurle
PrBsident, de m’avoir aooord6cette audience.J’ai
fait de mon mieux pour vous donner notre point de
vue. Je VOUEremeroie de votre patienceet de votre
bon& Cela m’a 6t4 fort utile et ce sera fort utile
A ma oommunaut6,oar j’espBre que oe queje viens
de vous dire voua aidera dansvos do6rations et
vos dgoisions.

101. The PRESIDENT:1 wish to thank Mr. Denktas
for the statement he has made. 1 am sure that the
membersof the Counoilwill examinethe information
oontainedin his statementwith the attention it deaervea.
Mr. Denktaswithdrew.

101. La PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais): Je
remeroie M. Denlctasde la dfiolaratîon qu’il vient
de faire. Je suis sdr que les membresdu Conseil
examineront les renseignementsoontenusdans 80
d6olarationaveotoute l’attention qu’ils ml3ritant.
M Denktasse retire.

102. Mr. LIU (Chino): At this stageof the debatelt
is almost redundantto say that the orisis in Cyprue
1sfraught with dangerouapotentialitiee. It is a11too
olear that the ohain of eventswhiohstarted last Deoember,if allowedto go on unoheoked,oouldthreaten
the peaoe of the sensitive Mediterraneanarea and
with it the peaoeof the world.

102. M. LIU (Chine)[traduit de Panglais]: A oeetade
des d6bats, il est presque superflu de dire quela
orise de Chypre est lourde de dangers. Il n’est que
trop Evident que la e6rie d%Wnementsqui a oommeno en d6cembre dernier, si elle n%tait pas
enrayBe, risquerait de menaoer la paix dan6 la
rbgion de la M&iterranBe, qui est particuH?irement
sensible,et dansle reste du monde.

of
103. As the organrespcnsiblefor the maintenanoe
international peaoe, the Security Counoil is duty
boundto bring its influenoeto bear on the Cyprua
oriais and pave the way for an eventualsettlementof
thebasioiseuesthathaveturnedtheGreekandTurkish
oommunitieson that ialand into warring oamps.
Admittedly,this is no easytaek. The disouseionsthat
havetaken place in the paat ten dnys, both inside and
outaidethe Council ohnmher,bave shownhowwidely
aparture the pceitionstakenby thopartiesooncerned.
Werire flll nwareof the untiring efforts of the Saoretary-General in oxploring the pcs~ibilitiesof a Swift
undpencefulsettlement. In bis statementbeforo the
Councilon 26 February, he told w thnt there wa8nn
earnestdesire on the pnrt of a11concernedto seek
a peacefulsolution, nndthnt there hadbeenprogress
on 8omeissuert,whilo certain basic differencespersieted.

103. En tant qVorgane responsabledu malntien de
la paix internationnle, le Conseilde s&ouriU n le
devoir d’user de son influence dans la crise de
Chypreet de pr6parer la voie gunrgglementEventuel
des queetionefondamentalesqui ont divi.4 lee oommurmut& greoque et turque de cette fie en campe
ennemis,Certes, oe n’est pas une t&ûhefacile. Les
disousaionsqui ont eu lieu AU oour8des 10 derniers
jours, tant nu Conseil qu’en dehors, ont montr6 h
quel point 108positionsrespectivesdesparties interesoeeo Btaient 6loignBes l’une de l’autre. Nous
sommestous au oOUrantdes efforts inlaosablesdbploy6s par le SeorBtnlre g0nt3ral pour Btudier les
posaibilit6s d’un reglementrapide et paoifique.Dana
In d6olnration qu’il n faite AU Conseille 26fevrier,
il noue A dit que tW3 les int6rese68 manifeetnient
le d68ir einobrede reoheroherune solutionpaoifique
ot quo deo progrba nvniont 6t4 r0alis6s sur divers
points, malgr6 la persistancedeoertainesdivergences
fcndamentale8.

21

’

104. 1 take thls as a hopeful note. Any progress, however small, le b be weloomed, even if lt ls no more,
at the present stnge, than a olarlfloatlon of positions.
The Councll must oontlnue to searoh, in the words of
the Seoretnry-Clenernl, for “a reasonable and praotloal way out of what now appears to be an lmpesaeN.

l

104. Je veux voir en oette d6olaratlon un signe dles108. There ls, of
polr. Tout progr88, pour petit qu’il Boit, doit 8tre le
nnequltableandJu
bienvenu, marne s’il ne s’agit gui3re plus, dans l%tat
mentof a medlator
cotuel des ohoses, que d’une mise au point des poslhns no hesltntion
tlons respeotlvss. Le Conseil doit oontinuer de rebelleve that an lr
oheroher - pour reprendre les paroles du SeorBtalre
asstst in brlnglng
gfW3ral - une solution raisonnable et pratique qui nous
to enablethe two
permette de sortir de 08 qui semble @Itremalntenunt
from two of the wo
une impasse.
togetherin the buil
106. What has made the Cyprus criais SOdlffloult to
106, Ce qul a rendu la orlae de Chypre ai difficile
B rBsoudre, o’ost, me semble-t-il, l’extr6me comresolve ls, 1 bslleve, the immense oomplexlty of the
109. This 1s a til
issues lnvolved. There is, in the first plnoe, the stub- j plexit6 des questions en jey, Il .y . a tout d’abord 08
1 belleve wlth the
fait in6luotable quIa Chypre vivent cieux oommunnut6s
born faot that there are in Cyprus two dlstlnot oomearnestdeslre on
munltiee whose lntereats do not alwnys oolnclde. Tbere ! dlstlnotes dont les lntt3r9ts ne oonoordsnt pas toujours,
penoefulsolution,
are, in the seoond plaoe, the oomplex oonatltutlonal 1 Il y a, en deuxlbme lleu, les dispositions oonstltutlonbe put into effeot I
nelles
complexes
destin&8
A
proteger
les
lnt8r&s
de
arrangements deslgned to proteot tho lntarests of the ,
the Oo-oaerationc
Turkish Cyprlot oommunlty, whlchooouples n mlnorlty I la oommunaut6 ohypriote turque, qui 06t en mlnorlt&
not be a’ vlctory
position. There ls, in the thlrd place, the question of : 11 y IL, en troldBme lieu, la question des Aocords de
Turklsh Cvariots.
the London and Zurloh Agreomenta and the Treuty of ! Londres et de Zurich et du TrnltB de garantie, Les
Clreeoe,bit’ a vlo’t
Quarantee. The Agreements, if my understandlng ls 1 aooords, si j’ni bien compris, posaient les bases de
of Cyprus.
oorreot, laid the foundatlon of tho oonstltutlonnl struo- ; la struoture oonstitutlonnelle de la RBpubllque de
110 Mr BITSIOS
ture of the Republl0 of Cyprus; nnd the Tronty of I Chypre, et le Trait6 de garantie visait h sauvegnrder
I R; anxious this
Quarantee was deslgned to safeguard the lndependenoe, ; ltlnd6pendan&e, lYntbgrlt6 territoriale et la sbourit6
nogleoted,and to 1
territorial lntegrlty, nnd seourlty of the Republlo as j de lu RBpubllque telles qutelles avalelit 6td 6tablles
Qeneralnnd to yo1
establlshed by tho baslo artloles of the Constitution, ! aar les nrtloles fondamentaux de 18 Conatitutlon. On
efforts you have n
;Oit donc que les nooords oonstltutlonnels int$rleurs
It ls thus seen that ihe Interna1 oonstltutlonal arrnngeandto work out pi
de Chypre sont indissolublement lies B un certain
mente in Cyprus are lnsepnrnbly bound up wlth a
for the lnterests of
nombre d’instrument internationaux. Les dispositions
number of international instruments. Both tho speolctl
question,mlght CO
oonstitutional arrangements and the internationnl
oonstitutionnelles sp6olales et les instrumenta lntergrtivlty of the sltun;
natlonnux ont un but commun, A suvolr le maintien de
instruments bave one oommon purpose, nnmely, the
mvornment ha8lna
l’harmonie entre les oommunuut88 vivant dans 1Yle.
malntenanoe of hnrmony between tlie oommunitles
fol*your patience,J
nlnsl que le maintien de la paix et de la stablll~~
living on the islnnd and of the pêne and etnblllty in
the nrea.
dans la rflglor.,
111. The Council
106. 1 heve listened with great nttentlon to a11 the
106. J’ai 60out8aveobeaucoupd’attention toutesles
atatements made round thls tnble. The causes thnt
d8olaratlonsfaites autour de oette table, Les oauses
flrst is that subml
on 26 Deoember1’
bave been attrlbuted to the present or1818 are wldely
auxquellesest attribuea la crise actuelle sont tout h
divergent. On the one hand, il ha8 been malntatned
fait divergentes. D’une part, on a soutenuque les
supportlngdooumer
that the soeoinl uullotltutlonal arrangements lmposed
the lndependenoe,
ti
dispositionsoonstltutlonnellessp6oluleslmpos6esB
on CyprG hy the London and Zurloh ngreemente, ns
Chypre par les Aooords de Londres et de Zurich,
of the State. It aske
to remedy the situ
well na the Treaty of auarantee sofeguardlng the
de m6me que le trait6 qui garantit le respeotde oes
observanoe of th&e arrangements, o&stltuté nn dlsposltlons, oonstltuentun empletementsur la sousu0hviolations. In
Of Cyprus was a8
abrldrrement of the soverelgnty and lndependenoe of
verninet et l’lnd6pendanoede Chypre et sont oause
CyprÜa and are responslbie -for the unsatlsfnotory
proteot the Repub
de la situationregrettable quirbgne dansoette jeune
state of affaire obtttlnlng in that young Republic, and
interventionor thre
fipublique; on a njout6 que leur exlstenoeoollstitue
that thelr oontlnuanoe o&stltuteË an obstacle to the
un obstacle nu maintien de la paix et de l’harmonie
malntenanoe of inter-oommunal peaoe and hnrmony.
entre les oommunaut88.D’outre part, on a soutenu
On the other hand, lt hns been argued that inasmuoh
que, dansla mesureoll les dispositionset 108accords
112. Before anyac
as the oonstltutlonnl arrangements nnd agreements I oonstitutionnelsainsi que leA traites r0pondentaux
anotherrequestwal
and trentles are deslgned to meet the speolal oondloondltlonssp6olnlesdu pnys, toutepropositiontendnnt
Kingdomofi 15 Feb,
tlons of the country, any proposa1 to modify them ls
B les modlfter 6quivaudrnit fi priver la oommunaut6
hls request [1096t
on attempt to deprlve the numerloally weaker oomnumbrlquementIn plus faible de ses droits oonstithe Unlted Klngdon
munlty of lts hard-won oonstitutlonal rlghte.
tutlonnelspgnlblementacquis.
parties dlreotly CI
tlonal polloe foroe
107. It seems to my delegatlon chat the Seourity
107, De l’avis de ma dWgatlon, le Conseil de
not eucceededand
Counoll, as a politloal rather than a judlolal body, lB
&urit& Btnnt unorganepolitiqueplulOtquejudiolaire,
oontlnueto besr.
not in a position to paBB judgement on the merite of
n’est pasen mesurede seprononoersur le bien-fond6
reeponelbllltyfor tt
theee two oontradiotory vlews. Members
of thie
de oes deux opinionsoontradlotolree. Les metnbres
Slr Patrlok Deanths
Counoll oannot, of oourse, fa11to underatand the lmde oe oonsell ne peuvent Evidemmentmanquerde
the way whloh wou
portante of the various legal issues lnvoIved in the
oomprendrel’importancedesdivers problBmenjurla11parties. of the tt
01188.Rut tha primavy pre-oocupntlon of the Counoil
dlquesque soul&vecette question.Mais lapr6oooupn0f Ïm inte’rnationa
nt the preeent stageis howto restorepeaoenndordor
tien essentielledu Consoll au otade actuel doit Otre
aooeptablo
nndequl
in Cyprus. Onthis there la n lnrgemensureof ngroe- de restnurer l’ordre et la pnlx & Chypre: la grand0
hadglven rlse to th
ment omongCounoil membere.My delegntlonhnsnn
majorlt6 des membresdu Conseilest bien d’accord
openmlnd as to the methodsto beuoedto bring pcraoe eur oe point, Ma d610gatlon
n~apnsd’ld~esI~~~~con~~o~ thnt connexionto tl
tien.
nndorder about.It ha8beensuggested
thnt an lnternusur les m0thodeuh utiliser pour ramener l’ordre et
tlonnl pence-keeplngforce shouldbe sent to Cyprus. la pnix. On a sugg8r6dlonvoyor h Chypreuneforce
The dlffloultles surroundingthe edtnbllshmentof such internationale ohnrg0e du maintien de lu paix. LW
n force ore real but notlnsurmountable.My delegatlon difflcultbs que susolterait In or&ntiond’unetellefor@
1sready to supportnnyproposnlthat willbe acceptable sont rOettes, mnls nonlnsurmontnbles.Mn dbt6gntlo~~
to the parties concerned.
est prbte II appuyer toute prOpOtJitlO~1
qui pnraftra
aooeptnhleauxparties lntBress6es.

108. There is, of oourse, the long-range problem of
an equitable and Just politioal settlement. The appointment of a media& h& been suggested. My delegation
hns no hesitation in endorsing this suggestion. We
believe that an impartial mediator oan do muoh to
nsstst in bringing about an equitable settlement SOas
to enable the two oommunities, with a rioh heritage
from twc of the world’s noblest oivilizations, to work
topther in the building of a new nation.

108. Il restera naturellement, A longue BohBanoe,
A trouver une solution aolltiuue Juste et EquitableA
oe problAme.Ona sugg&+de-nommerun madiateur.
Ma d618gation
appuiesansh&dtation cette suggestion.
Nous pensonsqu’un m&liateur impartial peut falre
beauoouppour contribuer A un raglement Bquirable
qui permettrait aux deuxcommunau%,h$riti&es de
deux des civilisations les plus noblesdu monde,de
travailler ensemble A l%iIffcation d’une nation
nouvelle,
109. This 1s a time for oonstruotive statesmanship.
109. Le moment est venu d’adopter une attitude
I believe with the Seoretary-Qeneralthat there is an construotiva. Je orois, aveo le SeorBtaire g0n6ra1,
earnestdesire on the part of a11concernedto seek a que tous les int6ress6a ont le profond d6sIr de
peaoefulsolution. If the suggestedmeasuresshould oheroher une solution pacifique. Si les mesure6
be put into effeot andrewardedwith successthrough SuggWes devaient 6tre appliqu6eset oouronn6esde
the oo-operatlonof the parties ooncerned,It would succAsgrRoeA la ooop0ratIondespartiesintbress8e8,
not be a victory for the Greek Cypriots or for the
00 serait une victoire non seulement pour les
l’urkish Cypriots, nor a victory for Turkey or for
Chypriotes turos, non seulementpour lu Turquie ou
areeoe,but a viotory for the future of the Republic pour la OrAoe, 08 serait un0 viotoire pour l’avenir
of Cyprus.
de la RBpublique
de Chypre.
110. Mr. BITSIOS(Greeoe)(translatedfrom Frenoh): 110. M. BITSIOS (GrAoe): J’ai manqu6A un devoir
1 am anxiousthls eveninato fulfil a duty that 1 have et Je m’emcressede m’enuouuitter08soir en rendant
nogleoted,and to paying‘R tri’.Jute to thé Secrctaryhommageiu SeorBtaire g&&al et A vous-m0me,
Qeneraland to you, Mr. President. for the untirlng
Monsieur le PrBsIdent. nour les efforts inlassnbles
efforts you bavé madeto reooncile diverging viewi
quevous avesd6ploy0sVp&roonoilier les vu88divernndtc work out prooedureswhioh, with duo regard ganteset 6laboror desformules qui, en tenantoompte
for the interestsof ihe parties involved in the Cyprus despr6oooupations
desparties int6resséesAla quesquestlon,mlght oopeconstructiveiy with the extreme tion de Chypre, pourraient repondre de maniAre
gravity of the situation we are oonsidering.Thc Groek oonstruotive A l%xtrf)me gravit6 de la situation que
Qcvornmenthasinstruotedme to expressits gratitude nous examinons.Pour votre patience, votre imparfor your patlenoe,your impartiallty andyourdevotion. tialit6, votre abnegation,le Gouvernementhellenique
m’a chargede vous exprimer sa reoonnaissanoe.
111. The Council has two requestsbefore it. The 111. Lb Conseil est saisi de deux reoours. Il y R
first is that submittedby the Qovernmentof Cyprus
d’abord oelui du Qouvernementde Chypre, qui a Bt&
on 26 Deoember1963(S/5488)& it wasfollowedby
pr&sent$ le 26 dl3oembre1963 [S/6488]Z/ et a Bti
sucportinadocuments.It listed aotaandthreatsarainst suivi de dooumentsA ltnppui. Il 8num6rnitdesactes
thè‘indep&denoe,territorial integrity andsover&gnty et des menaoescontre- iYnd$pendanoe,l’intBgrit8
of the State. It askedthe Counoilto take urnentaotion territoriale et la souverainet de 11Etat;il demandait
tc remedy the situationandprevent any rëpetftion of au Conseilde prendre d’ur@noeles mesuresn6osssuohviolations. In other words, what the Government saires pour rem&iIer A la situation et pr8venir la
of Cyprus was asking was that the Counoilshould r&&ition de pareilles violations. End’autrestermes,
ce quele Gouvernementde Chypredemandait,o%tnlt
proteot the Republio from any unilateral military
Interventionor threul of suohintervention.
que le Conoeil mette la RepubIQueA l’abri de toute
intervention militaire unilatirale et de toute menace
d’unepareille intervention.
112. Before any aotionhadbeentaken on thatappeal, 112. Alors que oe reoours Btait enooreen sufqxm,
anotherrequestwasmadeto the Counoilby the United le Conseila BtBsaisi, le 16 fbvrier 1964,d’uneautre
Kingdomon 16 February 1964[S/6543].uInsubmitting requ&e de la part du Royaume-Uni(S/6643]u En
hls request [1096thmeeting], the representative of pr6sentantson reoours [1096Bmesaanoe],le repr0the Unlted Klngdomexplainedthat the efforts of the sentant du Royaume-Unia expliqutl que les. efforts
pnrties direotly conoernedto establish an interna- des parties directement int6ress6espour mettre en
tional polioe foroe and a mediation prooedurehad place une foroe de police internationale et une pronot succpededand that the Unlted Klngdomoouldnot oadure de m&iIation n’avaient pas abouti et que
oontinueto bear, alone, the military and politioal le Royaume-Unine pouvait continuer A assumerseul
Waponelbilityfor the maintenanoeof order in Cyprus. la re&nsnbilit$ mjlitaire et politique du maintien
81rPatrick Deanthereforeaekedthe Counoilto indioate de l’ordre A Chypre. En oons&uenœ, sir Patrfok
the way whloh wouldlead to a solution, aooeptabletc
Deandemandait& ConseilquW -montre la voie qui
a11
parties, of the difficulties obstructingthe creating aboutirait A une solution, aooeptablepar toutes les
cf an Internnticnnl force, and the wny towar& an parties, des dIffioult6s qui s’opposaientAIn crtWion
aooeptnble
andequltablesolutionof theproblemewhioh d’une force internationale, ainsi que la vole qui
hadgiven rise to tha presentsituation. Herefarred in
mènerait A une solution nooeptableet Bqultablodes
thnt oonnexlonto the advantagesof ooncertedmedia- problAmes qul ont don& naissanceA la sftuation
t1on.
nctuelle. Sir Patriok Dean a mentionn(lA 08 prolx)~~
l’opportbnit8d’unemddialionoonoert8e.
21 kxumnntn
offlrlcls
Supp&Ï%
d’octobre,

du Consell

9 Ibid.,
1904.

onnbo,

dix-nsuvldme
--

de

SupplBmcnt

sisurité,dix-bultIEmo
do Jsnvlrr,

tbvrlor

~:rn60,
ot mua

113. The Minister for Fore@ Affaira of Cyprus has,
in our opinion, fully justified the reaaon for the fears
aroused in his country by the aots, statements,
demonstrations and intentions to whioh he referred.
He enumerated thom in the greatest detail and oited
supporting doouments. Regarding the alleged right of
unilateral military intervention in Cyprus under the
Treaty of Quarantee, Mr. Kyprianouquoted the relevant
Artioles of the Charter and the opinion of experts in
international law. Iie thus relieved me of having to do
so. althourrh it would be aossible. at the risk of
wearying tee Counoil, to addioe furtier arguments of
a politioal and legalnature. But Mr. Kyprianou’sstatementsaeemto meto haveprovedbisthesie oompletely.
114. The representativeof Wrkey, for his part, oonfined himselfto thejirave situationprevailing in Cyprus
andthe more generalinternational oomplioationsthat
are to be feared. No one deniesthese faots andthe
existenoeof thesedangers,But it seemstous that we
are here not to establishor evaluatethem,but to oope
with them.
116. As if further proof of what 1s already quite
obvious were neoessary,the Counoilhasthis evening
invited Mr, Denktas,who,underrule 39of the Counoil’s
provisional rules of prooedure, that is to say, in bis
individual oapaoity-and1wiahto stressthat-has oome
to enlightenus on somethingwe already knewabout.
Mr. Eenktas, whosepersona1responsibtlity for the
diffioulties Cyprus nowfaoesandin reoent years has
hadto faoe is, 1 regret to say, hea+y,hasnot failed to
tnke the further oooasionof this eveningto addfuel
to the fire. But honestlv.if werefer to the exaot terms
of the reqüestswhioh& are disoussingandwhiohoonstitute the sole Item on the agenda,1do not think Mr.
Denktashas given to the Counoil any insight that it
laokedbefore.
116. TO return then to the statementaof the representative of Turkay, whioh for their part are very
important, what struok me most of a11was whathe
failed to say-in other words, the faot that, oonfronted
with speoifîo questions,he refrained from sayingthe
only thing we expeotedto hear from him. He oonsistently avoided the key questionin this situation, the
questionthat was put to thethree of us by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus. Doesnot this serious
omissionmakeit essentielthatthe Counoilshouldissue
an appealfor the independenoe
andterritorial integrity
of Cyprusto be raspeoted?

113. Le Ministre des affaires &rang&res de Chypre
a, B notre sens, amplementmontr6 aombienbtnient
lustifi6es les oraintes au’insuirent B son pays les
àotes, les d6olarations,16smanifestations,16sintentions dont il a fait Btat. Il-les a BnumBrBsdansleur
moindre d0tail et a oit6 des dooumentsA llappui.
Quant au prhtandudroit d’intervention militaire unilaterale & Chypre en vertu du TrnitB de garantie,
M. Kyprianou a invoque les articles pertinents de
la Charte et l’avis de sommit6sdudroitinternational.
Ce faisant, il m)a dispensed’avoir B le faire, bien
qu’il serait possible, au risque de lasser le Conseil,
d’apporter encore d’autres argumenta de nature
politique et juridique. Mais les Interventions de
M. Kyprianou meparaissentavoir paxfaitementprouve
sa thbse.
114. De son 08% le representantde la Turquie a
limit6 sesinterventions h-la grave situationexistanth
Chypre et aux oomplioationsinternationales plus
g&&ales qui sont A oraindre. Ces faite et oes
danners. personnene les nie. Mais il nous semble
que-nousèommesioi non pas pour les constaterou
les bvaluer, mais pour y parer.
116. Commes’il fallait d’autres preuvesdeoequiest
trbs l!vident, on a invite oe soir M. Denktas,lequel,
en vertu de l’artiole 39 du rbglementintdrieur provisoire du Conseil,olest-h-dire B titre personnel-et
je tiens a le souligner -, est venu nous8olairer
sur oe que nous savionsdejft. M. Denktas,dontje
regrette de dire que la reeponsabilit6personnelle
dans les diffioult& auxquellesfait faoe et auxquelles
a da faire face Chypre au oours de oesderni&res
annaesest lourde, ne s’est pas priva oe soir non
plus de profiter de l’oooasionpour jeter de llhuile
-&r le feu. Mais, en toute Ëino6&, et si nous
revenons aux termes exaots des reoours que nous
examinonset qui seuls sont b l’ordre du jour, je ns
orois pas que M. Denktasait apport6au Conseilles
lumibres gui lui manquaient.
116. Pour revenir dono quxinterventions du reprb
sentant de la Turquie, qui, elles, ont une grande
importance, 08 qui m’a surtout frappe olest oe qu’il
a omis de dire, h savoir que, devant des questions
pr8oise8, il s’est gard8 de dire la seule ohoseque
nousattendionsde lui: il a oonstamment
6lud8la question olef du DroblBme.oelle aue nous a posbe,B
nous trois, 16 Ministre des &ires $rran&res de
Chypre. Cette serieuse omission ne rend-elle pas
indispensableun appel du Conseilpour le respeot
de l’ind8pendanoe
et de lW8grit8 de Chypre?

persona1exper:
duoes lawyers
eupposing
that l
waainspiredby

119. As the rf
pointed out yes
is not oompete
treaties, but nel
If interpretation
for the Internati

120. It is obvio
shouldtake a p
makingthemsek
a deadlook.For
ooveringboth tl
fears andat the
andnegotiation.

121. Mr. KYP:
makea long stl
oarefully to the
shallstudy oare
1shalloonsider
straight in vies
oalledoitieen of
before the Seou
mvernment, ha
inoludingperhal
requestyou, MI
Republioto oom
tien onthe vital i
of oitizens of th
ta cornebefore t

122. Reserving
whiohhae been
before the Coun
1 said in the oo
said that 1 was
reluotanoe,and
thesituationin (
tien of order a1
oountry.1 wentc

“1 only hope
not makethe TI
that it may ste
tien, through j
to deetroy the
117. 1 have tried to go over the elementsof the
117. J’ai essay0de reprendreune Bune les donn0es
pherewhiohis
problemoneby one,and1havenotedthe oontenteof the du problbme, et j’ai not8 le oontenu du premier
ing, para, 118.
first requeet.1 must a160note a generaloonsensus
of
reoours. Il me faut auesioonstaterquel’on est paropinionto the effeot thpt a multi-national foroeshould venu ii une opinion genhralementadmise B l’effet
123. The provof
be set up under the auspioeeof the United Nationsto
ouluneforce multinationale.aoual%nfde desNatlone
from the armed
preserve peaoein the areaandrestore order andoalm ünies, doit Qtre oharg6edé profiger la paix dansla
oomeagainin th
on the island.that nerrotiationson the basio problems r0pion. de rêtnblir l’ordre et le oalmedansl’fle, et
qm1*tl3,
whioh
Il
shouldberesumedwitï~theassistanoe
of anindependent que, s;r lesproblbmesdefond,lasn6goointions
doivent
“a poworful Tur
mediator. andthat the Seourity Counoilshouldbekept reprendre aveo l’assistanoe d’un m0diat8ur ind6alongtllo south
informed.ofthe situation.
pendant,et enfin quele Conseilde s6ourit.6doit 6tx‘o
from Cyprus toc
tenu au oourantde la situation.
c on11for inter1
troubled Medite
118. There havo boen rumours-and aftRr henring 118. Desrumeurs ont oouru - et nousenoonnaissonB
on to say that “t
tir. Denktas,we know what their source is-to the
maintannntIn source, apr8savoir BntBndu,M. Denktlls
Oftwo weeksag
- selonlesquellesle but des ChypriotesCLaitd’orraeffeot that the Cypriots’ aim wasto extract a résoluohor une r&olution nu ConsellpourpOUVOlJ~pr6tend~~ l’urkieh invasio;7
tfon from the SeCürltyCounofl60 that theyoouldIntel
$oDson: “In the
olalm that the Counollhad qbrogatedthe treutles. That ansuite que uelul-oi a abroge les tralt8s. Il n’enest
eaid‘the Makaril
rien, Les Chypriotefi, c+nacceptant le prinoipe de
1s not the casa.The Cyt~loebhava shownthelr intenandthe aunranto
tlons by aoceptingthti principle of mediation.1have no la m&liatlon, ont d6montrb leurs intentions. Je n’ai
24
li.73
‘“.-,‘ti’tri.,i~;i~~.~.~,,~.;
,=..
->x+.<*:z
,,,..
q,,,“>”.,Fw.~~.-pr3~’
LF’.,T,>
,,.,n.
=y9“I’..oni‘~iRw~~~~,~,~~.~
<,“.li),
,*,.,. <

c
persona1 experienoe of Qray’s Inn, but 1 think it produoes lawyers of too high a quality to justify us in
aupposing that Mr. Kyprianou, in presenting Ns oase,
wasinspiredby any suohmotives,

t
L

pas une exp6rience personnelle, d*ailleure, de Qrayls
Inn, mais je pense qu’elle ptipare des juristes assez
aooomplispour quenousne puissionspas penser que
M. Kyprianou Btait anime de telles intentions en
pr6sentsntsa08~88.
119. Commel’a fort justementfait remarquer hier
119. As the representative of Franoe quite rightly
pointedout yesterday [1098thmeeting], the Counuil le repr6sentant de la Franoa [1098Bmcs&noe], le
is not oompetentto judge, amendor abrogatethe Conseil n’a pas qualit pour juger, modifier ou
treaties, but neither is it uompetentto interpret them. abroger les trait6s. mais11n’a pasdavantagequalit
If interpretation is felt tobe neoessary,thetask is one pour les interpr&er. Si le besoin @enfait sentir,
ofest a la Cour internationale de Justice de donner
for the InternationalCourt of Justioe.
sonintarpr&ation.
120. It is obviousthatthosewhoinsistthat the Counoil 120, Il est Bvldent que oew qui insistent pour que
shouldtake a positionon the trsaties in questionare
le Conseilprennepositionsur les trait& en question
makingthemselvesresponsibleforbringingmattersto
assumentla responsabilitide menerles ohoseslune
adeadlook.For our part, westill hopafor a text whioh, impasse. Pour notre part, nousestirons toujours
ooveringboth the requests, will allay th0 Cypriots’
obtenir un texte qui, en faisant la synthbsedesdeux
fearsandat the sametime open the wayto paoifioation r0oours, dissipera les ordntes des Chypriotes et
andnegotiation.
ouvrira en m6metemps la voie a la paoifioationet
a la nt3gooiation
121. Mr. KYPRIANCU(Cyprue): 1 do not intend to
121. M. KYPRIANOU(Chypre) (trnduit de l’anglais]:
makea long statementtonight. 1 have listenedvery
Je n’a1 pas l’intention do parler longuementce soir.
oarefully to the information given by Mr. Denktas.1 J’ai 0ooutB Ws attentivement les renseignements
shallstudy oarefully the oontentsof his statamentand donnI3spar M. Denktas. J’6tudierai aveo soin le
1shalloonsiderwhat is the best wayto put the reoord oontenu de sa deolaration et je r6fl6chiral & la
straight in view of the distortians andlies that a someilleure faqonde faire une miseaupointAtaatdon&
oalledoitieenof the Republiohadtheaudaoityto make les dI3formationsdes faits et les mensongesqu’un
bafore the Seourity Counoil. 1 may, on bhalf of the soi-disant oitoyen de la Republiquea eu l’audaoe
Bovernment,have to olarify various pointa myself, de pr6senter au Conseilde s6ourit6,J’aurai peut4tre
Inoludlngperhapsproduoedooumenta.1may have to
il clarifier moi-m6me,au nomde mongouvernement,
requestyou, Mr. President, to allow oitlrens of the divers points, voire m6meft produire desdoouments.
Republioto oomebefore the Counoilandgivs informaPeut-Btre devrais-je vous demander, Monsieur le
tienon thevital issues,1may haveto requesta number PrBsident,depermettre hdesoitoyensdela Hflpublique
of oitieens of the Republio,of various ethnioorigins,
d’origines ethniquesdiverse6 de se pr6senter devant
to oomebefore the Counoil.
le Conseil et de fournir des renseignements
sur les
questionsB 1’6tude.
122. AprBs avoir r6serv6 de la sorte ma position
122. Reservingthus my positiononthe %formation”
whiohhas beengiven, may 1 revert to the mainissue sur les “renseignements”qui vous ont 6t43fournis,
baforsthe Counoil?May 1be permitted to quotewhat je reviens B la questionprinoipale dont le Conseil
1 said in the oontext of my last speeohyesterday?1 est saisi. Qu’il me soit permis de alter ce que
eaid that 1 waa mentioninga11thesefaots with some je disais hier dans ma d6olaration Je disais donc
reluotanoe,and 1 referrsd to the oalminpdown of
queofest aveo quelquesh+itations quejementionnais
thesituationin Cyprusand to theoomparativerestoratous oesfaits, et je parlais del’apaisementqui s’&ait
tien of order and normality in oertaln areas of the manifesti B Chypre et du retour relatif B l’ordre et
0oUntry.
1 wenton t0 say:
B un Btat de ohosesnormal danscertaines partie8
du pays, Je poursuivaisen oestermesr
“1 only hopethat bystatingthedevelopmants
1 shall
nJtesp8re seulementqu’en vous en faisant part
not maketheTurklshaovernmentunhappy
to thepoint
Je ne ddplairai pas au Gouvernementturo au pbnt
that it may step up againthe maohineryof provooade l’inoiter B d6olenoherB nouveau,par l’intertion, through ita armed agentsin Cyprus, in order
m6d.lafrede ses agentsarmas B Chypre, sondisto destmy the relatively calm andpromisingatmospositif de provocation pour d6truire le oalme
pherewhiohis at presentprevailing.a11098th
meetrelatif et l’atmosph&refavorabh qui Ment aott’eling, para. 118.1
lement a Chypre.” (lOW9me8681108,
par, 118.l
123. The provooationperhapsdid not oomelastnight 123. La provooation n’a peut-Btre pae 6t4 le fait la
from the armedagentsof Turkey in Cyprus,but it has nuit dernibre desagentsarm6sturos B Chypre, mais
Oomeagainin the usualmarner. Aooordingtovarlous elle a eu lieu h nouveauoommed’habitude. &Ion
lwports, whiohhavenot bcendeniedasfnr as 1know, diverses souro0squi, pour autantque je saohe,n’ont
“n p0werful Turklsh fleet with troops aboardsalled pas Bt4 dfSmentias,“uno puloeanto flotte turque,
alongthe soutli Turkish oonstlessthaneighty miles ayant des troupus h b0rd, n long8 le littoral sudde *
from Cyprus today, while the Turkish Senatohenrd la Turquie h moins de 80 milles de Chypre pondant
qu’on demandait au S6nat turo d’intervenir pour
c on11for intervention to snfeguardthe penoeon this
troubled Mediterranean island”, The message~00s sauvegarder la paix dans cette fie troubl&c de la
M1to sny tint “the mnnwuvreawere similar to those M6dîtarran6ett. Le messageajoutait que “10s maOftwo weeks ag0,whioh raisodfears of an imminent nœuvros 6taient analoguasa celles qui avaient 6t4
l’urkishinvasionof this stratoglo islnndn.The rep0rt effeotubes deux semainecauparavantet qui avalent
Ws on: “In the TurltishSenate,SenatorDnkri ICnpnlnn fait oraindro un0 invasionturque imminentede oette
aald lthe MaknrîoEl~rlmlnIstration1soompletelyillegnl Ile strat&ique*. On nous apprendegalement qu’au
S0natturo le abnateur Dakrl Kapalana d6olnrbque
aad the CluarantorPowerashouldnot IntarvenOt.W

I,
.A,
&q@~;-~r,J,>
7h,,~f==
m..;,
.,-F,,.

“+=q>-rmzxr

26

“l’administration du pr6sldentMakariosBtaitentiArementill&gale et que lesPuissanoes
garantesdevraient
intervenir d8sApr6senV.
124. Ainsi dono, ie Qouvernement turo poursuit
124. Thus the Turkish Government is oontinuing its
sa politique do ~~rovooationtant A 11int8rieur de
polioy of provooation, either within Cyprus or over
Chypre qu’autour de Chypre, en utilisant des bAtiCyprus, by using warships and various manœuvres,
ments de guerre et en recourant A des manœuvres
1 wonder whether it was SO absolutely nooessary to
have these kind of manœuvresat a time the Seourity diverses. Je me demandes’il etait vraiment naoessaire d’avoir rooours A oe genre de manceuvresau
Counoilwasdisoussingthe issue,
momentOPle Conseilde86ourit6examinaitla question.
126. On a beauoouppar18aujourd’huide la situation
126. Muohhas beensaid today aboutthe situation in
A Chypre1on en a beauooup
par16au oours desdebats
Cyprus; muoh has been said a11along during the
du Conseil, Peut-Btre $tait-il bon que le Conseilde
deliberations in the Counoil. It has perhapsoorreot
s&~rit& apprenne quelle est oette situation, qu’il
for the Cour1011
to learn aboutthe situation in Cypru&
prenne oonnaissanoe
des faits, mais des faits V&ito hoar tha faots-but the oorreot faots. Wehavetried
tables, Nous avons esEay6,dansnosdiverses d6olathrough our various statementsto put the reoord
straight when it was distorted. Weshall go on doing rations, de reatifier les faits lorsqueooux-oi 6talent
dt3form&, et nousoontlnueronsde le faire. Pourtant,
the samo.But while wo go on doingthat, it seemsthat
somepeoplehaveforgotten the reasonthat theCypr~e alors m6me que nousfaisons oes misesau point, il
Governmenthasoomebefore the Seourity Counoil.
semble que oertains aient oubli6 la raison pour
laquellele Gouvernementohypriote aport6 la question
devant le Conseilde 86ourit6.
126. Noi!e sommesvenus foi parce que mon pays
126. We have oome here beoausem oountry is
threatenedby aggrossionfrom outside,Krom Turkey.
est mena& d’agressionpar la Turquie, Noussommes
venu8 ioi paroe que nou8croyonsnon seulementquo
We have oomehere beoausewe believo not only that
the Counoilshouldproteot Cyprus from aggression le Conselldoit protager Chypre contre uneagression
do llext6rleur, oommeil est de sondevoirdele faire,
from outside, beoauseit is its duty to do that, but
mais aussi paroe que, A moinsrl’aglr de la sorte,
aleo, unle you do chat, you oannothave petroein
Cyprus. You oannothave peaoein Cypruswhilepeople il ne saurait y avoir de paix AChypro. Il ne saurait
are shoutingandoalling uponTurkey to intervene. You y avoir de paix A Chypre tant quecertains r$olament
oannothave peaoein Cyprus while Turkey is asking A grands oris une intervention de la Turquie. Il ne
people to start oalling dpon Turkey to start an saurait y avoir de paix AChypre tant quela Turquie
inoitera les gens A faire appel A elle pour qu’elle
aggression,
deolenoheune agression,
127. Je suis oertain que si le Conseilde s&ouriti
127. 1 am oonfidentthat, if the Seourity Counoilded6oide de nrot6PrerlQt&rrit6 territoriale et lcind6oidesto proteot the territorial lntegrity andtho independanoedé C&re la paix sera rtltablie dansIffIe,
pendenoeof Cyprus, peaoewill be restored in the
Comme nous l’avons dit A diverses oooasîons,afin
island. As we have saidonvariousoooasions,in order
to allay oertain foars-whioh wo believe have nobasis d’apaiser certaines oraintes qui, selonnous,ne sont
nullement fond$es, nousn%levonaauouneobleotion
--wo do not objeot in prinoiple to havingan international force under the United Nations. Somepeuple de prinolpe oontrè la or6ation d’une foroe iiternationale sous l%rcidedes Nations Unies. Certainsont
bave tried to say that we have attemptedby trioks t0
don& Aentendrequenoustentionspar la ruse d%viter
avoid having any foroe. We tee1that, if Cyprus is
proteotsd, a foroe is not nooeseary-but nevertheless que oette foroe soit oonstitu&e.Le fait est que,tout
en estimant qu’unetelle foroe ne s’imposeplus si
WQars prepared to have it. Howover,having a foroe
is not the goal, Having a foroe is oneof the means Chypre est protegae, nous aonlmoetout pr0ts naanmolns A aooepter qu’elle soit oonstitu6e. Mais la
toward the restoration of normalconditionsandorder.
or6ation d’une telle foroe n’est pas une fin en soi,
You oannothave a force theretu restore normal interElle ne oonstitue qu’un des moyensde r0tabUr la
na1oondltlonsfor a neriod of three months-andyst
have Turkey feel that it has the right to intorvéne vie normaleet l’ordre. On no saurait envoyerpendant
wheneverit likee. You will not thereby beserving any trole mois une foroe A Chyprepeur y restaurer des
oonditionsde vie normalescependantquela Turquie,
purpose,
de sonobt6,estimequ’ellea ledroit d’intervenir quand
bon lui semble. Ce serait 18.un gesteoompl&ement
inutile,
128. Pour oe qui est d’avoir une force A Chypre
128. In regard to the ldea advanoedthat, having a
pendant trois mois puis, ayant obtenu la r0solution
foroe there for three montheandhaving obtainedthe
que nous souhaitons,de nous livrer, une fois oetb
resolution we wanted,WQmight, after the foroo withdraws, onrry on with this allegedides of mussaoring foroe partie, au mas8aoredes Turos - puisque
telle est l~lntsntion que l’on nous prQte -, je ferai
the Turks, 1’may say that the UnitodNationsis Welsimplementobserver que le6 NationsUniespourront,
oome to hnve observera in C~~rusto watohthe situasi elles le dbsirent, envoyer des observateurs h
tion evennftar the three months.
Chypre pour y oontr6lar la situation, m&ne au-delh
du d6lal de troio mois qui nvnit 6t0 pr6vu.
129. Permettez-moi de oonolureen dbolarnnt cequi
128. I ehouldlike to oonoludebystatingthofollowfng:
suit: mongouvernementfolt de nonmieuxpourmettre
My Qovcrnmentis doingits best to stopbloodsbedin
fin aux effusionsde snngAChypreet pour r&ablIr de8
Cyprue and to restore normal oondltions.But 110~ oan
oondltions normales. Mais oommuntdae condil:ion~
normal oonditionsba restored as long aa the oountry

whiohhas or8
feelsfree to 1

130, We havc
oountry whioh
taklngs. Thon
tered in a Seo
to respeot thc
sovereignty 0
jn aooordano
from the useI
foroe oango t
interna1peaoe

131, Mr. ME
just a few w
heard is whal
ableto find a
here, again a
territorial 01
brought to lif
twioe the pop)
andis large 81
of this Republ:
now, 1 think,
oomehere, to
national foroe
abouta neighl
there? But, as
bestfrom the
my Oovernmei

132. Wehave
the other sid
reality, those
whiohMr. Ky
Artiole II say’i

Wroeoe, ’
note of the
Set out in Ar
andguaranta
andseourity

133, My Qovc
given our WOI
8olemnlybefo,
134. Tharefo:
Prolonrredthis
reaoh“a praoi
foroe in order
anyposslbiliti
13G. Turkay 1
Or intarvene 1
in this serions
saidby either
not be attribu
that 1 have Ju
we Irave pledg
askedfor. AI
working

ulldor

3J se0 loot-nota

1

which has oreated ths abnormality for other purposes
feels free to invade the oountry whenever it thinks fit?
130. We have given our undertakinns. It is UP to the
oountry whioh tl&atens Cyprus to gi% ItsowrÏunder
takinaa. Then both sets of undertnkinns oan be realstered-in a Seourity Counoil resolutfony oolllngupo~all
to respeot the territorial integrity, independenoe and
sover&ignty of the Republio ofCgrus and to refrain,
jn aooordanoe with the Charter of the United Nations,
from the use or threat of foroe. And the United Nations
foroe oan go there to help the Qovernment in restoring
interna1 peaoe and normal interna1 oonditions.
131. Mr. MENEMENCIOULW (Turkey): 1 want to say
just a few Word8 at thie late hour. If what we bave
heard is what is separatingus, 1think we shouldbe
ableto find a way outof ths diffioulty. 1 have explained
here, again and-ngain,that Turkei oertainly ‘hasno
territorial olaim on Cyprus, The ohildren who are
brought to life by Turtiah mothers every year are
twioe the populationof. Cyprus-and our land is bfg
and1slarge enoughfor ua. Wearooneof the founders
of thie Republio.Wewant to secit Prosper-and up ta
now, 1 think, we haveproved it. That is whywe have
oomehere, to try to sec whetherwe oanget an inter
nationalforoe. Doesa oountmthat has anvbad idens
abouta neighbourwish to haie an internationalfor&
there?But, as everybodyknows, 1have besndoingmy
bestfrom the very beginning,underinstruotionsfrom
my Qovernment,to obtainsuoha foroe.

121. We haveSOoftentalkedaboutthe Treaties, whioh
the other side oonsidersae being ag-inst them. In
reality, those Treaties oontainthe very guarantees
whiohMr. Kyprianou hae just aekedfor, Whatdoes
Artiole II say? It says:
Vreeoe, Turkey and the UnitedKingdom,taking
note of the undertakingsof the Republioof Cyprus
set out in Article 1 of the presentTreaty, reoogniee
andguaranteethe independenoe,
territorial integrity
andseourity of the Republioof Cyprus, , , .“a
133, My Qovernmenthassignedthis Treaty. Wehave
given our Word, and we standby it-and 1 say it now
solemnlybefore this Counoil.
134. Thsrefore, if this is amisunderstanding
that has
prolongedthis debate,1think thetimehaenowoometo
rsaoh a praotioal solution-t0 have an internntional
forasin order to keepinterna1peaoe,inorder t0 stop
anypossibilitiesof the reourrenoeof nnytrngio eventa.
13G. ‘I’urkey hnenevor snid that itfeols free to invnde
or intervene wheneverit seesfit. Weshouldnot talk
in this serionsdebatenboutthingswhiohhavenet been
saidby either side-nnd thosepartioularthiny should
not be attributod to me. In any oase,I wiahto ropoat
that 1 bave just rend an artiole of n trenty by whioh
we bave pledgedto guaranteeexaotly whathnebeen
nskedfor. Ancl 1 wish to sny thnt tny delugation,
wOl’kitlg
ullder inotruotionafrom the Turklsh aovarnAl sec Ioot-nota

1.

normales peuvent-elles Btre r6tablies tant que le
pays qui a 0196,Ad’autres fins, des oonditionsanormales se oroit autoris Aenvahir Chypre ohaquefois
quebon lui semble?
180. Nousavonsdonn6notre engagement.
Il appartient
au pays qui menaoeChypre de s’engagerde sonobt&
Cesdeux engagements
pourraient Btre oonsignJ3sdans
une r6solution du Conseilde o6ourlt6 demandantA
tous de resaeoter l’int6nrit8 territoriale. l’indtlpendanoeet la‘souveraineti de la RBpubliquéde Chypre
et de s’abstenir. oonform6mentA la ChartedesNations
Unies, de reooürir A la menaoeou A l%mploi de la
foroe. La force des NationsUniesp(xrrralt se rendre
sur plaoe pour aider le pays A r0tablir la pnix
interieure et des oonditionsde vie normale.
191, M. MENEMENCIOQLU (Turquie) [traduit de
l%nglaia]: le ne dirai que quelquesmots A oetta
heure tardive, Si les divers exposesentendusloi
r&unent vraiment 08 qui nous &Pare, je pense
que nous devrions pouvoir trouver un moyen de
sortir de oette impasse.J’ai expliqub ici A maintes
reprises que la Turqule n’avait absolumeatauoune
vis6e territoriale sur Chypre, Les enfants mis au
monde ohaquean& par les m8res turques rspr6sentent deux fois la populationde Chypre et nota%
pays est grand et noussuffit, Naussommesl‘un des
fondateurs de oette rtipubliquei nous voulonequ’elle
soit prostire et je orois que, jusqu’Aprbsent, mm
l’avons prouv& CYest pourquoi nous sommesvenus
ioi, afin de voir s’il Btaitpossibled’obtenirla ordation
d’une force internationale, Un pays qui nourrirait
de mauvais desseinsA Mgard de sonvoisin souhaiterait-il la or6ation dQie foroe internationale?Or,
oommeohaounle sait, j’ai dAsle ddbut, sur instruotiens de mon.wvernement, fait tout mon possible
pour obtenir la orhdion d’unetelle foros.
139. Nous avons Bvoqu6 bien souvent les trait&
quel’autre partie oonsid&reoommeallant Allenoontre
de ses intAr&s. En r&allt& oes trait& oontiennent
les garanties marnes qui ont I3t.0demandbespar
M. Kyprfanou, Que d!t en sffst l’artiole Il? Il eut
ainsi libell6:
fiLa Qtioe, le Royaume-Uniet la Turquie, prenant
aota dee engagementsde la RApubliqusde Chypre
BnoncBsdans l’artiole premier du prbsont trait6,
rsoonnaissentet garantiesentltind6psndance,
ltint&$;$;+J.J.ria!s
et la sBouriU de la Rt3publique
,*.*
138. Mon gouvernementa sign6os trait& nousavons
donti nott’e parole et nous y sommesfidAlesr osla,
je le dbolare solennellementdevant le Conseil.
134. C’est pourquoi, si 08 d6bat s’est prolong A
la suite d’un malentendu,je orois que le moment
est venu de reoheroher une solutionpratique, d’avoir
une foros internationale pour maintenir la paix in&
rieure et de faire oessertoute possibillt.6de renwvolloment de 00straglquea 0v6nemonte.
136. Ln Turcluie n’a jamais dit qu’elle s’est jug8c
libre d’envahir File ou d’intervenir quand bon lui *
semblerait, Il faudrait evlter, dans o& dl3batsqui
portent sur de graves questions,de oitor des propos
qui n’ont 6t6 tenus en fait par personneet en tout
oas pas par moi, Quoi qu’il 8n soit, je vlens de oitor
un nrtiole d’un trnit43aux termes duquol nou8 nous
sommes engag& A garantir exactemontoo qui nous
n Bt8 damand6.J’affirme quomn d616gation.aglssant
4f VoirIlot*1.

Yment, ie here to do its best to find a quiok solution
for the sending of an appropriate international foroe
to Cyprus.

sur inetruotions du Gouvernementtiro, est ioi pour
s’efforoer de trouver unepromptesolutionpermettant
d’envoyer h Chypre une for00 internationale appropri8e.
136. Mr. KYPRIANOU (Cyprus): Just by way of
136. M. KYPRIANOU(Chypre)[traduit de l’anglais]:
olarifioatlon: Do 1 take it that the representative of
Une simple pr8oision: dois-je oomprendre qua 10
Turkey does not objeot tc A Seourity Counoil resolution
rear6sentant de la Turquie ne stopPosepas B un0
inoluding th0 PhrAS0 that it oalls upon a11to respeot
r&olution du Conseil qÜi oomportè&it une clause
the tarritorinl integrity. independenoeand sovereignty
demandantBtous de respeoter111nt6grit6
territoriale.
of the Republio of Cyprus in aooordanoe with the Charl’ind$pendanceet la souverainet de-la RBpublique
dé
ter of the United Nations, and to refrain from the
Chypre, oonform6ment&la ChartedesNationsUnies,
threat or use of foroe against suoh territorial integrity
et de s’abstenirde reoourir h la menaceou B l’emploi
andindependenoe?
de la force ocntre lrint6grit6 territoriale et l’independanoede 08 pays?
137. Mr. MENEMENCIOOLU(Turkey): Whnt 1 said 137. M. MENEMENCIOOLU (Turauie) [traduit de
ie on r0oord, and1think thot we oannotdieousstexts
lla~~~lais]:Ce quej’aidit estoonslgn8àuDracBs-vel~bal
at this distanoe. 1 have rendA text very olearly, and et fe Denseaufil est diffioile de dleouter de textes
it is onthereaord, and1aaaeptresponeibilityfor whatdta;ssi loin. jlai donnaleoture d’un texte fort olair;
ever 1have said.
il figure au oompterendu et je m’en tien@B 00 que
j’ai dit.
138, Mr. BITSIOS(Qreeoe)!1have thefeolingthatthe
138. M. BITS105 (Or&) [traduit de l’anglais]: J’ai
Preaident’s tusk is being madecasier andcasier, In
l’impression que la tache du PrBsidentdevient de
plus en plus faoile. Etant donnala d6olaration du
view of thodeolarationby theruproeontativeof Turkey,
readingthe relevant Artiole 2of the Treaty of aunran- representant de la Turquie, qui a donnaleoture de
tee-that Turkey, amongother States,hasundertaken llartiole II du TrnitB de garantie auxtermes duquel
tc guaranteathe independenoe
andterritorial integrity
la Turquie, entre autres Etats, s’est engag6eh
of Cyprus-1 do not sec why anybodywouldobjeotto a garantir IWdbpendanoe et l’int6grit6 territoriale
resolutionoallingupcn a11Stutesto raepootthat same de Chypre, je ne vois pas pourquoi Von objeoterait
independenoe
and territorial integrity, Cenainly, the h une r6solution qui inviterait tous les Etats A
parties that have the apeoialreepcnsibilityof proteotresp0oter oette m8meind$pendanceet oette mt%me
ing that independenoe
andterritorial integrity willnot
int8grit6 terrltorlale. AssurBment,lespartiesquisont
objeotto havingothers reepeotit.
sp6oialementoharg8esde protbger oetteindapendanae
et oette int.6grit6 territoriale ne sauraientstopposer
a oe qu’ondemandeBd’autres Etats de les respecter
6galement.
130. Mr. FEDORENKO(Unionof Soviet SooialietRe139, M. FEDORENKO(Uniondes R6publique.s
sooiapublioe) (translated from Ruesian): At suooessive listes sovi&lques) [traduit du russe]: Au ocurs des
meetings of the Seourity Counoil, we have heard a diffdrentes r&mione du Conseil de 86ourit4, une
legltimate questionbeing askedby the delegationof
question tout B fait justifi6e a Bt6 pc860 par la
th0 Governmentof Cyprus and in partioular by the df316gation
de Chypre, notammentpar M. Kypriancu,
Mini&er for Foreign Affaira, Mr. Kyprianou,by the
son ministre des affaires &rang8res, par le repr$repreeentative of ar0eoe, and, finally, by the Soviet sentant de la Qrboe et, enfin, par la d818gation
delegation.
80vl0ticpe.
140. Can we, the membersof the Seourity Counoil, 140. Le Conseil p0ut-il obtenir enfin du repr6at last obtain here a direot and olear an6werfrom
sentant de la Turquie une r6ponseolaire et netteA
the repreaentativeof Turkey? Canwe have an answer cette question? Peut-il savoir si le Gouvernement
tc the‘questionof whether<LeTurkioh Covernmentie turo est Pr&, oonform6mentB la Charte de notre
prepared, in nooordanoewith the Charter of our organisation, A assumerl’obligation qui lui incombe
Organisation,to deolarethat it undertakeeto respeot de resgeoter la souveralnet6, l’ind&endanoeet Pint&
the eovereignty, independenoe
andterritcrial integrity
grit6 territoriale de Chypre?
of Cyprus?
141. Mr. MENEMENCIOOLU(Turkey): 1believe that
141. M. MENEMENCIOQLU (Turquie) [traduit de
1 have answeredthat questionbefore. However,1shall l’anglais]: J0 orois avoir d6j&r6ponduBoettequestion,
do my best-very briefly, beoaweit L late-to answer Toutefois, je m’efforcerai, tr8e bribvement,enraison
it again.
de l’heure tardive, d’y r6pcndreunefols enccre.
142. 1 think it has been explainedthnt, after very
bitter disouasioneIn an affort tn soc what wouldbo
tbe bast solutionfor bringlng aboutahappysettlemont
of the Cypriot question. the two oommunitianon th0
island ,nlld their two mother oountrios,
Groeoe
and
l’urkey, AQwoll as the LJnUed
Klngdom,hadall agreed
on a oertnln
solution-a solutionwhloh hae oertain
agruements.Thosoagreomontsnro tied to theCha&r
in A mannor knownto the membersof W3 Counoil.
ThoueAre thooiroumstanoee
underwhioha oontraotuul
agroemontha8 takonplaoo by whiohthie nuwRepublio
wna given the ohanoeto Prosperand to build itself in
A bi-oommunalStato, mndlt ia by thie oettlemontthat
a8

142. Comme on l’a d6jIl expliqu6, apr8e dlbpres
disOW3iOnsau OOursdosquolleson s’est efforob de
reoheroher la in0illoure solution h la questionde
Chypre, les deux oommunautbs
de lITle et leurs deux
mbres patries, la arboe et la Turquie, da mQmequo
10 Royaume-U& 8Wnient toua entendus sur una
cortalne solution, solutionqti fait l’objet de oertain8
aooords. Ces damiers sont 116sB la Churte de la
manibre que savent les membres du Coneeil de
ebourit& C’eet dans oes conditions qu’un aooord
oontraoluola Bti ooncluen vertu duquel&tte nouvel10
r0publiquesevoyait donnerla pcseibillt0duprosp6rer
ot de 80 oonstituer en Etat oompcs0de deux oom-

the interesi
territorial

143. When
part of the
said tbat th
is valid, wh
andeven if
part of intc
provieions,
traotual wa
nndthe 0th
Certainly tl
an elaborat
part of this
the Treaty
NntionsCh
UnitedNati
theseTI%R
anoewith tl:

144. As 1 é
key aooep
underthat
mntter: whr
be taken AE
our work ii
ofwhat1ha
way or uBe
situation is
Be reoord
whole,and1

146. Mr.
Republios)(
for having
seemsto i
olearly and
therepresel
146. What1
tion andwe
tcwardsthe
‘l’urkey as
anotherM~I
CYPrus.
147. Our qr
Treaty of 1
repreaentati
someprivatl
148. We WL
tstive of Tu
etantly rets;
b the Charte
tive of Turh
tho plooe

in

oalled Trea
him nb0ut th

tcwardsthls
very Ohr A
hown, tha (
WI question
149. WL3arI
le Council,
artioulat0ly ,
~wnrdsthe I

the interested parties guaranteedthe independenoe,the
territorial integrity and the soveraignty of this oountry.
w-oLais]:
ks le
L une
Lause
aa3,
ue de
‘nies,
$2:
It rie
erbal
extes
clair;
,e que

143. When asked the question 1 replied and read one
oart of the Treaty whioh, preoisely, does that, and 1
Said that this Tre&y 1s en int‘ernational dooumentwhioh
1s valid, whioh is registered with the United Nationsand even If it were net it would still be valid-whioh is
part of international law and whioh, aooording to its
provisions, gives the neoessary guarantees in a oontraotual way. One aide is eupposed to do something,
and the other aide is alto supposed to do something.
Certainly the Seourity Counoil is not the plaoe where
an elaborate disoussion should be entered upon on eaoh
part of this Treaty, but whatever anohpart of it may be,
the Treaty is oertainly in aooordanoe with the United
Nations Charter, When Cypru8 was admitted to tho
United Nations it was in this very ohnmber that a11
these Treaties were explained, and it was in oooordanoewith this thot Cyprus WPSadmitted.
144. As I said before, %mkey is a signatory and Turkey aooepts its rosponsibilities and oommitments
under that Treaty. Of oourse, this is a very serious
matter; whatever 1 bave said is on reoord ond is to
be taken as a whole. 1 do not think we shnll advanoe
our work if someone tries to take just one sentenoe
of whrrt 1 hnve said out of oontext and to put it in a new
way or use taotios of this sort, beoause, ns 1 say, the
situation is a serious
one. Anyone who wants to sec
the reoord oan read what 1 hove snid and take It as a
whole, nnd 1 stand by thnt.

/OOill6 des
une
;ar
la

hnou,
‘epr&

kation
l

mpr&
etta A
Fg;;
tombe
1in%
lit
de
Istïoa
raison
.

‘i%pree
Poe do
ion do
s dewc
‘10 quo
,r un0
rtnlns
~ de la
3il do
L000ld
uvell0
kp0ror

oom-

146. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Yooialist
Republios) (transloted from Russian):Imust apologize
for having to olnrify the nature of my question. It
seems to us that we put the question suffloiently
olearly and we are now waiting for an answer from
the representative of Turkey.
146. What is involved is the Charter of our Organization and we want to sec the attitude of Turkey olarified
towards the nrovlsions of the Charter. the attitude of
Turkey as a’ Member of our Orga&atlon towards
another Member of our Organieation-the Hepublio of
CYPrue.
147, Our question did not even allude to tlle so-oalled
Treaty of 19130.It is quits inoomprehonslble why the
mpreaentative of Turkey oontinually harks baok to
some private treaty.
140. We wîsh to know, not the views of the represenktive of Turkey about the treaty to whioh he la oonstnntly refsrring, but the position of Turkey in regard
ta the Charter of the United Nations, The representative of Turkey says that the Seourity Counoil is not
the place in which to disouss the question of the soOalled Treaty of 1960. Ilowever, we are net asking
him nbout thie, We arefullyawnreof Turkey’s attitude
towards this Trenty, Wo are waitlng for a reply to a
very olenr and, it would seem, simple question. As 1s
h~own, the Counoil hns alroady roceived n reply to
911squestion from the Government of Greoce.
140. We are glnd to note bat, at the laet meeting Of
the Councll, tho roprosentativo of Greace spoke most
a1*tioulntolyabout the attitude of the Greek Governmont
tewards the Chnrter of the United Nations as it relates

munautes; o’est par oe rbglement que les parties
int6resst3es ont garanti l’ind6pendanoe, l’int6grit.6
territoriale et la souverainet du pays.
143. Lorsqu’on m’a pos6 la question. j’ai r6pondu
et J’ai lu -une partie-du Trait%, qui dit exactement
cela; j’ai ajout6 que oe trait6 est un dooument international, qu’il est valide, qu’il est enregistr6 au.
Nations Unies - mAme s’il ne l%tait pas, il serait
Egalement valide -, qu’il fait partie du droit international et que, oonform6ment aux dispositions de la
Charte, il aooorde les garanties ntloessaires sur une
base oontraotielle. Une des parties doit faire quelque
ohose, l’autre doit egalement faire quelque ohose.
De toute Bvldenoe, le Conseil de S&urit8 n’est pas
l%mtance oh il convient d’entreprendre une 6tude
d6taill6e de ohaoune des dispositions de oe traite,
mais, quel que soit 08 traite, quelles qu’en soient ‘es
dispositions, 11 est sans nul doute oonforme A la
Charte dee Nations Ilnies. Lorsque Chypre a 6te admise
A l’Organisation, olest dans oette sailë m6me que les
traitas ont Bt6 expliqu6s et olest en fonotion de oes
trait& que Chypre i f3t6 admise aux Nations Unies.
144. Comme je l’ai d@A dit, la Turquie est signataire
de oe trait8 ot elle nooepte les responsabilitf3s et les
obligations qui en d6ooulent. Bien entendu, olest 18
une question tr8s grave; tout oe que j’nl dlt figure
dans les oomptes rendus et doit 8tre pris oomme un
tout. Je ne vois pas oomment nous progresserons
dans nos travaux si l’on isole de son oontexte telle
ou telle phrase e j’ai prononoBe, pour la pr6senter
aou8 un jour diff r rent, ou si l%n a reoours A d’autres
taotiques de mt3me nature; en effet, je le r&Ate, la
situation est trop grave pour de telles manœuvres.
Quioonque le dt3sire Peut consulter les oomptes rendus:
il y trouvera oe que j’ai dit et devra le oonsid8rer
comme un tout, j’insiste sur oe point,
146. M. FEDORENKO (Union des RBpubliques eooialistes sovi&iques) [traduit du russe]: Vous voudree
bien m’exouser d’avoir A pr8oiser la nature
de ma
question. Nous pensons l’avoir pos6e aveo une nettet8
suffisante et nous attendons maintenant une rf3ponse
de la part du repr&ntant
de la Turquie.
146, Il s’agit de la Char%s, et nous voulons d&ager
l’attitude que In Turquie, Etat Membre de notre
organisation, adopte dans le ordre de la Charte A
l’agard d’un autre Etat Membre, la RBpublique de
Chypre.
147. Notre question ne oontenait pas la moindre
allusion au Trait6 de 1960. Nous ne oomprenons pas
du tout pourquoi le repr6sentant de la Turquie se
r8fAre sans oesse A un aooord partioulier.
148. Nous voulons oonnaftre les vues de la Turquie
non pae sur oe trait& qu’il ne oesae d’invoouer. maie
sur la Charte de ltOKU; Le repr8sentant de ia Turquie
dit que le Conseil de s8ourit8 n’est pas le lieu oQ doit
&re exnmin6 le problAme du Trait6 de 1960. Mais
nous ne lui posons pas de question A oe sujet. Nous
oonnsissons bien lluttitude de la Turquie A l%gard
de oe traIt& Nous attendons une r6ponse A une
question qui noua parnft olnire et simple. Comme
on
le sait, le Gouvernement grec a dejA r6pondu A
oette question.
149. Nous sommes heureux de oonstater que le
repr4senttuit de la Greoe a prbois6 dans les termes
les plus nets, A la derniere sAance du Conseil,
l’attitude de son gouvernement A l%gard des dlspo-

to the sovereignty,
tegrity of Cyprus.

independenoe and territorial

in-

sitions de la Charte des Nations Uuies qui sont
applioables A la souverainet6, A l’ind6pendnnoe et
A l’int6grit8 territoriale de Chypre.
160. Nous ne comprenons pas pourquoi le repr&
sontant de la Turquie ne peut pas r0pondre aussi
nettement que le reprbsentant de la GrBoe.
161. Voilh pourquoi nous nous posons des questions,
et il est naturel que nous voulions entendre une
r6ponse non 6quivoque de la part du repr6sentant
de la Turquie, Quelle est finalement son attitude A
oet Bgard?
162. Nous donnera-t-il enfin une r&ponse, oufaudrat-il encore rdunir de nombreuses fois le Conseil de
sWrft6
avant d’entendre une d6olaration sur une
question qui, oomme l’a fait remarquer A juste titre
le Ministre des affaires &rangiWes de Chypre, est
de la plus haut8 importance?
163. M. KYPRIANOU (Chypre) [traduit de l’anglais]:
Le repr$sentant de la Turquie a par16 de la façon
dont les m8res et la belle-m8re ont pr6par6 les
aocords de 1960. Mais, depuis lors, un nouvel Etat
est n6, la RBpublique de Chypre, qui est Membre de
l’Organisation des Nations Unies, aveo tous les droits
et devoirs qui s’attachent A cette qualit& C’est A oe
titre que mon pays est reprbsente ioi.
164. J’ai relev6 une remarque faite tout A l’heure
par le repr6sentnnt de la Turquie. Si je l’ai bien
oompris, il a dit qu’h son avis et de llavls de son
gouvernement les traitas Btalent conformes A la
Charte des Nations Unies, Si le Gouvernement turc
estime que les trait& sont oonformes A la Charte,
pourquoi y aurait-il une objeotion queloonque A une
r$solution d6olarnnt que lW6grit6 territoriale et
l%&pendanoe de Chypre doivent &re respeot6es,
aonform$ment au paragraphe 4 de 1lArtiole 2 de la
Charte?
166. M. FEDORENKO (Union des RBpubliques sooialistes sovi#iques) [traduit du russe]: Nous nous
voyons dans l’obligation de constater que le repr&
sentant de la Turquie n’a pas donne de r6ponse A la
question que lui avaient pos6e la d616gation sovi&ique,
le Ministre des affaires &rangbres de Chypre et- je
me permets de le rappeler - le repr6sentant de la

150. It is inoomprehensible why, even after this, the
representative of Turkey cannot give us an answer as
olear as that of the Ambassador of Greeoe.
151. This is precisely why the question arises for us,
and we naturally want to have and to hear a clear
answer from the Turklsh representative: what then,
once and for all, is his attitude towards this question?
162. Shall we at last hear this, or must we oonvene
the Security Council again and again in order to obtain
a statement on a question whioh, as the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cyprus rightly says, is important
or cxtremely important?
153. Mr. KYPRIANOU (Cyprus): The representative
of Turkey spoke of the way in which the mothers and
the stepmother had brought about the Agreements in
1960. But sinoe thsn a new State has emerged, the Republia of Cyprus, whioh is a full Memberof the United
Nations. It is as suoh that my oountry is represented
here.
164. 1 notioe a remark whioh the representative of
Turkey made earlier. If 1 heard himoorreotly, he said
that, in his view and in his Government’a view, the
Treaties w8re in aooordance with the United Nations
Ch&er. If it is his Government’s view thatthe Treaties are in aooordanoe with the United Nations Charter,
why should there be any objeotion to a resolution
stating that the territorial integrity and independenoe
of Cyprus should be respected, in aocordanoe with
Artiole 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter?
166. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Sooialist Republias) (translated from Russian): If you will forgive
me, the Soviet delegation feels it necessary to note
that no reply has been given by the Turkish representative to the question raised by our delegation or to the
question raised by the Minister for Fore@ Affairs of
Cyprus and-1 venture to reoall-by the representative of Greeoe,
166. Mr. MENEMENCIOGLU (Turkey): The reoofrr?s
of the deourity Councfl will show that 1 have already
answered this question twioe.

Grboe.

166. M. MENEMENCIOGLU (Turquie) [traduit de
l’anglais]: Les oomptes rendus du Conseil de sbourit4
montreront que nous avons d@A rhpondu deux fois
A cette question.
167. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l’anglais): Il n’y a
plus d’orateur insorlt sur ma liste, J’ai oonsult4
les membres du Conseil au sujet de la date de notre
proohaine s&noe et, oompte tenu de leur avis, Je
sugg8re que le Consel continue l’examen de cette
question le lundi 2 mam, A 16 heures.

167. The PRESIDENT: There are no other names on
the list of speakers. 1 have oonsulted members of the
Counoil about the date of our next meeting, and J should
like to suggest, in the light of those oonsultations, that
the Co*unoil should continue its consideration of this
question on Monday, 2 Maroh, at 3 p.m.
If was SO decided.
The meeting

Zl en est afnsf
rose

at 6.40 p.m.

dtfcidt?

La dance

est levée

a’ 18 h 40.

30
---.--Prlce

$Us.

0.50 (or qulvalollt

~~.
111 otbor

currenclas)

2!%99-Fobrmy

1965~1,900
