S/2023/21

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 January 2023
Original: English

Situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2640 (2022) of 29 June 2022, the Security Council extended
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) until 30 June 2023 and requested the Secretary-General to
report to the Council every three months on the implementation of the resolution. The
present report covers developments in Mali since the previous report ( S/2022/731),
issued on 3 October 2022.

II. Major political developments
2.
Sustained efforts were made to maintain the momentum generated following the
agreement between Mali and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) on the extension of the transition. Transitional au thorities took steps to
implement their reform agenda and the recommendations stemming from the national
dialogue on the reform process held in December 2021. Efforts made to advance the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali r an into new
difficulties following the decision of the signatory movements to suspend their
participation in the Agreement monitoring mechanism until the holding of a meeting
with the international mediation team to discuss the future of the peace process. As
insecurity continues to challenge the restoration of State authority, the implementation
of the strategy for the stabilization of the central regions remains key to addressing
the prevailing situation.

A.

Political transition
3.
On 31 October, the commission mandated to prepare the new constitution
submitted a draft to transitional President Assimi Goïta. Prior to the submission of
the draft, between 17 and 30 October, the commission briefed government officials,
State institutions, political parties and civil society organizations on the process.
MINUSMA supported a similar exercise with regional stakeholders in the centre and
northern parts of the country. The draft constitution introduces several elements,
including provisions allowing for the impeachment of the President; a limitation on
the number of ministers; the introduction of a bicameral legislature (the Assemblée
nationale and the Haut conseil de la nation) the deposition of the presidents of both

22-29311 (E)

120123

*2229311*

S/2023/21

chambers; and the establishment of a Court of Audit. The text also includes an
acknowledgment of the role of traditional leaders in dispute resolution mechanisms.
4.
Malian stakeholders have expressed varied reactions on the process and content
of the draft constitution. Some have voiced concerns over the scope of power granted
to the office of the president, which they believe could jeopardize the separation of
powers between the executive, legislative and judiciary branches. The Coordination
des mouvements de l’Azawad (CMA) called for the inclusion of a section dedicated
to decentralization to frame the transfer of competencies to the Collectivités
territoriales and enhance regional financial autonomy. More generally, they stressed
the need to achieve the broadest possible consensus on the new constitution.
5.
Following the adoption of the electoral law in June, further progress was made
on electoral reform. On 20 October, the Independent Authority for Election
Management was operationalized, and its 15 board members took oaths before the
Supreme Court. Appointed by the transitional President on 12 October, the Board
includes eight members nominated by the Government, four by political parties and
three by civil society organizations. Four of the representatives are women,
representing 26 per cent of the total, falling just under the national law requiring 30
per cent. Meanwhile, the Ministry of Territorial Administration and Decentralization
operationalized the different thematic working groups of the Steering Committee for
the Referendum and General Elections, a mechanism established to support the
Government in its coordination efforts. Finally, the yearly update of the electoral list
began on 1 October and is expected to end on 31 December. MINUSMA and the
United Nations country team organized training sessions for civil society
organizations involved in election awareness-raising and mobilization. The Mission
also undertook the transportation of the delegates and electoral materials to facilitate
the exercise in the centre and the northern parts of the country. On 7 November, the
Mission d’observation des élections au Mali, a platform of civil society organizations
providing electoral assistance, highlighted that the absence of administrative
commissions in some municipalities, as well as the registration of internally displaced
persons and refugees, remained a challenge.
6.
Efforts by transitional authorities to foster consensus on reforms and the
electoral process continued. In October and November, the Cadre de concertation de s
parties politiques, under the chairmanship of the Minister for Territorial
Administration and Decentralization, convened to discuss the voting modalities for
internally displaced persons, refugees and the Malian Defence and Security Forces
who will secure the elections. Some political parties and civil society organizations
that boycotted the selection process of members of the Independent Authority for
Election Management did not attend the meetings.
7.
Next steps in the electoral process include the establishment of coordination
offices of the Independent Authority for Election Management at all constituency
levels. This will entail the recruitment, training and deployment of an estimated 3,000
personnel, with the support of the United Nations Integrate d Electoral Team,
comprising MINUSMA, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women). On 26 October, the Mission organized a meeting with the heads of
diplomatic missions accredited to Mali to give them an update on the electoral process
and urge for the mobilization of the required resources. Moreover, MINUSMA police
are conducting capacity-building programmes on election security for Malian police
and gendarmerie personnel in Bamako, Gao and Mopti. Similarly, MINUSMA and
the European Union capacity-building mission in Mali are supporting the Malian
centre de gestion des crises et catastrophes with regard to election-related risk analysis
and response planning and coordination. MINUSMA provided air transport for 213
individuals and 2 tons of electoral materials in support of Government -led activities
2/19

22-29311

S/2023/21

on political and institutional reforms, including the dissemination of the new electoral
law, briefings on the draft constitution and the yearly update of the electoral roll.
8.
The transitional authorities also initiated measures to address long -standing
administrative and political shortcomings affecting governance. On 19 October, the
Council of Ministers adopted six bills on administrative and territorial reorganization.
One set of bills provides for the creation of administrative constituencies (regions,
cercles and arrondissements), the demarcation of the new regions and the
readjustment of several existing administrative boundaries. The second set of bills
establishes decentralized constituencies at two levels, namely the regions and the
communes. With MINUSMA support, the National Transition Council organized
information sessions for its members on 29 and 30 November and public hearings
with concerned stakeholders prior to the examination of the bills.
9.
Other measures were taken to implement the recommendations stemming from
the national dialogue on the reform process. From 17 to 22 October, a conference was
organized in Bamako on the development of a social stability pact, providing
recommendations to address prevailing challenges and to accelerate the establishment
of a framework for social dialogue. The Government also enacted a law on the
militarization of the national police which, alongside the national army, is expected
to help secure areas freed from the presence of terrorist groups. Furthermore, on
28 October, the transitional President appointed 26 new members to the National
Transition Council, in line with the July decree expanding the membership from 121
to 147 and allocating the additional seats to different entities. While the enlargement
of the National Transition Council does not substantially alter the balance among the
different categories, it provides an opportunity to balance the distribution of seats
among signatory movements, with equal representation for CMA and the Platform
coalition of armed groups. Among the appointees, 10 are women, bringing their total
number to 42 (28 per cent). Some stakeholders, including the Mouvement du 5 juinRassemblement des forces patriotiques and the High Islamic Council, expressed
discontent over their lack of representation in the final list.
10. At the same time, the joint monitoring mechanism for the return to constitutional
order met on a regular basis. At the 13 October meeting of the Commission for the
Monitoring of the Timetable for Political and Institutional Reforms, software to track
progress against benchmarks and enhance oversight was introduced. On 29 November,
the ECOWAS Mediator for Mali visited Bamako ahead of the sixty -second ordinary
session of the Authority of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS, which met
in Abuja on 4 December. The Authority of Heads of State and Government
subsequently noted with satisfaction that the transition was on course. It also instructed
the ECOWAS Commission to assist the Malian authorities, with the support of the
African Union and the United Nations, to mobilize the necessary resources to help
meet the transition deadline of March 2024. Finally, the Authority commended the
various diplomatic efforts made by ECOWAS and its member States, as well as those
of the United Nations, to secure the release of the 46 Ivorian military personnel detained
in Mali, calling on the Malian authorities to respond positively to these efforts.
11. The reporting period was marked by political dynamics driven by the debate
over constitutional reform, to which numerous stakeholders provided concrete
recommendations, with some expressly stating the need to avoid polarization. The
Alliance pour la démocratie au Mali-Parti africain pour la solidarité et la justice and
the Parti pour la renaissance nationale called on the Government to suspend the
process pending an inclusive political dialogue within an appropriate framework. For
its part, the Union pour la République et la démocratie stressed the relevance of
constitutional reform, inviting Malians to provide objective proposals to address the
shortcomings of the preliminary draft constitution. On 26 November, the Cadre des
partis et regroupements politiques pour le retour à l’ordre constitutionnel held a press
22-29311

3/19

S/2023/21

conference to call for the holding of a high-level dialogue with political and other
relevant stakeholders on the broader political and institutional reforms required to
complete the transition. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General met with
civil society and political parties on 16 and 29 November to emphasize their crucial
role in the success of the transition reform agenda and encourage constructive dialogue.

B.

Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
12. The forty-sixth ordinary session of the Agreement Monitoring Committee was
held in Bamako on 11 October. Participants acknowledged the need to deliver peace
dividends to the population and reiterated the need to implement the 16 development
projects still outstanding for the benefit of the northern regions. They underscored the
role of the Agreement’s monitoring structures and emphasized the importance of
revitalizing the four thematic subcommittees. The forty-seventh session of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee, due to be held on 29 November, was adjourned
to allow further discussions about the level of representation of the Government, an
issue raised by CMA. Subsequently, the Special Representative of the Secretary General and the President of the Agreement Monitoring Committee met with the
Minister for Reconciliation, who reiterated the Government’s commitment to the
implementation of the Agreement.
13. Meanwhile, on 18 October, the Council of Ministers endorsed a six-month
mandate for the ad hoc commission to resolve outstanding issues related to the chain
of command within the national defence and security forces and on the integration of
senior civilian officials of the movements into Government institutions, including the
national defence and security forces. Both CMA and the Platform coalition of armed
groups have six representatives each, while the inclusivity movements have three
delegates.
14. Furthermore, MINUSMA and the two national commissions in charge of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration carried out visits to the northern
regions to assess the logistical and technical conditions for the launch of the global
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process. Meanwhile, the Malian
Government reached an agreement with the World Bank to extend the funding of the
socioeconomic reintegration of 900 women affiliated with the armed groups until
30 June 2023.
15. On 21 November, the Minister for Reconciliation, Colonel-Major Ismaël
Wagué, travelled to Kidal for consultations with relevant CMA stakeholders. While
there, he inaugurated the regional representation of the Office de radiodiffusion
télévision nationale du Mali and visited the reconstituted battalion.
16. The Mission continued to support the implementation of the Agreement’s
provisions on reconciliation and justice. This included the redeployment of judges
and prosecutors to the tribunal in Gao to hold civil and criminal hearings, and the
facilitation for four relocated judges to hold hearings in Diré, Goundam and Gourma Rharous in the Timbuktu region and in Bourem in the Gao region during October and
November.
17. The October and November meetings of the Agreement Monitoring Committe e
were marred by a controversy over the level of participation by the Government. In
this connection, on 10 December, CMA issued a communiqué deploring what it
perceived as a lack of political commitment from the Government in the peace process
and requested that the parties discuss the future of the Agreement in a neutral place
“for a decisive examination of its viability”. Meeting on 14 December, the
international mediation team stressed the primary responsibility of the Malian parties,
which include the Government and the movements, to advance the implementation of

4/19

22-29311

S/2023/21

the Agreement. The mediation team called on the Malian parties to refrain from any
statement that might undermine efforts to build confidence. On 20 and 21 December,
signatory movements met within the Permanent Strategic Framework, reiterating in
the meantime the call for a meeting to discuss the viability of the Agreement, and
announced the suspension of their participation in the monitoring mechanisms of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee and the implementation of the Agreement.

C.

Stabilization and the restoration of State authority in the centre
18. Since the endorsement of a strategy for the stabilization of the centre,
MINUSMA continued its collaboration with the permanent secretariat of the Cadre
politique pour la gestion de la crise du centre to support the implementation of the
strategy. MINUSMA and the United Nations country team are developing a support
plan in line with the four strategic axes of the strategy. Between 14 and 17 November,
MINUSMA met with governors and representatives of the Malian Defence and
Security Forces in the five central regions to identify their priorities and tailor support
to the specific needs of each region.
19. MINUSMA and UNDP are supporting the operationalization of the remaining
three regional committees to implement the strategy for the stabilization of the cen tre
in Bandiagara, Douentza and San.
20. Efforts also continued to enhance civil society contributions to good
governance. From 11 to 13 October, MINUSMA conducted a training-of-trainers
workshop on good local governance and citizen participation for 20 me mbers of civil
society, including 6 youth and 6 women. In turn, from 19 October to 13 November,
they proceed to train a total of 500 citizens, including 285 women, from 20 communes
throughout the Ségou and San regions.

III. Major security developments, the response of the Mission
and support for national efforts
21. The security situation in Mali remains complex, particularly in the centre and
the border area between Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger. Ongoing activities of
extremist elements affiliated with Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin (JNIM)
and Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (ISGS) continue to drive insecurity in Gao and
Ménaka, while the other northern regions are severely affected by the displacement
of the affected population. In central Mali, extremist groups continue to capitalize on
intercommunal conflicts to expand their influence and secure new recruits.
22. Discussions between MINUSMA and the Malian army leadership are ongoing
to facilitate planning and coordination. MINUSMA and the Malian Defence and
Security Forces conducted 81 coordinated patrols in Gao, Ménaka, Mopti and
Timbuktu, including five long-range patrols in Bara and Gargouna in the Gao region,
to enhance movements on these axes and secure fairs and markets.
Central Mali
23. In central Mali, groups affiliated with JNIM continued to pressure communities
to enforce survival pacts and force them not to collaborate with the Malian Defence
and Security Forces or support dozos affiliated with Dan Nan Ambassagou. This
coercion has resulted in a growing number of villages signing agreements and paying
the zakat tax to extremist groups.
24. The Malian Defence and Security Forces released information about Operation
Maliko, noting several interventions in the areas of Boni, Bankass, Dou entza, Mopti,
22-29311

5/19

S/2023/21

Sofara and Timissa. The reports highlight raids on various terrorist strongholds and
on JNIM-affiliated Katiba Serma and Katiba Macina. On 23 October, about 100
internally displaced persons sought shelter in Douentza town, fearing arbitrary a rrest
or targeting by extremist groups in the aftermath of a series of military operations in
the villages of Dourgana, Hombori, Hairé, Simbi and Mondoro. In Douentza,
MINUSMA is securing the airfield to create conditions for humanitarian access to
populations. The Mission also conducted daily foot and mechanized patrols in the
town and in nearby urban centres. During long-range patrols, on 4 and 5 November,
peacekeepers were involved in two separate improvised explosive device incidents,
between Douentza and Mopti, which injured six personnel. On 21 and 25 November,
two improvised explosive device incidents near Douentza injured three peacekeepers.
25. Mopti remained the region with the highest number of incidents related to
improvised explosive devices. Civilians are disproportionately affected by the
explosive threat, as exemplified by fatal incidents on 13, 18 and 28 October which
left 25 civilians dead, including 3 children, and 37 others injured. On 13 October, a
local bus hit an improvised explosive device in Sibo village, near Bandiagara,
resulting in 17 civilian deaths and 36 injured. The same day, the local population
threw stones at a MINUSMA convoy in Bandiagara town, blaming the Mission for
the incident. Misinformation about these allegations continued to spread and, on
14 October, a MINUSMA patrol travelling from Sévaré to the temporary operating
base in Ogossogou village was blocked by a hostile crowd. In its attempts to return
to Sévaré, the convoy met further roadblocks. The convoy w as forced to stop in
Bandiagara while local authorities mediated with the population to allow the convoy
to return to Sévaré. The incident left nine peacekeepers slightly injured and seven
MINUSMA vehicles damaged. On the same day, the Chief of Staff of th e Malian army
issued a communiqué condemning the improvised explosive device incident and
indicating that Katiba Macina were the perpetrators.
26. Popular discontent with insecurity has led MINUSMA to restrict movements by
road in the area, thereby requiring resupply missions by air to the Ogossogou
temporary operating base on 15 and 31 October. On 29 November, as a result of
sustained engagement with local authorities to address issues related to access,
peacekeepers travelled to Ogossogou to relieve personnel who had been due for
rotation since October. Despite these challenges, the Mission continued night patrols
around Ogossogou to protect civilians and support local peace initiatives brokered
between communities since October 2021. The Mission also facilitated visits of the
gendarmerie and the sub-prefect from 4 to 6 October to investigate incidents in which
nearly 180 civilians were killed in 2019 and 2020.
27. In the Ségou region, a reduction in communal violence was observed in areas
where MINUSMA invested substantial efforts towards facilitating reconciliation,
including through support for the Government’s regional reconciliation support
teams. Following two years of conflict over land issues between the Dogofri and
Sokolo communities, their representatives gathered in Niono from 7 to 9 October to
resolve differences. Similarly, a dialogue was organized from 14 to 16 October in the
Mariko commune to address the conflict affecting communities from 25 villages in
the area.
Northern Mali
28. In the Gao and Ménaka regions, JNIM and ISGS continued to clash near
populated areas, leading to several civilian casualties and displacement towards
neighbouring areas. ISGS remained active in the Anchawadi and Gabero communes
of Gao cercle, in Tessit and Tin Hama in Ansongo cercle in the Gao region and in the
Anderamboukane cercle in the Ménaka region. Signatory armed groups increased
their mobilization with the stated aim of countering the advancement of extremist
6/19

22-29311

S/2023/21

groups towards the Timbuktu and Kidal regions. In a bid to create a security belt,
CMA deployed fighters and military equipment to the Gao and Ménaka regions. These
movements of signatory armed groups beyond the zones agreed upon in the
Agreement could make the ceasefire fragile, heightening the risks o f unintentionally
breaking the status quo. Similarly, the Groupe d’autodéfense des Touaregs Imghad et
leurs alliés (GATIA) called for youth to mobilize and rejoin its ranks, which may also
pose an additional challenge to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process. The Malian Defence and Security Forces released information on efforts
undertaken in the eastern sector of Operation Maliko, noting multiple interventions
in the areas of Gossi, Ménaka, Tessit and Gao. Moreover, the Malian Armed For ces
are providing regular escorts to civilian convoys to facilitate their movements along
the Gao-Labézanga axis.
29. In the Gao region, ISGS continued to target the civilian population and the
Malian Armed Forces. On 5 October, following threats to the population by extremist
groups, MINUSMA conducted assessment missions in Haoussa Foulane, Kobe,
Tacharane and Tin Hama to assess security and investigate allegations of human rights
violations. MINUSMA integrated visits to Ansongo and Bara contributed to reinforcing
collaboration with local authorities and facilitating regular long -range patrols on the
Gao-Bara and Ansongo-Bara axes. In addition, two community violence reduction
projects to improve water systems in Bilali Koira and Kokorom were launched. On
24 October, gunshots were fired towards the MINUSMA temporary operating base in
the vicinity of Tamkoutat, Anchawadi commune, Gao cercle. On 30 October, ISGS
conducted an attack against GATIA and CMA elements near Djebok, northern Gao.
The incident resulted in the death of about 26 civilians and forced more than 1,000
others to flee to Gao, where the Direction nationale du développement social
estimated the number of sheltered persons at 58,308, including 33,813 women. On 29
October, the Malian Defence and Security Forces started patrols within the city and
its outskirts, with units comprising members of the Malian Armed Forces, the garde
nationale, the gendarmerie, the police, and civilian protection.
30. In the Ménaka region, ISGS continues to exert influence on three of the region’s
four cercles. Between 27 October and 4 November, MINUSMA received reports of
clashes between JNIM and ISGS in Tamalelt, Anderamboukane district, and
Tinteshori, 40 km south of Ménaka, with the former retreating to Inékar, 48 k m west
of Ménaka town. MINUSMA pursued its day and night patrolling in Ménaka town,
as well as its regular patrolling. Coordinated patrols with Malian security forces were
conducted once a week. Two MINUSMA deterrence flights were conducted on
10 October in support of the Malian forces. These efforts were complemented by
initiatives to strengthen early warning and community mechanisms for conflict
management.
31. On 4 October, the Technical Commission on Security agreed on the need to
develop a new security arrangement to enhance coordination among relevant
stakeholders, within the framework of the Agreement. In this regard, on 13 October
and 2 November, the MINUSMA Force held consultations with local authorities, the
Malian Defence and Security Forces and signatory armed groups.
32. In the Timbuktu region, signatory armed groups mobilized in response to the
growing threat of ISGS in areas bordering the Gao region. On 7 October, CMA
elements gathered in Ber commune, Timbuktu cercle, while GATIA and the Platform
coalition of armed groups re-established checkpoints in different localities of the
Gourma-Rharous cercle. These activities have been linked to accusations of
racketeering against civilians in the Gourma-Rharous and Timbuktu cercles. Attacks
by unidentified armed individuals continue to occur on the main axes. This
challenging environment has had an equal impact on the Mission. On 1 November, a

22-29311

7/19

S/2023/21

MINUSMA convoy hit an improvised explosive device while returning from a long range patrol approximately 15 km from the MINUSMA Goundam camp.
33. MINUSMA has reinforced long-range patrols, particularly on the GoundamTimbuktu axis. Coordinated efforts with the Malian Armed Forces resulted in an
increased number of patrols and activities, focusing on the Goundam -Diré-Tonka
triangle, where extremist groups are particularly active. On 1 December, MINUSMA
also provided air reconnaissance support to the Malian Armed Forces between
Timbuktu and Léré to mitigate threats against them. In Timbuktu city, the Mission
supported the construction of four watchtowers for the gendarmerie. Moreover,
civilian-led activities focused on the facilitation of meetings with local authorities
from the Timbuktu and Taoudenni regions towards the restoration of State authority.
In this context, MINUSMA conducted a mission with the Governor of Timbuktu to
Gourma-Rharous to facilitate exchanges with his constituency. MINUSMA held
several training sessions on conflict management for 50 youth leaders, including 17
women, from Timbuktu and Taoudenni. MINUSMA also supported the strengthening
of local protection capacities for focal points from the communes of Ber, Alafia,
Lafia, Timbuktu and Taoudenni.
34. In the Kidal region, on 17 October, two separate MINUSMA convoys hit
improvised explosive devices in Tessalit in separate incidents. In the first incident,
four peacekeepers lost their lives, and two others were seriously injured. In the
second, nine peacekeepers suffered injuries. On 19 October, another MINUSMA
vehicle hit an improvised explosive device near Aguelhok. On 30 November, an
individual contracted by a MINUSMA subcontractor was killed in the explosion of
an improvised explosive device approximately 750 meters north-west of the
MINUSMA camp.
35. The region has been severely affected by the increasing influx of internally
displaced persons from the Ménaka region. Local authorities estimated that more than
11,000 people had arrived recently, leading to tensions over water, food, medical
supplies and farmland in the area. On 12 October, the M ission distributed food,
non-food items and medical supplies to more than 4,000 displaced persons. On
15 October, MINUSMA also started a training programme for the reconstituted army
battalion in Kidal, covering a broad range of tactical skills.
36. MINUSMA continued to promote social cohesion and economic recovery for
communities in Aguelhok and Tessalit. In this regard, two rehabilitation projects of
public facilities were launched in Aguelhok. In October and November, four
dialogues with communities were organized in the region to strengthen collaboration
with local partners.
Restoration of State authority and other related efforts
37. As at 30 November, the presence of State authorities (including governors,
prefects and sub-prefects) has notably increased in the north (from 10 per cent during
the previous reporting period to 17 per cent, or 22 out of 130 civil servants) and, to a
lesser extent, in the centre (from 28 to 29 per cent, or 34 out of 118 civil servants).
MINUSMA assisted the newly appointed State representatives by holding a five -day
capacity-building training session in late October.
38. Transitional authorities are working on advancing reforms aimed at redefining
the strategic vision of the security sector and its main pillars: defence, internal
security, justice and prison, as well as territorial administration. In support of these
reforms, the Mission continued its assistance to the permanent secretariat of the
National Security Council, which finalized the draft national security strategy on
1 November. Moreover, on 4 November, the Ministries of Territorial Administration
and Decentralization, of Internal Security and of Defence endorsed the national
8/19

22-29311

S/2023/21

strategy on border management and security, which was developed with MINUSMA
support, to enhance coordination among communities, local authorities and security
forces.
39. MINUSMA continued to work with the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights
on a national criminal policy and prosecutorial strategy on terrorism -related and
international crimes, which was adopted in September and is currently being
implemented. MINUSMA, together with the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, continued to build the capacities of the Specialized Judicial Unit on Terrorism
and Transnational Organized Crime. As at 1 December, the Bamako Criminal Court
of Assises had processed 22 cases related to terrorist offenses and transnational crimes
investigated and prosecuted by the Specialized Judicial Unit. From 17 to 20 October,
MINUSMA trained prison staff in Mopti as a continuation of its support for the
implementation of the national policy on the prevention and countering of violent
extremism and radicalization in prisons. From 4 to 9 December, in Bamako, the
Mission facilitated the sharing of experiences on the prevention of radicalization and
violent extremism in prisons among religious leaders and prison staff from Mauritania
and Mali.

IV. Human rights situation
40. Attacks by violent extremist groups against civilians constituted the majority of
the documented abuses. The Mission documented violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law allegedly committed during military opera tions
conducted by the Malian Armed Forces, accompanied by foreign security personnel
and dozos. The Mission also documented some instances in which foreign security
personnel appear to have committed violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law while conducting both air and ground military operations in the
centre of the country. The Government announced the opening of investigations into
violations of international human rights and humanitarian law documented since the
beginning of the year, but the findings have yet to be released. On 15 November, the
transitional President promulgated a law establishing modalities for compensation for
damages resulting from serious human rights violations.
41. The Mission maintained dialogue with transitional authorities in support of their
efforts to respect human rights, including through the provision of technical support
and capacity-building. MINUSMA also conducted training sessions on international
human rights and humanitarian law for 182 participants, including 14 women, from
State actors and for 29 participants, including 12 women, from non -State actors. In
accordance with the human rights due diligence policy, 47 risk assessments were
conducted on support provided to non-United Nations security forces, including the
Malian Defence and Security Forces. The type of support assessed during the
reporting period included fuel and rations, transportation, capacity -building and
construction work. Mitigating measures are in place and recipients are monit ored
regularly.
42. MINUSMA documented 172 human rights violations (26) and abuses (146), 58
per cent fewer than during the previous reporting period. These included killings (76),
injuries (63) and abductions or enforced disappearances (33). Thirty -three cases of
arbitrary arrest and detention in connection with military operations were also
documented. Of the 172 violations and abuses documented, 121 were allegedly
perpetrated by extremist armed groups, 26 by national armed forces and foreign
security personnel, 13 by unidentified armed groups, 8 by signatory or compliant
armed groups and 4 by community-based militias. Most of these violations and abuses
were documented in the central regions of Bandiagara (72), Douentza (3), Mopti (4)

22-29311

9/19

S/2023/21

and Ségou (23). In the north, violations and abuses were recorded in Gao (43),
Ménaka (16) and Timbuktu (9).
43. A decrease in verified grave violations against children (215) was recorded (369
were verified during the previous reporting period). These violations included
recruitment and use (68), killing and maiming (41), sexual violence (18), abductions
(47), attacks against schools and hospitals (5) and the denial of humanitarian access
(36). Verified violations occurred in the Ségou (97), Bandiagara (30), Kidal (26),
Ménaka (23), Gao (22), Mopti (6), Timbuktu (4), Bamako (2), Kayes (2), Koulikoro
(1) and Sikasso (1) regions and were mostly attributed to unidentified armed elements
(150), as well as CMA (16), the Malian Defence and Security Forces (7), an
undetermined branch of the Mouvement pour le salut de l’Azawad (6), the Platform
coalition of armed groups (6), Dan Nan Ambassagou (8), clashes between the Malian
Defence and Security Forces and armed groups (5), dozos elements (4), Katiba
Macina (4), ISGS (3), Katiba Serma (2) and the Mouvement pour le salut de l’Azawad
des Daoussak (2). Of the 68 children recruited, 2 are still active with the armed
groups, 12 left the armed groups during the reporting period and 54 left prior to the
reporting period. A total of 32 children, including 6 girls, were abducted and forcibly
recruited, while 15 other girls were abducted for sexual purposes. All abductions took
place in Ségou and were perpetrated by unidentified armed groups except two
incidents, which occurred in Bandiagara and were perpetrated by Dan Nan
Ambassagou elements.
44. The United Nations and non-governmental partners recorded 1,151 incidents of
sexual violence, of which 48 were conflict-related. All the victims were female, and
almost 8 per cent were girls aged 12 to 17. These crimes were reportedly perpetrated
by elements of armed groups (32 per cent), notably members of the signatory armed
groups and unidentified armed elements (68 per cent). MINUSMA organized three
workshops on conflict-related sexual violence monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements in Bamako, Kidal and Mopti during the 16 Days of Activism against
Gender-based Violence campaign to involve more actors in the monitoring and
documenting exercise. In various communes of Bamako, the Mission further
implemented sessions on conflict-related sexual violence, in which over 2,000 people
were sensitized through mobile cinemas.
45. On 2 November, the High Authority for Communication suspended the Joliba
television channel for two months after concluding th at the channel aired contents
considered to be defamatory against the Authority and the transitional Government.
On 1 December, the Authority decided to shorten the period of suspension by one
month, allowing the resumption of the activities of the television channel the
following day.

V. Humanitarian situation
46. Humanitarian needs have increased significantly. This situation was further
compounded by the economic fallout of the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic and the rise in global food prices. The number of people displaced
internally has risen from 397,000 during the previous reporting period to 442,620 (as
of October). Some 1,950 schools remain closed, affecting over 587,000 children,
particularly in the Mopti region. Humanitarian actors continued to provide food,
shelter and health care. Assistance has reached 2.5 million people out of 5.3 million
in need. Resources mobilized to date stand at $230 million, or 34 per cent of the
required funding.
47. Food insecurity is emerging as a major threat, resulting from a combination of
conflict, episodes of drought and rainfall variability exacerbated by climate change.
10/19

22-29311

S/2023/21

Owing to funding constraints, 400,000 people will not receive any assistance. A
staggering 2 million children under the age of 5 remain affected by acute malnutrition.
48. On 23 November, the transitional authorities banned all activities of
non-governmental organizations supported by France, including humanitarian
activities. This announcement followed the earlier decision by the Government of
France to suspend development assistance to Mali. The combined effect of these two
decisions will have an impact on the delivery of basic social services in the Ménaka
region, the health sector in the Kidal region and the functioning of some local
authorities in the Ségou region.

VI. Economic development
49. In 2022, the effects of ongoing conflict and political instability in Mali, the
armed conflict in Ukraine and the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the consequences
of past sanctions, have resulted in lower-than-expected gross domestic product (4.2
per cent according to the Government), increased income inequality and higher
inflation. The World Bank estimated that, with the current level of inflation, poverty
in Mali would increase by 4.8 per cent. The Government has reduced taxes, increased
subsidies and established an interministerial task force to counter rising prices and
facilitate the supply of agricultural products and basic necessities. In November,
public demand for enhanced State assistance grew, resulting in a series of strike
notices that were submitted to the Minister for Labour and Public Service by several
organizations and unions of teachers, students, magistrates and judicial and hospital
personnel, among others.
50. Four projects worth $3 million in total were launched by MIN USMA under the
trust fund in support of peace and security in Mali, covering support for the
implementation of the Agreement, human rights organizations in Bamako and in the
centre of the country, and the justice sector response to conflict -related sexual
violence. Moreover, the Mission financed 27 quick-impact projects, worth $866,279,
focusing on governance, the renovation of public facilities and infrastructures and
access to water and sanitation.

VII. Operational challenges
51. The reporting period saw both progress and setbacks in the implementation of
the force adaptation plan. On one hand, the completion of critical infrastructure in
Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu will enable the deployment of three additional helicopter
units from Bangladesh, India and Pakistan, as well as a second cargo aircraft from
Tunisia in the first months of 2023. The Mission is implementing the
recommendations from the Board of Inquiry Unit related to the Egyptian combat
convoy battalion to facilitate the resumption of its oper ations. On the other hand, the
operational capacity of the Gao mobile task force has been greatly hampered by the
withdrawal of the Swedish contingent and the end of operations by British troops.
The Secretariat is working with troop-contributing countries that have indicated an
interest in replacing the outgoing units but, given the Mission’s equipment
requirements, no deployment is expected for at least a year.
52. With regard to the police component, in October, MINUSMA carried out a
predeployment visit to Nepal to facilitate the deployment of a new formed police unit
in Kidal to replace the Benin detachment, which ceased its operations in November
and was repatriated in December. The restrictions previously imposed by some
contributing countries on certain activities of their police officers were lifted.
However, the delayed deployment of the Egyptian formed police unit, owing to the
22-29311

11/19

S/2023/21

delayed shipment of the remaining contingent-owned equipment from Dakar, affected
the Mission’s operational capacity to protect civilians in the centre of the country.
53. The non-availability of three of the four combat convoy companies tasked with
escorting logistics convoys is stretching the Force’s capabilities and absorbing
substantial resources from other tasks, including the protection of civilians.
Challenges related to supply routes have been compounded by severe constraints with
regard to military cargo aircraft. Until October, notwithstanding the fact that
MINUSMA capacity was stretched, the Mission was able to ensure continuity of
operations. However, following the end of the multinational rotation contribution and
the departure of contracted Antonov An-74 aircraft in November, the only dedicated
cargo aircraft in the Mission is the Tunisian C-130 based in Bamako. In the light of
this, the tempo of supplying sector West and sector North with rations and food will
be significantly lower.
54. The Mission is taking active steps to address these challenges by increasing
storage capacity in several locations to cater for the unpredictability of resupply.
MINUSMA is also exploring the feasibility of alternative supply routes from Algeria
and Mauritania, which could significantly increase logistical capacity. During
meetings with relevant stakeholders, MINUSMA presented a c omprehensive plan,
illustrating opportunities and advantages for partners.
Access and freedom of movement of Mission personnel
55. MINUSMA continued to face restrictions of movement, causing increasing
difficulties in maintaining situational awareness in the sectors, increasing risks for
peacekeepers and weakening their ability to implement the Mission’s objectives.
56. Since 4 October, 9 ground movements have been restricted by the Malian Armed
Forces. Notably, on 4 October, the Malian Armed Forces did not authorize
MINUSMA to conduct an assessment mission to Fafa, Gao cercle, following an
incident in the area on 1 October in which MINUSMA-contracted trucks had been
attacked.
57. Since 4 October, 237 MINUSMA flight requests have been either d enied or
received no response from Malian authorities. Most of these restrictions (219) applied
to intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance unmanned aircraft. This affected the
safety of MINUSMA convoys, which were deprived of pre-convoy reconnaissance
and intelligence collection along resupply routes, particularly on the Gao -Kidal axis.
Following sustained engagement with Malian authorities and the Chief of Staff of the
Malian air forces, a new procedure for flight requests was agreed upon, on
15 November. The procedure streamlines the approval process by emphasizing
decentralized coordination between MINUSMA and regional authorities and
clarifying responsibilities. As a result, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
flights were conducted in coordination with the authorities on 11 and 12 December,
marking the resumption of these operations. Since the implementation of the
procedure, the number of approved flights has increased, although there remain
restrictions in areas where the Malian Armed Forces are operating.
External communication
58. Disinformation and misinformation campaigns persisted during the reporting
period, some aimed directly at MINUSMA. The Mission expanded its direct
engagement with the media and bloggers as a means to sensit ize the public about its
mandate. Furthermore, the Mission is strengthening collaboration with the Malian
Bloggers Association and supporting the capacity-building of bloggers in the fight
against fake news. The Mission also organized awareness-raising sessions on the role
of the Mission for web activists.
12/19

22-29311

S/2023/21

59. MINUSMA continued to explore ways to incentivize proxy communication by
national actors, especially those benefiting from projects and actions developed or
supported by the Mission. The Mission is also promoting the notion of resilience and
peaceful living among Malians through direct support for cultural and artistic
expression, tailored radio productions and news articles.
60. The Mission participated in the mis- and disinformation project of the
Department of Peace Operations. At the Mission level, a working group was launched
in November to ensure mission-wide coordination and the reinforcement of the
capacities of personnel to combat mis- and disinformation.
Safety and security of United Nations personnel
61. As at 5 December, 18 attacks against MINUSMA were recorded, including 8 in
Mopti, 5 in Gao, 4 in Kidal and 1 in Timbuktu, resulting in 4 peacekeepers killed and
38 injured. The deadliest attack occurred on 17 October, when MINUSMA
peacekeepers hit an improvised explosive device near Tessalit camp, killing four
peacekeepers and seriously injuring two others.
62. A working group on countering improvised explosive devices, co-chaired by
MINUSMA and the Mine Action Service, conducted a compreh ensive mission
analysis and presented an action plan to the steering committee to enhance the
Mission’s response to the explosive threats.
63. The hovering of unidentified drones over Mission premises was reported on
5 and 25 October, over Mopti Airport, near Sévaré, the MINUSMA “Office du Riz”
premises and the MINUSMA Mopti camp during the first incident and over the
MINUSMA Mopti camp during the second incident. Furthermore, the frequent
unauthorized use of unmanned aerial vehicles persisted in Timbuktu, where a drone
overflew the MINUSMA camp in Ber on 19 October.
64. The safety and security of personnel have further been enhanced by the
operationalization of reinforced individual capsules in the living areas and bunkers in
field camps. New camera surveillance systems were installed internally and along the
perimeter of the camps, allowing day and night observation of access areas and
enhancing the capacity of the base defence operations centres.
65. The Board of Inquiry Unit completed 11 incident reports, including 4 on serious
illnesses, 2 of which resulted in fatalities, 1 on a serious injury resulting from a
recreational accident and 2 others on serious injuries resulting from hostile action.
One hostile action led to a contingent-owned mine-resistant ambush-protected vehicle
being damaged beyond repair. The Board reported on two occupational safety cases
of misfire and one inconclusive allegation against United Nations peacekeepers
regarding the death of a civilian. Proceedings identified important les sons for
preventing a repetition of similar events or mitigating their consequences.

VIII. Capacities of the Mission
Military
66. As at 14 December, 12,388 military personnel were deployed, corresponding to
93.21 percent of the authorized strength of 13,289 personnel, comprising 11,900
military unit personnel, 488 military staff officers and 3 contracted posts. Women
accounted for 5.1 percent of the military personnel. Compared with December 2021,
the number of female military personnel increased by approximately 0.79 per cent.

22-29311

13/19

S/2023/21

Police
67. As at 14 December, 1,598 police personnel were deployed, corresponding to
83.22 per cent of the authorized strength of 1,920 personnel. Women accounted for
28.83 per cent of 274 individual police officers and 14.50 per cent of 1,324 formed
police unit personnel. Compared with December 2021, the number of female
individual police officers increased from 71 to 79, an increase of approximately 11.26
per cent.
Civilian personnel
68. As at 6 December, United Nations civilian staff numbered 1,795 personnel,
corresponding to 90 percent of the authorized strength of 1,999 positions, comprising
753 international staff, 863 national staff and 179 United Nations Volunteers. Women
accounted for 26 per cent of civilian staff, approximately the same percentage as in
2021.
Performance
69. MINUSMA continued to make progress on its Action For Peacekeeping Plus
commitments, including through the Comprehensive Planning and Performance
Assessment System. The performance assessment findings were used to inform and
strengthen the 2021/22 performance report and the results-based budget for 2023/24.
The Mission continues to collect data regularly and adjust interventions quarterly to
ensure optimal mandate implementation.
70. The Force conducted 42 performance evaluations, using a combination of the
military unit evaluation tool and the enterprise feedback manageme nt tool, as part of
the regular evaluation plan conducted on a quarterly basis; 9 units exceeded the
established standard and 33 met the standard. MINUSMA systematically initiated
measures to strengthen performance for evaluations scoring about 75 per cent or
lower, including observations, details of shortfalls and recommendations, with a view
to generating follow-up requirements for use by the unit commander in developing a
military evaluation improvement plan.
71. The Mission’s police component continued to evaluate individual police officers
and formed police units in order to enhance police performance. Seventeen
evaluations of formed police units were conducted in relation to contingent -owned
equipment, operational readiness and performance assessments. All units were found
to be satisfactory. The Mission also evaluated the performance of 88 individual police
officers through quarterly assessments.
Conduct and discipline
72. One case of allegation of sexual exploitation and abuse was recorded during the
period under review and victims continued to receive assistance from the Mission.
MINUSMA continued to implement its strategy to prevent misconduct, particularly
sexual exploitation and abuse, through the provision of induction and refresher
training to all categories of personnel. The Mission also continued to conduct
outreach activities, including awareness-raising for the local population.
Environmental issues
73. While the Mission’s demand for electricity and water increased, improvements
were registered in the areas of site energy, wastewater risk and waste management
practices. Moreover, ageing containerized wastewater treatment plants are being
replaced with conventional alternatives. The process has started in Timbuktu and Gao
and will progressively be rolled out to the other MINUSMA sites. In support of plans
14/19

22-29311

S/2023/21

for the extension of sites in Gao, Ansongo and Douentza, the Mission has conducted
environmental baseline studies to assess and mitigate potential environmental risks
prior to site occupation.

IX. Observations
74. The reporting period has seen some progress in the various political processes
under way in Mali; however, numerous challenges still persist. Overcoming existing
challenges will require continued political will and focus from the transitional
authorities, enhanced coordination and cooperation between MINUSMA and the host
country and renewed international support, while keeping in mind t hat the
stabilization of Mali and that of the region at large are intrinsically linked.
75. Echoing the pronouncement on the transition in Mali of the sixty -first ordinary
session of the Authority of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS, held on
3 July, I note the steps that have been taken since my previous report, in particular
the operationalization of the central structures of the single electoral management
body, the submission of the preliminary draft constitution and the efforts relating to
the territorial reorganization of the country. Along with other efforts undertaken in
follow-up to the national dialogue on the reform process, these steps should also usher
in long-term reforms to help address some of the fundamental governance challenges.
It is important that the institutional reforms launched as part of the transition also
reflect the relevant provisions of the Agreement. MINUSMA will continue to extend
multifaceted support to all these efforts, while also remaining active in the monitoring
mechanisms of the transition in close coordination with ECOWAS and the African
Union, as part of the local follow-up committee on the transition.
76. I urge the authorities to expedite the implementation of the electoral timetable
as published in July 2022. In this respect, particular attention should be paid to
advancing outstanding legislative matters and the establishment of local chapters of
the single electoral management body and the constitutional process, whose timely
completion is an imperative for addressing some election-related issues. At the same
time, the authorities should ensure the broadest possible consensus on the reforms.
This is key to achieving ownership and sustainability of the reform process. I note the
meetings held in the context of the consultation framework with the political parties.
I encourage constructive dialogue by all parties, including political and civil society
stakeholders. It is imperative that the interests of the Malian people and their hopes
for peace and development be placed above any other consideration.
77. Of equal importance to the lasting stabilization of Mali is the implementation of
the Agreement. The success of the transition will also be assessed on achievements
made in this respect. The resumption of the meetings of the monitoring mechanism
was an encouraging development, as they provide a structured framework for
dialogue not only among the parties but also between the parties and their
international partners, whose support is crucial for the implementation of many of the
provisions of the Agreement, in particular disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and the socioeconomic development aspects. However, the recent
decision by the movements to suspend their participation in the implementation
process is cause for serious concern. I reiterate that the primary responsibility for
moving the peace process lies with the parties and urge them to engage constructively
with each other and the international mediation team to overcome the current hurdles.
MINUSMA will continue to provide every possible support to the implementation of
the Agreement and to play its role within the international mediation team led by
Algeria.

22-29311

15/19

S/2023/21

78. The situation in the centre of the country continues to warrant utmost attention,
requiring a holistic approach. The adoption of the stabilization strategy provides Mali
with the framework needed to deal with the complex challenges confronting that part
of the country. The priority now is to turn the strategy into action, and to do so with
the urgency called for by the situation. In this respect, continued leadership at the
highest level of the State will remain paramount, especially given that the issues at
hand involve the coordination of the activities of several line ministries. MINUSMA
and the United Nations country team have taken steps to enhance their support and
align their activities with the priorities of the Government.
79. While efforts are being made to address the security situation in the country, one
must also acknowledge that the level and frequency of incidents of violence remain
exceptionally high, with particularly far-reaching consequences on the livelihoods of
women and girls. The attacks carried out against civilians by terrorist groups, the
battle for influence among them and the violent activities conducted by community
militias remain a chilling daily reality, as do the attacks against the Malian Defence
and Security Forces and against MINUSMA. I condemn these attacks and express my
heartfelt condolences and sympathy to the Malian people and authorities. Going
forward, military operations to combat the extremist groups will continue to be a
crucial component for the restoration of security. As I have stressed in earlier reports,
their ultimate success will hinge on the extent to which they are accompanied by
complementary efforts to ensure respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law, foster social cohesion, address structural fragility and deliver basic
services. MINUSMA will continue working with the Malian transitional authorities
in fostering such an approach, while also exploring all avenues to facilitate joint
planning and greater coordination with the Malian Defence and Security Forces.
80. The prevailing security challenges continue to greatly affect the humanitarian
situation. The increase in the number of internally displaced persons, which is now
estimated at 440,000, and that of people in need of humanitarian assistance, which
stands at 5.3 million, speak volumes about the dire conditions of t he civilian
populations in different parts of Mali. Unfortunately, the humanitarian response has
not been commensurate with the needs. I once more appeal for greater international
generosity in response to the humanitarian appeal, which is thus far funded at only
one third of the set target.
81. Over the past three months, MINUSMA has continued to do its utmost in order
to deliver on its mandate, against the backdrop of significant operational and capacity
challenges, including insufficient staffing at a time of escalating protection needs. I
reiterate my appreciation to the troop- and police-contributing countries and to the
Mission’s personnel and leadership. I encourage Member States to extend the
necessary capabilities and uniformed personnel to replace departing contributors.
That said, the ability of the Mission to meet the expectations of Mali and its people
is also contingent upon the level of cooperation it receives from the host authorities,
including with regard to freedom of movement and the use of its air assets to protect
civilians and ensure the safety of its peacekeepers. The report on the internal strategic
review of MINUSMA, as requested by the Security Council in resolution 2640
(2022), is currently being finalized for issuance to the Council.
82. Finally, I would like to express appreciation to all the partners with whom
MINUSMA is working. The United Nations will continue to closely coordinate its
efforts with those of the African Union, ECOWAS and the European Union in order
to provide Mali with the most effective support possible.

16/19

22-29311

S/2023/21

Annex I
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali: military and police strength as at
14 December 2022
Military

Police

Experts on mission,
staff officers and units
Country

Individual police officers

Formed police units

Total police

Male

Female

Total

Male

Female

Total

Male

Female

Total

Male

Female

Total

Armenia

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Australia

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Austria

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Bangladesh

1 315

66

1 381

1

1

2

220

59

279

221

60

281

Belgium

9

–

9

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Benin

233

25

258

17

–

17

11

–

11

28

–

28

Bhutan

5

–

5

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Bosnia and Herzegovina

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Burkina Faso

632

27

659

20

24

44

132

7

139

152

31

183

Burundi

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Cambodia

232

34

266

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Cameroon

2

1

3

7

1

8

–

–

–

7

1

8

Canada

4

1

5

4

3

7

–

–

–

4

3

7

Chad

1 380

52

1 432

7

–

7

–

–

–

7

–

7

China

389

18

407

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Côte d’Ivoire

833

29

862

20

6

26

–

–

–

20

6

26

Czechia

3

1

4

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Denmark

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

1 075

3

1 078

7

–

7

146

14

160

153

14

167

148

20

168

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Estonia

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Ethiopia

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Finland

4

–

4

–

1

1

–

–

–

–

1

1

France

25

1

26

9

2

11

–

–

–

9

2

11

Egypt
El Salvador

Gambia

7

1

8

6

1

7

–

–

–

6

1

7

Germany

610

53

663

2

–

2

–

–

–

2

–

2

Ghana

124

17

141

2

–

2

–

–

–

2

–

2

Guatemala

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Guinea

613

53

666

5

4

9

–

–

–

5

4

9

Indonesia

8

–

8

3

2

5

–

–

–

3

2

5

Iran (Islamic Republic of)

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Ireland

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Italy

2

–

2

3

–

3

–

–

–

3

–

3

Jordan

319

–

319

9

–

9

–

–

–

9

–

9

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Kazakhstan

22-29311

17/19

S/2023/21
Military

Police

Experts on mission,
staff officers and units

Individual police officers

Formed police units

Total police

Country

Male

Female

Total

Male

Female

Total

Male

Female

Total

Male

Female

Total

Kenya

9

–

9

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Latvia

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Liberia

145

15

160

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Lithuania

39

6

45

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Luxembourg

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Mauritania

7

–

7

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Mexico

9

–

9

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Mongolia

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Nepal

164

17

181

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Netherlands

13

2

15

4

1

5

–

–

–

4

1

5

Niger

865

6

871

13

8

21

–

–

–

13

8

21

Nigeria

108

30

138

–

–

–

107

33

140

107

33

140

Norway

3

1

4

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Pakistan

204

14

218

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Portugal

2

–

2

2

–

2

–

–

–

2

–

2

Romania

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Senegal

939

33

972

8

4

12

263

52

315

271

56

327

Sierra Leone

12

4

16

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Spain

1

–

1

2

1

3

–

–

–

2

1

3

Sri Lanka

242

–

242

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Sweden

119

23

142

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Switzerland

7

–

7

4

2

6

–

–

–

4

2

6

Togo

673

62

735

9

11

20

253

27

280

262

38

300

Tunisia

81

7

88

21

5

26

–

–

–

21

5

26

Türkiye

–

–

–

10

2

12

–

–

–

10

2

12

Ukraine

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland

118

10

128

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

United States of America

7

2

9

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Zambia

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

11 754

634

12 388

195

79

274 1 132

192

1 324

1 327

271

1 598

Totals

18/19

22-29311

22-29311

Annex II

S/2023/21

19/19
