S/PV.8130

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8130th meeting

Monday, 11 December 2017, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zambrana Torrelio
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli Frieri

Agenda
The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Letter dated 1 December 2017 from the Permanent Representatives of France,
Italy, Japan, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Uruguay to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2017/1006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-43606 (E)
*1743606*

S/PV.8130

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 9.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The President: I give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China is opposed to the Security Council’s proposed
consideration of the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. China has
consistently opposed the Council’s involvement in the
human rights issues of other countries. The Charter
of the United Nations has clear provisions with regard
to the functions and division of labour of the main
organs of the Organization. The primary responsibility
of the Council is to maintain international peace and
security, and its job is therefore to address threats to
that. The Security Council is not the appropriate forum
for debating human rights issues, nor should we allow
human rights issues to be politicized.
China is committed to the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula and to upholding peace and stability
there and resolving relevant issues through dialogue
and consultation. We are opposed to war and conflict
on the peninsula. The current situation on the peninsula
remains complex, sensitive and grave. Council
members and the parties concerned should engage in
seeking ways to ease tensions on the peninsula and
avoid mutual provocation and words or actions that
might further escalate the situation.
A discussion by the Council of human rights issues
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea would
run counter to the aforementioned objectives and
be counterproductive. China hopes that the parties
concerned will exercise restraint and keep the overall
situation in mind. They should move towards rather
than away from one another, implement the relevant
Council resolutions comprehensively and fully, and
give serious consideration to China’s suspension-forsuspension initiative so as to create an environment and
conditions conducive to a resumption of negotiations.
China hopes that the parties concerned will honour
their commitments effectively and play a constructive
role in maintaining the denuclearization process and
peace and stability on the peninsula.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): This issue
has become a repeated problem. We continue to think
that there is a separation between peace and security
and human rights, and there is not. If we go back in
2/21

11/12/2017

history, it shows that any country that does not take
care of its people ends up in conflict. We have seen that
in multiple cases in multiple places.
As much as the Secretary-General and the Council
talk about prevention when it comes to conflict,
prevention is about how a country treats its people as
well. If it starts to treat its people carelessly or abuse
them, it will easily abuse other countries, and that is
what we are seeing happen in North Korea. So while
I understand the concerns of some Council members,
I think it is extremely important that if we are to stay
true to our word on prevention, then we must stay true
to our word that prevention also includes human rights
and the ability to call out countries when they commit
abuses like the ones we are seeing.
I therefore suggest that not only should we do this
today, but we should be doing it more often with other
countries when we see such things coming up. We have
seen it in Venezuela and Syria. If we truly care about
prevention, human rights have to be at the heart of it.
The President: I wish to draw the attention of
Council members to document S/2017/1006, which
contains a letter dated 1 December 2017 from the
Permanent Representatives of France, Italy, Japan,
Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and Uruguay to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
In view of the request contained in document
S/2017/1006 and the comments made by members of the
Security Council, I intend to put the provisional agenda
to the vote. Accordingly, I shall put it to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Senegal, Sweden,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Uruguay
Against:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China and Russian
Federation
Abstaining:
Egypt and Ethiopia
The President: There were 10 votes in favour, 3
votes against and 2 abstentions. The provisional agenda
has been adopted.
17-43606

11/12/2017

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
Letter dated 1 December 2017 from the
Permanent Representatives of France, Italy,
Japan, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United States of America and
Uruguay to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2017/1006)
The President: I now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements
after the voting.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have often expressed our opposition to the
introduction of human rights issues into the Security
Council’s agenda. We believe that they are not within
the Council’s remit and should be considered by the
specialized bodies, first and foremost the Human Rights
Council. The Security Council has never been part of
the United Nations toolkit for protecting and promoting
human rights. It was never intended to monitor or
analyse situations in the area of human rights. It has
unique authority to take decisions on situations that
may involve the potential use of force, among them
situations that represent a threat to or a breach of peace
or an act of aggression.
Given that mandate, the Council cannot be a
platform for discussions of human rights situations,
wherever they are. No international document on
human rights assigns the Security Council authority for
oversight or any other function in that area. The remit
of the Security Council should be focused on issues that
pose genuine threats to international peace and security,
but if we regularly pad the agenda with non-core issues
it will inevitably dissipate the Council’s attention and
strength, reduce its effectiveness and encourage future
accusations that it has exceeded its mandate, become
politicized and is using double standards, leading to a
weakening of trust in the Security Council in general.
With regard to the potential outcome of today’s
meeting, the long-standing practice of the organs of the
United Nations system concerning human rights is clear
testament to the fact that politicized, country-specific
resolutions and discussions have never yielded positive
results, which can be achieved only by strengthening
dialogue and interaction among countries, as has been
demonstrated by attempts to discuss this issue here in
the Council.

S/PV. 8130

At this stage, the main goal of the Security
Council is to create the conditions for resuming the
negotiating process as soon as possible in the interests
of arriving at political solutions to the problems of the
Korean peninsula. Our priority should be on finding
a peaceful resolution to this problem. The present
difficult situation should not be used as a pretext to
increase foreign military potential in the region. We
call upon all parties to decrease tensions, avoid military
rhetoric and quickly start a political process to find a
way out of the impasse.
Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Everyone
is aware of Egypt’s position — we oppose the
nuclear-weapon programme in North Korea and that
country’s ongoing violations of Security Council
resolutions — and there is therefore no need to repeat
it here. Moreover, everyone is also equally aware of
Egypt’s commitment to the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, among which I would mention the
sovereign equality of its Members and non-interference
in the internal affairs of States.
Egypt abstained today in the voting on the holding of
a meeting concerning internal matters in North Korea.
Egypt once again reiterates that the Security Council
is not the relevant international forum to address
internal affairs or human rights situation in countries,
unless the matter concerns acts of genocide or ethnic
cleansing, which have a direct impact on international
peace and security and require the Council to act as one
in fulfilling its tasks.
We warn that a continued determination to place
internal affairs on the agenda of the Security Council,
in spite of reservations on the part of a great number
of Member States and contrary to the very mandate
of the Council, undermines the Council’s cohesion
and augments polarization among its members. That
effort also has a negative impact on the United Nations
being able to carry out its functions, as it erodes trust,
on the one hand, in the neutrality of the Organization
and its bodies and, on the other, among Member
States themselves.
Egypt also rejects a selective approach to human
rights situations in whatever country, which does not
contribute to fostering trust or providing an opportunity
to respond to genuine initiatives to resolve the root
causes of international crises and achieve international
peace and security.

17-436063/21

S/PV.8130

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
As on previous occasions, Uruguay voted in favour of
the holding of this meeting. Uruguay does not recognize
limitations when it comes to dealing with the issue of
human rights, either for reasons of the forum where it is
discussed or of deference to domestic jurisdiction. Full
and unconditional respect for human rights and their
promotion and protection, as well as accountability
when such rights are violated, are essential aspects of
the foreign policy of Uruguay.
It is still quite fresh in the memory of Uruguayans
that, during the military dictatorship we suffered
from during the 1970s and early 1980s, international
public opinion was the subject of intense pressure
owing to the violations of human rights that were being
committed in my country. That pressure was key in
gradually breaking down the military dictatorship.
We Uruguayans cannot forget the solidarity expressed
by the international community in our darkest hours,
and we therefore insist that there is no limitation as to
where the issue of human rights can be addressed — for
reasons of either forum or national jurisdiction.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Political Constitution
of the State of Bolivia enshrines a broad catalogue of
rights under various regional and universal instruments
as they relate to the protection of human rights. In that
regard, the Constitution provides that international
human rights treaties and instruments have been signed,
ratified or adhered to by the State that provide for more
favourable rights that those set out in the Constitution
shall take precedence over the latter. That is how Bolivia
shows its commitment to defending human rights
established at the regional and international levels.
However, my delegation would also like to make it
clear that the Charter of the United Nations stipulates
unequivocally that the primary responsibility of the
Security Council is the maintenance of international
peace and security — the Council not being the forum
to address issues pertaining to human rights. That is
why my delegation is opposed to the Council holding
meetings about human rights in any United Nations
Member country, in this case in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. These issues do not fall under the
competence of the Council, as they have their own
forum for debate and analysis within the specialized
bodies of the Organization, such as the Human Rights
Council in Geneva.
4/21

11/12/2017

As an elected member of the Security Council,
Bolivia has never had any doubts about the need to
discuss the issues of the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula, given its sensitivity for the international
community and the threat it poses to international peace
and security, and the fact that it generates instability
in the region. In that context, in line with our status
as a pacifist State, Bolivia has called, and always will
cal, for dialogue between parties. I therefore reiterate
that my delegation does not agree with using this forum
to address this issue, as it takes us further away from
the main goal of denuclearizing the Korean peninsula
and safeguarding international peace and security in
the region.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): The human rights situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is indeed
a source of serious concern. And we understand the
relevant mechanisms established within the Human
Rights Council, including the Special Rapporteur about
human rights in the Democratic Republic People’s
Republic of Korea as well as other mechanisms, such as
the Universal Periodic Review and special procedures
for the Human Rights Council. The Government of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has a huge
responsibility for protecting the rights of its citizens.
The dialogue on this issue with the relevant mechanisms
I just mentioned should certainly continue with a view
to improving the human rights and humanitarian
situation in the country.
We also wish to take this opportunity to express
our solidarity with Japan in connection with the
abduction of its nationals. We support all efforts and
discussions at the bilateral and multilateral levels
to ensure the return of the abductees at the earliest
possible time. This is in fact the most critical issue that
made it very difficult for us to abstain in the procedural
vote, because we are deeply convinced that the issue of
abductees is a gross violation, which we condemn very
strongly and vehemently. We call on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to take urgent positive steps
on the matter.
Nevertheless, we all know that situation on the
Korean peninsula is so extremely difficult and complex,
and its implications for international peace and security
so grave, that it is no wonder that the Council spends
so much time discussing the issue and has adopted
several resolutions and statements this year, thereby
demonstrating the seriousness with which it has been
actively seized of the matter.
17-43606

11/12/2017

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV. 8130

Again this month, under the Japanese presidency,
we will once again discuss the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea issue at the highest level, following
the emergency meeting we held after the latest ballisticmissile launch by that country (see S/PV.8118). Without
a doubt, that test showed that we are indeed at the edge
of the precipice, and any slight miscalculation, perhaps
even if totally unintended, could land us into a major
nuclear catastrophe on the Korean peninsula. That is
why every possible diplomatic effort must be made to
prevent that from happening, and time is not on our
side. Therefore, we believe that the Security Council
should devote all its time and energy to finding a
peaceful and diplomatic solution to the situation on the
Korean peninsula through dialogue and negotiation, in
the light of the looming danger and its unimaginable
consequences for international peace and security.

Mr. Jenča: Today’s meeting on the human rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is timely and again demonstrates that it is not just
nuclear issues that deserve the attention and action
of the international community. While it is difficult
to obtain up-to-date and comprehensive information
about human rights developments in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the information gathered
reveals a continuing pattern of serious human rights
violations and a lack of progress on issues such as
family reunification and abductions. There are no
indications that the situation has significantly improved
since the 2014 report of the Commission of Inquiry on
Human Rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea (A/HRC/25/CRP.1), which revealed that crimes
against humanity had been and were being committed
in the country.

In that context, we very much welcome the visit
of Under-Secretary-General Feltman to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which is the first of its kind
by a senior official of the United Nations since 2010.
It is a small but important step in the right direction.
We look forward to Mr. Feltman’s briefing tomorrow
on his various engagements in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.

In keeping with its obligations under international
law, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is responsible for protecting its population from
crimes that are considered to be the most serious
under international law. In addition, the international
community has the collective responsibility to protect
the population of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea if the State does not protect its own citizens, and
to consider the wider implications of the reported grave
human rights situation for stability in the region.

The President: Since the provisional agenda was
adopted, I shall suspend the meeting. We shall resume
after a brief recess to continue our consideration of the
agenda item.
The meeting was suspended at 10 a.m. and resumed
at 10.05 a.m.
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Republic of Korea to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, to participate in
this meeting.
Mr. Al Hussein is joining today’s meeting by videoteleconference from Paris.
The Security Council will now begin consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jenča.

During the past year, the security environment
has had a negative impact on human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The country’s
continued nuclear and ballistic missile activities have
led to its further isolation from its neighbours and the
international community. The country has imposed
severe restrictions on the freedom of movement, both
within the country and on the border with China. People
pay a heftier price and take riskier routes to leave the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and women
continue to be the primary targets of human traffickers,
who help them escape if they agree to be sold into the
sex industry.
The plight of prisoners and foreign detainees
continues to be a cause for concern, with reports of
abject detention conditions in holding centres and
labour camps throughout the country. In June, student
Otto Warmbier died a few days after he was released
from detention in Pyongyang and repatriated to the
United States. His case highlighted the situation of
foreign detainees who risk being cut off from the outside
world and are unable to enjoy basic entitlements, such

17-436065/21

S/PV.8130

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

as access to medical treatment and consular assistance.
Three citizens of the United States and six citizens of
the Republic of Korea remain in custody today. We
continue to advocate for their release.
The past year witnessed a surge in the forced
repatriation of nationals of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in China, in particular in the months
of December 2016 and April, July and November of 2017.
Reports of escapees being sent back to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea are regularly received by the
United Nations and civil society groups. Many of those
escapees are women victims of human trafficking who
leave their children in China. As we speak, dozens of
nationals of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
remain detained in China and scheduled for refoulement
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, where
they are at risk of torture and ill-treatment.
The United Nations has taken a number of steps
this year to address the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The Special
Rapporteur presented his report (see A/72/394) to the
General Assembly in September and the SecretaryGeneral issued his report (A/72/279) in August. The
Third Committee has agreed on a draft resolution
(A/C.3/72/L.40) that is to be adopted by the General
Assembly this month. In response, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has maintained its
strong objections to country-specific resolutions and
mandates, although it is open to non-country specific
cooperation on human rights.
The pursuit of accountability continues to be an
urgent priority on the human rights agenda for the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In 2016, the
Human Rights Council appointed a group of independent
experts on accountability who recommended, in their
report to the Council in March, that steps be taken to
strengthen the current monitoring and analysis efforts
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, including through the recruitment of
additional staff and setting up a central repository to be
used in any future accountability mechanism.
While emphasis is placed on the political and
security situation, the crisis in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has been forgotten on the
global humanitarian agenda. An estimated 18 million
people — 70 per cent of the population — are suffering
from food insecurity, and 10.5 million people — 41 per
cent of the population — are undernourished. The
6/21

11/12/2017

situation is even more critical given the current lack
of funding.
In response to the accelerated nuclear and ballisticmissile testing, the Security Council has strengthened
its sanctions regime on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea with three additional resolutions
since the previous meeting. In his latest report, the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
alerted us to the possibility that sanctions may have a
detrimental impact on livelihoods and medical care, and
requested that human rights be given due consideration
when drafting and assessing sanctions resolutions.
Humanitarian partners operating in the country have
reported increasing operational challenges, including
custom clearances for life-saving items, the procurement
of humanitarian supplies, the transport of goods and
rising food prices, which have risen by 160 per cent
since April. In addition, the banking channel for the
international organizations working in the country has
broken down for the third time in the past seven years.
In its latest resolution — specifically, in
paragraph 26 of resolution 2375 (2017) — the Security
Council reaffirms that the measures imposed by the
relevant resolutions are not intended to have adverse
humanitarian consequences for the civilian population
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea or to
negatively affect or restrict the activities and work of
international and non-governmental organizations that
are carrying out assistance and relief activities for the
benefit of the civilian population in the country. I take
note of the communication of 8 December to all Member
States from the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), offering clarifications on that
point and highlighting mechanisms to seek exemptions
for humanitarian activities. With that in mind, I would
like to make four requests.
First, I encourage all international and non-governmental
organizations that are facing operational challenges
to use the established process to inform or seek the
necessary guidance or exemption from the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). Doing
so helps to remove ambiguity and provides reassurance
for the relevant entities and partners to facilitate the
work of such organizations in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Secondly, I urge the 1718 Committee to continue
to expeditiously review those requests to ensure that
17-43606

11/12/2017

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV. 8130

the already fragile humanitarian situation does not
deteriorate further.

that it is impossible for me to point to any significant
improvement in the human rights situation.

Thirdly, I urge all Member States to support the
life-saving activities in the country. Funding for relief
activities is essential. Approximately $114 million are
required to address the critical humanitarian needs in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. I echo the
1718 Committee’s communication to Member States,
which emphasizes the obligation of each Member State
to comply with sanctions obligations and exemptions,
including by clarifying to public and private-sector
entities that humanitarian activities should not be
unduly restricted.

The international security crisis regarding the
actions taken by the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea ought not to negate our deep
concerns about the human rights situation of ordinary
people in the country. Security tensions seem to have
deepened the extremely serious human rights violations
endured by the 25 million people in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Our picture of the situation
is necessarily incomplete, given my staff’s lack of
access to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
However, escapees have reported to us extremely
widespread violations of rights in almost every aspect
of people’s lives.

Finally, I call on financial institutions to exercise
their corporate and social responsibility by providing
life-saving banking services to the humanitarian
organizations in the country. The channel would be
sent to the Security Council for approval.
The United Nations remains committed to
contributing to further efforts to reach a peaceful and
negotiated solution to the outstanding issues, and to
ensuring genuine and meaningful improvement to
the human rights and humanitarian situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The United
Nations system is ready to assist the call of the General
Assembly on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to
“engage constructively with international interlocutors
with a view to promoting concrete improvements in
the human rights situation on the ground, including
through human rights dialogues, official visits
to the country that include adequate access to
fully assess human rights conditions, cooperation
initiatives and more people-to-people contact as a
matter of priority” (A/C.3/72/L.40, para. 20).
To conclude, let us use all the tools at our
disposal — the Human Rights Council, the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the United Nations
system and other international entities — to take action
to build a better future for the people of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
The President: I thank Mr. Jenča for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Al Hussein.
Mr. Al-Hussein: This is the fourth briefing to
the Council by my Office in as many years on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and I regret

I will begin with the horrific conditions in the
country’s large network of prisons and labour camps.
Testimonies collected by my Office indicate that torture
is widespread in detention centres overseen by the
Ministry of State Security and the Ministry of People’s
Security, where it is used to extract information or
confessions from people suspected of planning to
leave the country, communicating with the outside
world by using foreign telecommunications networks
or engaging in smuggling activities. Detainees work in
mines or infrastructure projects in conditions of severe
deprivation. People held in such camps have told my
staff of being beaten by prison guards or other inmates
and being fed so little they barely survived. Moreover,
while it has been possible to gather some information
on the situation in regular prison facilities and labour
camps, there is absolute secrecy when it comes to
people detained in the five political prison camps that
are also reportedly operational. The interviews of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) with people who have left
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea indicate
that fear of being sent to those camps is a powerful
instrument of control.
In recent months, military tensions have led to
more severe controls over freedom of movement and
civil and political rights. My Office continues to receive
reports of new physical barriers being erected along
the border. Increased surveillance by the authorities
also makes escape more difficult. People who attempt
to leave the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
without authorization do so at great risk to their lives.
It is now almost impossible to cross the border without
engaging a broker or trafficker. Women, who make

17-436067/21

S/PV.8130

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

up the majority of those who manage to escape the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, are frequently
forced by traffickers into sexual exploitation, forced
marriage or cheap bonded labour.
A number of escapees are sent back to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, despite the
fact that monitoring by my Office indicates that anyone
who leaves the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
without authorization will face persecution if returned.
Over the past year, OHCHR has received more than 70
reports of women, men and children who escaped to
China only to be sent back to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea after the authorities found them to be
economic migrants, notwithstanding the overwhelming
evidence of human rights violations taking place in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Repatriated
escapees are routinely subjected to multiple forms of
torture and ill-treatment, including beatings, forced
labour, deprivation of food and health care, and sexual
violence, at detention centres located on the border with
China. Women have told my staff that following their
forced return, officials also subjected them to invasive
body searches, using methods that may amount to rape
under international law. My Office continues to receive
reports of people crossing the border carrying poison in
case they are caught. In July, a family of five reportedly
committed collective suicide as they were about to be
taken to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
border for repatriation. Anyone found to have attempted
to escape to the Republic of Korea or to contact people
there also receives particularly harsh treatment.
The case of Otto Warmbier, an American student
who had been sentenced to 15 years in prison in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and who was
returned to the United States earlier this year in a coma
with extensive loss of brain tissue, is suggestive of the
severe violations endured by persons deprived of their
liberty in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Three other United States nationals and six nationals
of the Republic of Korea are currently detained in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and denied
access to their families or any outside help. No progress
has been made regarding cases of the international
abduction or enforced disappearance of foreign
nationals. Efforts to locate 12 Japanese nationals and
516 nationals of the Republic of Korea have also been
hampered by the deteriorating security situation.
The people of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea also face severe violations of their economic,
8/21

11/12/2017

social and cultural rights. They continue to endure
chronic food insecurity, due in part to the diversion of
resources to military objectives, as well as to laws and
practices that make access to basic rights conditional
on perceived loyalty to the Government. A failing
public distribution system and pervasive corruption
in the delivery of public services are forcing people
to look for alternative ways to secure access to basic
economic and social rights. Even very poor people must
frequently pay hefty bribes to enable their children to
pursue primary or higher education, engage in private
business, register as overseas workers or access
health care.
The humanitarian assistance provided by United
Nations agencies and others is literally a lifeline
for some 13 million acutely vulnerable individuals.
However, sanctions may be adversely affecting that
essential help. For example, controls over international
banking transfers have caused a slowdown in United
Nations ground operations, affecting the delivery of
food rations, health kits and other humanitarian aid.
I would like to ask Council members to conduct an
assessment of the human rights impact of sanctions
and see that action be taken to minimize their adverse
humanitarian consequences.
Above all, every effort must be made to ensure that
the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea makes urgently needed changes to the country’s
laws and policies in order to enable greater freedom and
access to fundamental services and goods. My Office
is implementing Human Rights Council resolution
34/24, following recommendations by the Group of
Independent Experts on Accountability pursuant to
Human Rights Council Resolution 31/18 on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, who urged us to strengthen monitoring efforts
by recruiting criminal law experts and establishing a
repository of cases to be used in future prosecutions.
The President: I thank Mr. Al Hussein for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I
thank Assistant-Secretary-General Jenča and High
Commissioner Al-Hussein for their briefings. I am
grateful for this discussion today, because we must tell
the full story of the North Korean people. Only a few of
them, some of whom are with us today, have escaped to
17-43606

11/12/2017

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

tell the truth about their struggle for freedom. My hope
is that we will hear their stories today and add our voices
to the cause of basic human rights in North Korea. The
systematic human rights violations and abuses of the
North Korean Government are more than the cause
of its people’s suffering. They are a means to a single
end — keeping the Kim Jong-un regime in power. The
regime is using that power to develop an unnecessary
arsenal and support enormous conventional military
forces that pose a grave risk to international peace
and security.
Their menacing march towards building a nuclearweapon arsenal begins with the oppression and
exploitation of ordinary North Korean people. By
exporting workers abroad to earn hard currency and
exploiting forced labour at home, the regime uses its
people to underwrite its nuclear and ballisti-missile
programmes. The Government has developed a strict
caste system designed to control and suppress the will
of the people. The regime forces the North Korean
people to work up to 14 hours a day, six or seven
days a week, often with no compensation. Failure to
report to an assigned job can result in imprisonment
in a forced labour camp for six months to two years.
Non-governmental organizations have revealed video
footage of children as young as five years old forced
to carry out heavy labour in dangerous conditions,
including work on railroad lines and in mines.
Meanwhile, the Kim regime not only builds nuclear
weapons, it builds theme parks and high-rises in
Pyongyang for the elite and politically obedient, where
they live in relative comfort. The remaining 85 per
cent of North Koreans must obtain permission to enter
the city. The country is dotted with military checkpoints
to ensure that everyone stays where the Government
wants him or her to be.
Worse, the North Korean Government imprisons an
estimated 100,000 North Koreans, including children,
in political prison camps. There, they face torture,
forced labour, summary executions, starvation, sexual
violence and other forms of inhumane treatment. Many
of those detained are in the camps not because of
anything they did but because of something a family
member did. The North Korean regime’s system of
guilt by association allows for up to three generations
of family members to be imprisoned along with
the accused. Defectors have reported that all North
Koreans aged 12 and older are required to attend public

S/PV. 8130

executions — a graphic reminder of the consequences
of disobedience to the Government.
The regime bans foreign media. Radios and
televisions are fixed to State media channels. State
security officials regularly raid apartment buildings
in an effort to catch individuals with foreign media.
Punishment for possession of a foreign DVD or SD card
can include imprisonment or even execution.
And it is not just North Koreans who suffer under
this system. A large number of Japanese and other
citizens have been abducted by the North Korean
Government over the past few decades. Many of their
family members still do not know what has become
of their loved ones. Nor can we overlook the terrorist
acts that the North Korean Government has committed
against both its own nationals and other nationals
abroad, most recently in Kuala Lumpur.
But even for North Koreans trying to escape, the
road to freedom is dangerous and sometimes deadly.
They must survive border guards who shoot to kill.
They must contend with traffickers who lure them
into forced labour, sex work or forced marriages,
and then they must remain undetected as they cross
international borders in search of a country that will
provide temporary protection. What makes these
dangerous escapes even more harrowing is that many
defectors do not reach freedom on their first attempt.
North Koreans fleeing to neighbouring States are often
caught, detained and forcibly repatriated. The regime
has subjected returnees to torture, sexual violence,
arbitrary detention and imprisonment. In some cases,
they are killed.
The majority of asylum-seekers are women. They
pay the highest price for being captured and repatriated.
In addition to certain torture, hard labour and other
abuses, the regime subjects returned pregnant women
to forced abortions in an effort to maintain “ethnic
purity”. If the baby is born alive, it is killed. These
details are so horrific that they are difficult to believe,
so today I have invited two remarkably courageous
women who were imprisoned multiple times in North
Korea before escaping to China. I should like to ask
these brave women — Ms. Ji Hyeon-A and Ms. Jo
Yuri — to briefly stand to be recognized. Given time
constraints, I would like to now share a bit of one of
their stories.
Ms. Jo suffered greatly as she sought to flee the
repressive North Korean regime. After serving in the

17-436069/21

S/PV.8130

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

North Korean military for several years, she returned
to her hometown to find that her mother had been
detained and tortured for dealing with Chinese traders.
When her mother was released from detention after two
months, she died while Ms. Jo was carrying her home
on her back. To make a living, Ms. Jo continued her
mother’s business working with Chinese traders and
also found herself being harassed, jailed and tortured
by North Korean security officials. Eventually, after a
failed attempt to escape, she landed in a North Korean
detention centre, where she was tortured and beaten and
nearly lost her life. But she was determined to create a
better life for her young daughter, so she tried again. In
2014, she escaped to China, where she was caught but
was able to find a way out of detention to reach South
Korea in 2015. She is now a successful entrepreneur
running a small cosmetics company and works to raise
awareness about the terrible conditions in North Korea.
These two amazing women have the kind of courage
and persistence that few human beings can claim. I
thank them and all other North Korean defectors who
survived to tell their stories. They are the voice for the
millions of their countrymen and countrywomen who
remain trapped in a walking nightmare. The tragic
reality, however, is that the North Korean regime and
other enabling Member States are creating new stories
like this every day.
That is why, immediately following this meeting, the
United States will co-host an event on this issue, along
with Australia, Canada, France, Japan, the Republic of
Korea and the United Kingdom, in Conference Room 1.
This will be a rare chance to hear directly from Ms. Ji
about her experience in detail. We will also hear from the
former Chair of the Commission of Inquiry on Human
Rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Justice Michael Kirby, and renowned North Korean
human rights expert David Hawk. I urge all Council
members to join us and participate in our discussion.
The two North Korean women with us here today,
as well as all defectors who have lived to tell their
stories, are a source of hope for millions. We must
tell and retell their stories until the world knows what
is going on in the black box that is North Korea. We
must tell and retell their stories so that leaders inside
and outside of the Council cannot plead ignorance. We
have no excuse not to act. We must insist that the North
Korean Government and other relevant Member States
immediately implement the recommendations of the
Commission of Inquiry, the Secretary-General and the
10/21

11/12/2017

Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Member
States must also provide safe passage or temporary
protection for North Korean asylum-seekers. The
forcible repatriation of these women means certain
torture, sexual violence and hard labour. Too often, it is
a death sentence.
During his visit to the South Korean National
Assembly in November, President Trump described the
obligation we all have to open our eyes to the evil of the
North Korean regime and to act. He said:
“It is our responsibility and our duty to confront
this danger together, because the longer we wait
the greater the danger grows and the fewer the
options become”.
The crisis in North Korea is one of human rights
and peace and security. History will judge us on how
we respond.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
allow me at the outset to thank Mr. Jenča and
Mr. Al Hussein for their briefings on the situation in
North Korea.
We cannot but deplore once again this year the
disastrous human rights situation in the country, which
has hardly changed since the publication, in February
2014, of the report of the Commission of Inquiry on
Human Rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. The report concluded:
“The Commission finds that crimes against
humanity have been committed in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, pursuant to policies
established at the highest level of the State.
These crimes against humanity are ongoing”.
(A/HRC/25/CRP.1, para. 1160)
France condemns the massive violations of
human rights carried out by the authorities of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and calls for
the implementation of the recommendations of the
Commission of Inquiry, which, unfortunately, are
still applicable.
I wish to welcome the Council’s decision to hold
this meeting on a specific agenda item. This seems all
the more necessary given the developments in recent
months. While Pyongyang, in violation of its obligations
under international law and Council resolutions,
continues its illegal nuclear-weapons and ballistic17-43606

11/12/2017

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

missile programmes, the situation of its population
remains one of the most tragic in the world. More than
half of its people, as has been noted, suffer from serious
food and medical insecurity owing to the fact that the
resources of the country are being drained and diverted
for military programmes, at the expense of the wellbeing of the people and their most fundamental rights.
That is why it is crucial for the Council to
maintain its full focus on the human rights situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as it is
inextricably linked with global peace and security. The
development of its military arsenal, on the one hand, and
the restrictions placed on basic freedoms, on the other,
have largely the same goal. And this goal, let us be clear,
is to control the people through fear and to perpetuate
a beleaguered totalitarian regime. To achieve that goal,
the regime uses a wide array of methods that violate
international law. It is that logic, unmatched in the world,
that threatens us as a collective. Having just celebrated
Human Rights Day yesterday, opening celebrations of
the seventieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, our responsibility is to denounce the
actions of the North Korean regime, which is locked in
a totalitarian logic that clashes directly with the spirit
of the Charter and the three pillars that form the basis
of the United Nations and international peace.
Despite some progress intended to bring about
change in the area of the rights of women or persons with
disabilities, human rights violations in North Korea are
serious and systematic and their perpetrators continue
to enjoy intolerable impunity. The list of abuses is far too
long to be exhaustive here: torture, arbitrary detentions,
public executions, forced labour, rape, displacement
of people, trafficking in human beings — and women
in particular. The Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has received reports of the generalized fear
in the camps for political prisoners, the camps which
the regime calls “rehabilitation institutes”. According
to the report of the Special Rapporteur (A/72/394),
the apprehension is so fierce that people assume that
anyone who disappears must be detained in one of the
camps, often for the mere possession of a mobile phone.
I should like to highlight three points of particular
concern with implications for third countries. First, we
must continue to mobilize for the victims of enforced
disappearance, numerous in North Korea, but also among
the nationals of neighbouring countries, in particular
South Korea and Japan. Those kidnappings, both local

S/PV. 8130

and international, destroy the lives of the victims and
their families, who remain ignorant of the fate of their
loved ones for years. France reiterates its commitment
to combatting this scourge, and encourages all States to
ratify the International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.
I would also like to mention the issue of North
Korean workers abroad, who are exploited and
sometimes condemned to forced labour and deprived of
their freedom of movement. That is akin to trafficking
in human beings. Most of their income, in foreign
currency, is diverted by the North Korean regime to
the benefit of nuclear weapons programmes. We are
also concerned by the wave of forced repatriations over
the past two years. Together, and with all the countries
concerned, we must shed light on these practices so that
they finally cease.
Thirdly, the fundamental right of freedom of opinion
and expression remains undermined by censorship
and overshadowed by propaganda. The systematic,
illicit and arbitrary surveillance by fellow citizens, the
persecution of dissenting or even differing voices are
revolting means used by the regime to stifle freedom of
opinion and expression and equal access to information.
The absolute totalitarianism of Pyongyang maintains a
stubborn cloak of darkness around its internal affairs,
which allows it to violate the rights of its citizens with
complete impunity.
The Council must remain seized of the situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in all its
aspects and maintain its vigilance. We hope that the
Council will be united in calling on the authorities of
North Korea to allow access to human rights monitoring
bodies, including the Special Rapporteur, and to work
with them to put an end to the violations and to fight
against the impunity of their perpetrators.
It is essential to maintain strong pressure on the
North Korean authorities so as to bring them to assume
their responsibility to protect and promote the human
rights of their citizens, and to move away from this
terrible way of thinking and find their way back to the
rule of law.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I should like to begin
by thanking Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for their very powerful interventions today.

17-4360611/21

S/PV.8130

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

We welcome the discussion today in the Council on
the human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Serious human rights violations,
such as those described by the briefers should also be
seen in the broader context. A lack of respect for the
human rights of one’s own people is a signpost to a wider
disregard for the international norms and standards
that form the basis of our international community.
In today’s Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, its
leadership’s pursuit of nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles is built on the back of an unparalleled system
of repression directed towards ordinary North Koreans.
The links between a lack of respect for human rights,
humanitarian crisis, and the threat to international
peace and security is clear. Conversely, respect for
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea would not only contribute to the well-being and
dignity of the people of the country, but also promote
security and stability in the region and beyond.
It is very difficult to obtain comprehensive
information about the human rights situation in the
country. However, the reports of the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, successive reports by the
Secretary-General and other information, including
from civil society organizations, are all consistent in
describing the very serious human rights situation in
the country.
The list of violations is long, and the violations
are systematic, widespread and gross. Violations cut
across all areas of human rights, including civil and
political as well as economic, social and cultural rights.
The list includes reports and witness testimonies of
public as well as extrajudicial, summary and arbitrary
executions; torture, rape and other forms of sexual and
gender-based violence; and systematic violations of the
freedoms of thought, expression and religion. It also
includes a lack of the right to food and the right to health,
leading to severe hunger and malnutrition, which is
hitting women, children, persons with disabilities and
older persons disproportionally hard. Sweden notes the
importance of the issue of international abductions and
remains very concerned at the lack of positive action by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on returning
abducted Japanese and other nationals.
We must make every effort to end impunity, seek
accountability and secure truth and justice for all
victims. Any attempt to achieve lasting peace and
stability demands justice and redress for the victims
12/21

11/12/2017

of human rights violations in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We welcome the report of the group
of independent experts on accountability for human
rights violations in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and its recommendations. We further
welcome the steps identified by the group that can be
taken immediately to contribute to a comprehensive
approach towards accountability in the country.
Despite the time that has passed since the release of
the report of the commission of inquiry on human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in
2014 (A/HRC/25/63), the relevance and urgency of the
Commission’s recommendations have not diminished,
and need to be implemented.
We welcome the important work carried out by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Seoul and the work of the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and strongly urge the Government to
grant the Special Rapporteur and other mandate-holders
full, free and unimpeded access to the country. In that
respect, we welcome the visit of the Special Rapporteur
on the rights of persons with disabilities to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as a step in the
right direction.
The Council has previously expressed its regret that
the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea diverts critical resources into expensive weapons
programmes despite the fact that the humanitarian
needs in the country remain enormous — not least as
regards food security — as we heard this morning.
The responsibility to protect and uphold the well-being
of its people indisputably falls on the Government
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The
humanitarian crisis is a manifestation of its disregard
for the human rights of its people.
Sweden and other parts of the international
community continue to provide life-saving assistance.
But more is needed, including support for the United
Nations’ humanitarian appeal for the country, which
remains severely underfunded. Our embassy in
Pyongyang has been in regular contact with the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea authorities
and humanitarian organizations. We understand that
the ability of those organizations’ ability to provide
much-needed assistance has been reduced. Other
reports have confirmed those worrying findings. We
remind the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea of its obligation to provide to
17-43606

11/12/2017

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

humanitarian organizations the access they need to
perform their work. It is of the utmost importance that
the humanitarian exemptions provided for under the
sanctions are upheld, as underlined by the SecretaryGeneral through Assistant Secretary-General Jenča
today. Today’s meeting of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) is an important
opportunity to discuss these issues further.
Sweden encourages the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to cooperate with the international
community and to engage constructively with the
United Nations system, including the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. The Government of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must realize
that its system of repression cannot survive indefinitely.
People will always find ways to evade it, gain access
to information and even escape. History has shown us
that the human spirit will eventually triumph. The same
will one day be true for the people of North Korea.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me, on behalf of the Senegalese
delegation, to thank the Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Miroslav Jenča, and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al
Hussein, for their respective briefings.
My delegation is of the view that each State must
ensure the protection and promotion of the rights of
its citizens, thereby contributing to the reinforcement
of domestic and international peace and security. It is
my country’s conviction that the enjoyment of human
rights is essential to the dignity of any human being.
That is why in my country, protecting and promoting
human rights and fundamental freedoms is a cardinal
principle, founded in respect for the diversity of our
human societies and the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States. In that regard, we believe that
it is necessary to create conditions conducive to
strengthened international cooperation in the area
of human rights, while underscoring their universal,
indivisible and interdependent nature.
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) on
sustaining peace, and the idential General Assembly
resolution 70/262, adopted in April 2016, underscores
the close link between human rights and domestic and
international peace and security. We also believe that it,
as independent and sovereign States, we must engage in
solidarity on all issues, including human rights, on the
basis of mutual respect and constructive dialogue. It is in

S/PV. 8130

that spirit that we have provided special mechanisms to
promote and protect human rights throughout the world.
That remains a constant challenge that also constitutes
one of the three pillars of the Organization. Indeed, the
mechanisms established by the United Nations — the
Human Rights Council, the Universal Periodic Review
and other bodies established through international
instruments — are complementary and relevant tools
that, while always susceptible to improvement, can
address human rights issues, as noted in various reports
of the Secretary-General on the issue.
The information provided by today’s briefers,
Mr. Jenča and Mr. Al Hussein, to which the Senegalese
delegation pays great heed, are strongly disconcerting
and indicate that the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including
that of foreigners held in detention, constitutes a
threat to international peace and security. That is
why we take special note of the briefing of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights on the situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Senegal
encourages that country to better cooperate with the
relevant mechanisms on the promotion of human rights,
including the Office of the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the commission of inquiry on
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
The denuclearization and stabilization of the
Korean peninsula require, inter alia, an improvement of
the human rights situation, including by taking better
into account the humanitarian consequences of the
sanctions measures imposed on the country.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al
Hussein, and Mr. Miroslav Jenča for their harrowing
words on the dire situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Sadly, it is unsurprising that the regime maintains a
stranglehold on every aspect of its citizens’ lives. Like
other Security Council members, the United Kingdom
views the human rights situation in North Korea with
deep concern and dismay. The regime’s treatment of its
own people is yet another example of its unashamed
contempt for the international rules-based system. That
is why we fully support the Security Council’s wish
to draw attention to the shameful living conditions of
the North Korean people, as well as to North Korea’s

17-4360613/21

S/PV.8130

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

11/12/2017

illegal nuclear and ballistic missile programmes, which
we have condemned in resolutions 2371 (2017) and
2375 (2017). We must maintain international focus on
the human rights situation in North Korea, through
both the United Nations in New York and the Human
Rights Council in Geneva. We welcome the visit of the
United Nations last week and we encourage the regime
to engage in a meaningful way.

commission of inquiry’s report, which highlighted
wide-ranging and ongoing crimes against humanity.
The regime has rejected draft resolution A/C.3/72/L.40
of the Third Committee, which calls upon it to respect
the basic rights of its people. Today, I repeat the United
Kingdom’s call on North Korea to allow human rights
actors immediate and unhindered access to assess the
human rights situation in the country.

Evidence of the leadership’s appalling behaviour
towards its own people is impossible to ignore. People
lack freedom of religion and expression. They have
minimal control over their livelihoods and resources.
The State controls what they see, what they consume
and how they behave, using the threat of extreme
punishment to keep people under its thumb. Naysayers
are disappeared, jailed or publicly executed to
demonstrate the price of freedom. The Global Slavery
Index estimates that more than 1 million people are
victims of modern slavery in North Korea.

Our message to the regime must be clear and united.
We must use all of the diplomatic and economic tools
at our disposal to deliver that message. There is a very
different path that is still open to the regime. That path
leads to security and prosperity. It leads to improved
lives for its citizens. All of the members of the Council
and beyond must work together to persuade the North
Korean leadership to pursue that path. In order to do
so, it must end illegal missile tests. It must genuinely
engage with the international community. It must take
serious steps to improve the human right situation for all
of its citizens. Real, positive change to the livelihoods
of the North Korean people will not happen overnight,
but it will not happen at all for as long as North Korea
pursues its current course.

Yet, we know from defector testimonies that
despite the fear instilled in every North Korean,
there are many brave individuals who would rather
take their chances fleeing than remain gagged and
bound by the regime, such as the soldier who recently
defected across the Demilitarized Zone. His daring
escape was an act of desperation, as well as of hope.
His starved physical condition speaks volumes about
the standards of health and welfare in a country that
professes to put the military first, thereby speaking to
how the regime treats those who are most vulnerable.
We urge all members not to return defectors back to
such a miserable situation, which would send a message
that we condone the behaviour of the regime. We also
urge all members not to profit from the North Korean
people’s misery by employing North Korean nationals
who are sent abroad to generate foreign currency,
which is used by the regime to fund its illegal missile
programmes, as stated in resolution 2321 (2016).
The systematic violations of human rights by the
regime go beyond its own citizens or borders. The
death of United States citizen Otto Warmbier following
his detention, the abduction of 17 Japanese nationals
by the regime and the assassination of Kim Jong-nam
in Malaysia are all examples of the North Korean
regime’s contempt for the international rules-based
system Such contempt is further exemplified by the
regime’s denial of access to independent observers
of the human rights situation, its refusal to engage in
meaningful dialogue and its lack of action on the 2014
14/21

We are committed to working with partners on
the Council and beyond to tackle that challenge. The
world looks to us all and, above all, to the North Korean
regime to support a change for the better.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the Japanese
presidency for the timely and important topic suggested
for consideration in the Security Council. My special
thanks go to Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav
Jenča and High Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid
Ra’ad Al Hussein for their substantive briefings.
Today, the Council meets for the fourth time to
discuss the situation of human rights in North Korea.
We reiterate our strong support for the idea of holding
such meetings. We do not share the position that
human rights are the exclusive purview of the Human
Rights Council.
Ukraine reaffirms its stance that systematic and
consistent gross human rights violations are a clear
early-warning sign and indication of a credible threat
to international peace and security, the maintenance
of which is the primary responsibility of the
Security Council.
Regrettably, the human rights situation in North
Korea over the past year has not changed for better. It
17-43606

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

11/12/2017

still remains dire. Ukraine welcomes the first visit since
1995 to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea since
1995 of a special procedure mandate-holder, the Special
Rapporteur on the rights of persons with disabilities, as
well as the strategic framework for cooperation between
the United Nations and the Government for the period
2017-2021, launched in January 2017.
Yet the facts mentioned today by the briefers and by
previous speakers prove that the human rights situation
in North Korea continues to deteriorate. Urgent steps
must be taken by the international community to
reverse the targeted policy of systematic human rights
violations by the North Korean regime.
The latest
highlights that

report

of

the

Secretary-General

“serious and widespread violations of the right to
life, liberty and security of the person, and the
right to a fair trial remain of concern” (A/72/279,
para. 4).
Indeed, even George Orwell, who thought he described
the extreme stage of totalitarianism, would be surprised
by the findings of that report.
We are deeply disturbed by the continuous reports
regarding grave violations of human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including
torture and other cruel, inhumane or degrading
treatment or punishment; rape; extrajudicial, summary,
arbitrary and public executions; extrajudicial and
arbitrary detention; the absence of due process and
the rule of law, including fair trial guarantees and an
independent judiciary; the imposition of the death
penalty for political and religious reasons; collective
punishments extending up to three generations; and
many others.
I would like to mention in particular the issue of
the abduction of Japanese citizens by North Korea.
Twelve Japanese citizens abducted in the 1970s and
1980s are still missing; no clarification of their fate has
been provided to date. In that regard, we fully support
the call of the Secretary-General to all stakeholders
to take all steps necessary to resolve the issue of
family separation, promote accountability for cases of
enforced disappearance and ensure that mechanisms
are in place for relatives in the two countries to remain
in touch and reunite.
We all know that the North Korean regime
continues to build up its military arsenal at the

S/PV. 8130

expense of its own people and uses the country’s
limited resources to support prohibited nuclear and
ballistic missile programmes. The impact of diverting
resources, including earnings generated by nationals
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea working
abroad, has already provoked a steady deterioration in
the quality of life of ordinary citizens, which is a matter
of particular concern to us.
We commend and fully support the establishment
of the group of independent experts on accountability
for human rights violations in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Moreover, we advocate imposing
further pressure on those responsible for human rights
violations that may constitute crimes against humanity.
We also support the initiative of the group to consider
the scope for establishing an ad hoc international
tribunal for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The engagement of a broad range of
actors — Governments, international organizations,
non-governmental organizations and civil society — is
important for effective synergy of diplomatic strategies
and actions, including the vigorous implementation of
existing sanctions, to push the North Korean leadership
towards changes not only in the sphere of protecting
human rights but also in the denuclearization of the
Korean Peninsula.
We call on the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to fully cooperate with
the international community and to ensure safe and
unfettered access to the territory of the country for
United Nations monitoring mechanisms to fulfil their
mandates, in particular for the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, representatives of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Seoul and other independent human
rights mechanisms.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I should like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. Miroslav Jenča, and
the United Nations High Commissioner of the United
Nations for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein,
for their briefings today.
For Uruguay, there is a clear, intimate link between
the systematic violation of human rights and the
generation of conflicts, and the potential for conflicts
to become threats to international peace and security.

17-4360615/21

S/PV.8130

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The human rights and humanitarian situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a cause of
major concern, especially given the context in which
it occurs. The North Korean population is hostage
to will of the authorities, without the most basic
freedoms or guarantees provided for in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights of 1948. The violations
committed by the North Korean Government of the
rights to life, to freedom in the broadest possible sense,
and to the security of its people cannot and should
not be permitted in the twenty-first century. The very
existence of concentration camps and the lack of fairtrial guarantees fundamentally violate all the freedoms
of the civilian population of North Korea.
We are furthermore concerned about the extreme
poverty affecting the North Korean people. Uruguay
therefore condemns the production of nuclear weapons
and ballistic missiles, which has a detrimental effect
on the well-being of the population, whose massive
needs go unmet. The diversion of resources for nuclear
weapons and ballistic missile programmes has a direct
negative impact on the humanitarian and human rights
situation of the citizens of North Korea, who suffer
major material deprivation and hunger.
Unfortunately, there are many other Governments
that commit constant violations and abuses to the human
rights of their populations and are not on the Security
Council’s agenda. However, the situation of Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea occurs against a particular
backdrop that not only threatens to destabilize the
Korean peninsula but also threatens international peace
and security.
We acknowledge that the Government of North
Korea has devoted modest effort to follow up on the
conclusions of the Commission of Inquiry into the
human rights situation in the country. Also, we welcome
the launch of the strategic framework for cooperation
between the United Nations and the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic Of Korea for the period
2017-2021, entitled “Towards Sustainable and Resilient
Human Development”. However, while those are steps
in the correct direction, there is still a long way to go.
Last month, the international community expressed
its concern about the human rights situation in North
Korea once again with the adoption by consensus of
the annual draft resolution of the Third Committee on
the topic.
16/21

11/12/2017

I should like to conclude by noting that a solution
to the tensions on the Korean Peninsula can be found
only through dialogue, negotiations and political
commitment. We therefore stress once again the
importance of the implementation of the provisions of
the numerous resolutions of the Security Council on the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the resumption of the Six-Party Talks to contribute
to a lasting political solution.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, I wish to thank
the Japanese presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this meeting. The intimate link between
violations of human rights and the repercussions for the
maintenance of international peace and security cannot
be denied. This is particularly evident in the case of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as highlighted
by resolutions 2371 (2017) and 2375 (2017). Hence we
believe that the present meeting fully falls within the
scope and the mandate of the Security Council.
I also wish to thank Mr. Jenča and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their briefings.
I look forward to Mr. Feltman’s upcoming briefing on
his recent visit to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
Italy expresses its gravest concern about the
human rights situation and the lack of accountability
for human rights violations in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The North Korean regime continues
to deny its citizens even the most basic of rights and
liberties enshrined in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and other relevant human rights
conventions and instruments. In particular, we have
noted with great concern the reported surge in arbitrary
detentions, unsolved cases of abductions and enforced
disappearances and widespread torture, as well as
forced repatriations and numerous other gross human
rights violations that continue to affect North Korean
people in different ways, some of which can be rightly
considered as crimes against humanity.
Social and political repression is a distinctive
feature of the protracted isolation in which North
Koreans are forced to live. The systematic suppression
of such rights is among the regime’s top priorities as
it suffocates any form of dissent in order to ensure its
own survival. We must not forget the tens of thousands
of political prisoners who continue to be subjected to
the harshest forms of abuse in the regime’s network
of camps.
17-43606

11/12/2017

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV. 8130

Full accountability for those flagrant violations of
international norms and conventions must be ensured,
including through International Criminal Court
referrals. While regretting that the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Mr. Ojea Quintana, has
not yet been allowed to visit the country, we paid close
attention to his visit to the Republic of Korea in July.

be central to any policy of rapprochement and dialogue
with Pyongyang authorities in order to ensure the
welfare and dignity of people in the country. As Chair
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) this year, Italy has made its
best efforts, in close cooperation with other Council
members, to ensure that human rights and humanitarian
concerns are given primary consideration.

We are gravely concerned in particular by the
issue of abductions of Japanese citizens and other
nationals. In that regard, we firmly call upon the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea authorities to
show genuine commitment and make concrete steps to
address the issue and to resume full investigations on
what happened.

Allow me to recall that Security Council resolutions
clearly state that the Committee may, on a case-bycase basis, exempt any activity from the measures
imposed by the Council if the Committee determines
that such an exemption is necessary to facilitate the
work of such organizations in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. In that spirit, this afternoon the 1718
Committee will hear a briefing by Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on
United Nations operations in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and how humanitarian activities can
be carried out without being affected or hindered by the
strengthening of the sanctions regime.

We also strongly condemn the exploitation by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of its own
national workers abroad, whose revenues are forcibly
employed by the Government to fund its illegal
programmes and activities. The Security Council took
a firm stance on this issue in resolution 2375 (2017) by
prohibiting the issuance of permits for North Korean
workers in connection with admission to their respective
territories. We urge all Member States to ensure the full
and effective implementation of that provision.
Moreover, we remain deeply concerned about
the consequences of the protracted, entrenched
humanitarian situation in the country, where well over
half of the population suffers from major insecurity in
food and medical care. That falls within the context of
direct responsibility of the leadership of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which diverges essential
resources away from the population’s needs to fund
its nuclear programme. We therefore wish to reiterate
our call on the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to take action on the accepted
recommendations of the Universal Periodic Review
and those of the Commission of Inquiry as a matter
of priority. We also call upon the authorities of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to seriously
enact constructive engagement with international
interlocutors, particularly in the field of human rights,
in order to promote dialogue and explore possibilities
of cooperation.
Throughout our Security Council mandate in 2017,
we have closely monitored the evolution of the overall
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We believe that the protection of human rights should

I would also like to recall that, in the framework of
the General Assembly Third Committee, as a member
of the European Union, together with Japan we have
been among the main sponsors of the draft resolution
on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea adopted by consensus a few
weeks ago.
Allow me to conclude by underscoring that
the two aims of pursuing accountability for human
rights violations and promoting engagement with the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to address the
situation reinforce rather than undermine one another,
as highlighted also by Mr. Ojea Quintana in his latest
report (see A/72/394).
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Jenča and High Commissioner
Al Hussein for their briefings on the situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We
supported the proposal to discuss this item in the
Chamber based on the understanding and vision that
all issues — even those that are the most sensitive,
difficult and complex — should be addressed through
constructive dialogue in a balanced and equitable
manner with all Member States.
At the same time, while the political and security
situation has a direct impact on human rights, as in the
case of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,

17-4360617/21

S/PV.8130

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

we believe that the Human Rights Council is a more
appropriate platform to discuss country-specific human
rights issues. The mechanisms and procedures of the
Human Rights Council, as well as the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, play a
key role in monitoring human rights in all countries and
have the appropriate mandate and experience to address
them. We also reiterate that human rights must be seen
in an impartial and objective way, in keeping with the
accepted principles of international law, and should
be realized through diplomacy, mediation, inclusive
dialogue and capacity-building.
We have taken note of some positive developments,
such as to include a human rights-based approach in
the strategic framework between the Government of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
United Nations for the period 2017-2021. We also see
that the recommendations of the second cycle of the
Universal Periodic Review in relation to humanitarian
support and the rights of women and children, as well
as to health care and education, are being implemented.
Another step forward has been the visit of the Special
Rapporteur on the rights of persons with disabilities.
We encourage Pyongyang to continue substantive
and constructive engagement with the United
Nations human rights system to effectively follow the
guidance and directives of international human rights
mechanisms, including treaty bodies. We also call on
North Korea to resume negotiations with Japan to bring
the issue of Japanese abductees to a close.
In addition, we urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to allocate more resources for
development goals, including overcoming food
shortages and malnutrition and providing decent basic
social services to its population, instead of spending
more on developing its nuclear programme.
Once again, we encourage the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to hear the message of humankind and
seek the path of prudence and dialogue. We hope that,
in response to the concrete steps that Pyongyang takes
in implementing the United Nations recommendations,
the situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea will ease. That will allow the much-needed
sustainable international funding to be channelled into
humanitarian assistance, therefore improving overall
conditions in the country.
Kazakhstan joins the international community in
working for peace and stability on the Korean peninsula.
18/21

11/12/2017

To achieve that goal, we must redouble our efforts to
introduce confidence-building measures and revitalize
and conduct meaningful, sincere dialogue to create a
balance between accountability and engagement in
order to improve the human rights and living standards
of people in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
I would like to begin by expressing my appreciation
to Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs
Miroslav Jenča and to High Commissioner for Human
Rights Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein for their briefings.
For the past three years, the Security Council has
taken up the issue of systematic, widespread and gross
human rights violations in North Korea. However, we
have not yet seen tangible improvements. In resolutions
2371 (2017)and 2375 (2017), which were unanimously
adopted this year, the Security Council reiterates its
deep concern about the grave hardship to which the
people in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
are subjected.
The Security Council also condemns the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea for pursuing nuclear
weapons and ballistic missiles instead of the welfare of
its people, while the people in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea have great unmet needs. According
to recent United Nations findings, significantly more
than half of the people in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea suffer from major food insecurity
and lack of medical care, including a very large number
of pregnant and lactating women, and children under
five years of age, who are at risk of malnutrition, and
nearly a quarter of its total population is suffering from
chronic malnutrition.
However, instead of addressing those urgent
issues, North Korea has conducted three nuclear tests
and launched 40 ballistic missiles since January 2016.
Not only is the quantity outrageous, but the qualitative
advancements are also deeply alarming. Just two
weeks ago, for the third time, a ballistic missile with
an intercontinental range was launched. North Korea
claims that that missile can strike anywhere within
the United States mainland. It is essential for the
international community to maximize pressure on
North Korea, including through the full implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, and make
North Korea change its policies. North Korea has
consistently ignored the obligations under the relevant
17-43606

11/12/2017

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Security Council resolutions, and challenged regional
stability, as well as international peace and security,
while violating the human rights of its people. The
Security Council must continue to address this agenda
item within its mandate.
I also wish to highlight the issue of North Korean
workers abroad. In its resolution 2371 (2017), the
Council expressed concern regarding situations in
which North Korean nationals often work abroad for
the purpose of generating foreign currency that North
Korea subsequently uses to support its prohibited
nuclear and ballistic missile programmes. Japan,
together with the European Union, pointed out in the
General Assembly resolution 71/202 that workers sent
abroad are exploited by North Korea. That is another
stark example of the close link between the human
rights situation and the pursuit of nuclear and missile
development by North Korea.
Let me now touch upon the issue of the abduction of
foreign nationals, including Japanese nationals. As the
report of the commission of inquiry on human rights in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea states,
“the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
engaged in the systematic abduction, denial of
repatriation and subsequent enforced disappearance
of persons from other countries on a large scale and
as a matter of State policy.”(A/HRC/25/63, para. 64)
Abduction is a grave issue concerning the sovereignty
of countries involved and the lives and safety of
their citizens, and it undoubtedly poses a threat to
international peace and security. In the past, North
Korean agents infiltrated Japan and abducted a number
of Japanese citizens, including a girl as young as
13-years-old.
Abductees’ futures have been stolen, and their
families torn apart. Even now, at this very moment,
many abductees are being deprived of freedom and
waiting to be rescued. As the abductees and their
families grow older, that issue can afford no further
delay. Some family members have passed away, without
ever seeing their loved ones again. There is no time to
waste in resolving the issue. I sincerely hope that the
international community will work closely together to
realize the immediate return of all abductees.
In March, the Group of Independent Experts on
Accountability for Human Rights Violations in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea submitted a

S/PV. 8130

report to the Human Rights Council that emphasizes
the importance of ensuring accountability for North
Korea’s grave human rights violations, including
the country’s abduction of foreign nationals. For the
implementation of the relevant recommendations made
in the report, the Human Rights Council adopted a
resolution to strengthen the capacity of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, including its field-based structure in Seoul.
Japan intends to continue to actively cooperate with the
activities of the Office in that regard.
Today I strongly urge North Korea to heed the
messages from the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the report of the commission of inquiry.
It must start taking concrete steps towards resolving all
outstanding issues of serious human rights violations,
stop its acts of provocation and cease its nuclear and
missile development programmes, which pose a threat
to international peace and security. The Council
should continue to hold meeting on the situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Japan intends
to continue to participate.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): Let me first
express my gratitude to you, Sir, for convening today’s
meeting on the human rights situation in North Korea.
I appreciate the opportunity to participate in this
important meeting. I also thank Prince Zeid Ra’ad Al
Hussein, United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, and Mr. Miroslav Jenča, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for their informative and
comprehensive briefings.
One year ago in this Chamber, I made my first
statement (see S/PV.7830) as Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Korea on this issue of great
significance for the future of our divided nation. I did
so with a heavy heart and an earnest desire to see a
genuine improvement in the human rights situation
in the northern half of the Korean peninsula, but no
progress has been made during the past year, which is
indeed a source of profound disappointment and regret.
Even at this very moment, systematic, widespread
and grave human rights violations are being committed
somewhere in North Korea, and many North Koreans

17-4360619/21

S/PV.8130

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

continue to risk their lives to cross the border in search
of freedom and a dignified life as human beings. Last
month, we even witnessed with our own eyes a North
Korean soldier being shot by his fellow soldiers during
his dramatic escape from the north. Fortunately, he was
brought back to life from the brink of death thanks to
the soldiers in the south who took a measured response
with sound judgement in a situation in which sharp
tensions could have triggered a military clash.
At long last, he was given a priceless opportunity
to live the new life for which he had desperately
yearned. More than 30,000 defectors, including that
soldier, have escaped from North Korea and settled in
the south over the past decades. That simple fact is an
eloquent testimony to how grave and dire the human
rights situation in North Korea is today. Words cannot
describe the pain and suffering of those who, for
whatever reasons, were forced to be sent back to North
Korea after attempting to escape from the north.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
human rights situation in North Korea (see A/72/279)
submitted to the seventy-second session of the General
Assembly this year states that the North Koreans
repatriated to their country are constantly at risk of
torture and ill-treatment and that some women are even
subject to unimaginable human rights violations, such
as forced abortion.
The root cause of those human rights abuses suffered
by the North Korean people is the preoccupation of the
North Korean regime with its own security, for which it
is ready to employ whatever means available, including
through the development of nuclear weapons, while
completely ignoring the basic human rights of its own
people and turning a blind eye to their livelihoods. This
year, yet again, North Korea conducted a nuclear test
and 15 ballistic missile launches. A huge amount of
money, which should have been invested in the wellbeing of its people, has been squandered on developing
weapons of mass destruction. Such irresponsible
behaviour threatens the very survival and the dignified
life of its people, who are already at risk.
Resolution 2375 (2017) also expresses deep concern
over North Korea’s massive diversion of its scarce
resources towards the development of nuclear weapons
and missile programmes and the grave hardship that it
has brought to its people. The reason that the Security
Council has been discussing the North Korean human
rights situation for four consecutive years is also
20/21

11/12/2017

because it views this matter not only as a human rights
issue but also as an issue that poses a serious threat
to international peace and security. The North Korean
nuclear and human rights problems are two sides of
the same coin. Seeking to improve the human rights
situation in North Korea without addressing the root
causes behind the deterioration of the situation is as
irrational as climbing a tree to catch a fish.
North Korea should abandon its nuclear and
missile programmes, abide by international norms and
recommendations, including all the relevant Security
Council resolutions, and invest more of its resources
in the livelihood and welfare of its people. The
international community, for its part, must continue
to raise its voice of concern and compassion so that
North Korea changes its course and makes substantial
improvement in protecting and promoting the human
rights of its own people.
While I was listening to the briefings on the human
rights situation in North Korea earlier this morning,
I was overwhelmed by deep sorrow and painfully
realized anew that our brothers and sisters in the North
are living such strikingly different lives from our own.
Such human suffering, caused by the division of our
nation, however, is not confined only to those of our
compatriots in the North.
Most of those who suffered from the separation of
their families due to the Korean War seven decades ago
have already passed away, and those who survived are
now over the age of 80. To the Koreans, the anguish of
that family separation is the most urgent humanitarian
and human rights problem, which needs to be addressed
without further delay. It is my earnest desire that,
sooner than later, those Koreans who were separated
from their families against their will and have longed
for reunion with them their entire lives can rejoice
in being united with their loved ones, hugging and
caressing each other’s cheeks.
In his address in Berlin last July, President Moon
Jae-in stated: “Before more members of separated
families leave us behind, we must wipe their tears.”
Once again, we urge the North Korean authorities to
respond immediately to our proposal for the resumption
of family reunions.
The Third Committee draft resolution on the
human rights situation in North Korea, adopted on
14 November, refers to another significant humanitarian
issue, that is, the human rights problem of so-called
17-43606

11/12/2017

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

non-Democratic People’s Republic of Korea citizens
detained in North Korea, including six South Koreans.
The families of those detainees are struggling day and
night with anxiety and worry, as they have no idea
whatsoever where and how their lost families are living.
The North Korean authorities should provide them
with adequate protection, allow them to contact their
families and immediately take the necessary measures
for them to return to their beloved families as soon as
possible. That is an imperative humanitarian call.
I believe that only when the people of North Korea
can enjoy a normal life as ordinary citizens like the rest
of us, pursuing their dreams and visions and having the
opportunity to realize their potential as human beings,
will peace on the Korean peninsula be sustainable.
In that regard, the endeavours of the international
community to improve the human rights situation in
North Korea are also linked to the establishment of
peace on the Korean peninsula, including through the
resolution of the North Korean issue. More opportunities
should therefore be provided for North Koreans to
communicate and to interact with the outside world so
that they can pursue a normal, dignified life, enjoying
their basic human rights.

S/PV. 8130

As was seen by the recent visit to North Korea by
the Special Rapporteur on the rights of persons with
disabilities, North Korea has been showing an interest
in working with the United Nations human rights
mechanism, albeit in a limited way, and that has drawn
due attention from the international community. We
urge the North Korean authorities to further expand
their cooperation with the international community
with a view to making progress in protecting the human
rights of their people. The international community
will wholeheartedly welcome North Korea sincerely
heeding its call.
I have a firm conviction that the day will definitely
come when all Koreans, on both sides of the divide,
will live in a unified country together as compatriots
sharing the same blood. I sincerely hope and expect that
the international community will continue to watch
the human rights situation in North Korea until all its
people, including in particular the children who will
take part in building our shared future, can enjoy a
dignified, healthy and happy life.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

17-4360621/21
