i,
:

/F-Y.

L_
j

THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

,,A

,

t ,;i, ”
MEETING:

NEW

\

.a 1.

th
6 APRIL

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2000/Rev.

Statement

by the President

Expression

of thanks to the retiring

Adoption

of the agenda

1)

, . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . , . .. .. . . .

. . . , ., ,. .. . , . . . , . , . . . .. , . . . . . ,. , . , , .
President

. , . . . . . . , .. . . . . , . , .. . . . .

. , . . , . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . a.

. . . . .. . . . .

Complaint by Benin:
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the People’s Republic of
Benin established under resolution 404 (1977) (S/12294 and Add.1 ) . . , . . .

S/PV.2000

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2000TH MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday,
l?e.Tident: Mr. Simon Alberto CONSALVI (Venezuela),
Present: T!le representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2OOO/Rev. 1)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Benin:
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the
People’s Republic of Benin established under resolution
404 (1977) (S/l2294 and Add.1)
The meeting was called tv order at 3.45 p.m.
Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation jkom Spanish): As the
Security Council has with this meeting reached a numerical
milestone in its 3 1 year history, I think that it is
appropriate to say a few words in commemoration of this
event.
2. Let me recall that the first meeting of the Council-l
could say our first meeting, even though I am a comparative
newcomer to this main organ of the United Nations-was
held on 17 January 1946 in London. Arter four and a half
rather busy years, the Council held its 500th meeting on 12
September 1950 at Lake Success. During the following
years, the States Members had recourse to the COUIIC~~less
often, and it took almost 12 years for the next 500
meetings to be held. The 1000th meeting was held in this
chamber on 3 April 1962. Almost exactly 15 years later, wc
meet today for the 2000th meeting.
3. Statistics should not lead one to rash generalizations
but, if for the purpose of a birthday speech a generalization
may be allowed, I should like to point out that, as long as
one takes 500 meetings as a unit, the Security Council
seems to have an irregular heartbeat, whereas, if one uses
1000 meetings as a unit, the analogy of a diagnosis for a
long and healthy life comes to mind.
4. May I quickly add, in making these comparisons, that I
certainly do not wish either to encourage or to discourage
any Member State from requesting a meeting of the Council

6 April

1977,

at 3 p.m.

or abstaining from doing so. I merely wanted to strike a
note of confidence with complete conviction.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
5. The PRESIDENT: (interpretation from Spanish): As 1
assume the presidency of the Security Council, I have the
great honour of expressing to Mr. Andrew Young, representative of the United States, the appreciation of all the
members of the Council for the services he rendered as
President during the month of March. Both during the
formal meetings of the Council and in the course of
intensive consultations devoted to the consideration of two
of the most difficult and long-standing issues before the
Council, Ambassador Young gave generously of his talent
and demonstrated qualities of patience, courtesy, skill and
wisdom, which quickly earned him our respect and friendship. I am very happy to be in a position to pay this
well-deserved tribute to Ambassador Young, who has set an
example of dedicated and impartial leadership which I shall
do my best to emulate.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Benin
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the
People’s Republic of Benin established under resolution
404 (1977) (S/l 2294 and Add.1)”
6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretatiorz from Spanish):
Letters have been addressed to the President of the Council
by the representatives of Botswana, Gabon, Guinea, and
Morocco in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the question on the agenda. Consequently, I propose, in accordance with the usual practice
and with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, under the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
7. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table I invite the representatives mentioned above
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, on the understanding that they will be
invited to take a place at the Council table whenever they
wish to address the Council.
* Subsequently
issued as Official Records of tke SeCUritycou?lCil,
T/&y-second
Year, Special Supplement NO. 3 (S/l 2294/Rev.l).

At

the

imitutioi?

of

the

President,

hrlu. M.

Modisi

(BQts~~~f~Q),Mr. L. N’Dong (Gabon), Mr. M. S Ovnnra
(Gllillea) and Mr. A. Bengelloun [Morocco) took the places
reSer~d ./br them at the sideof the Council chamber.
8. The PRESIDENT (interpretation jkom Spanish): The
Security ~k~llllC~
will now resumeits consideration of the
complaint by Benin. I should like to recall that when the
Council considered this item at its 1986th and 1987th
meetings, held on 7 and 8 February, it adopted resolution
404 ( 1977), by which it decided to send a specialmission
composedof three membersof the Council to the People’s
Republic of Benin in order to investigate the events of 16
hl11ary at Cotonou and to report to the Council. The
Special Mission, composedof Mr. RameshMulye of India,
Ambassador Mansur Rashid Kikhia of Libya and Ambasador Jorge Enrique lllueca of Panama,who acted asthe
Chairman, submitted its report, contained in document
S/12294 and Add.1, on 8 March 1977.
9. I should also like to draw attention to additional
documents before the Council in connexion with the report
of the Special Mission: S/12313, which contains a letter
dated 28 March 1977 from the Secretary-General, transmitting a copy of a telegram from the President of the
Republic of Gabon; S/12317, which contains a further
letter dated 4 April from the Secretary-General, transmitting a copy of a letter dated 23 March from the
President of the Republic of Gabon; S/12318 and S/12319,
which contain letters dated 4 April from the Char@
d’affaires n.i. of Benin requesting the circulation of reports
prepared by his Government. The first of those reports has
been issued in document S/ 12318/Add.l and the second
will be issued as soon as possiblein document S/12319/
Add. 1.

14. As President Carlos Andres PBrez stated on 16
November 1976 before the General Assembly, Venezuela
has among its priority objectives in its foreign policy the
“strengthening of the United Nations [becausethat] is the
strengtheningof peaceandof hopesfor a better destiny for
mankind”.1 To paraphrasethe statement by President
Perez, I might say that the political conceptthat Venezuela
standsfor in the Council and its Latin Americanidentity
are embodied in its representative,our eminent colleague
AmbassadorSin& Albert0 Consalvi. From his country’s
Parliament, where he is a representativeof the Democratic
Action Party in the Congress,
AmbassadorConsalvicameto
this world parliament to bring to us the wealth of his
experience and his ideals,which he hasupheld in prisonas
in the pressand in his legislativepost. As a diplomat, the
President of the Institute for Culture and Fine Arts and
Minister of Information of his country, AmbassadorConsalvi brings to the Council a reputation for integrity,
humanism,devotion to duty and erudition, which together
with his serenewisdom will contribute to makingthe work
of the Council during the month of April fruitful and
constructive.
15. These are sufficient reasons,Mr. President,to expect
every successin the exerciseof your duties asPresident.1
shouldlike to state that at all times you will havethe firm
and willing co-operation of the delegationof Panama.We
offer you this co-operation with fraternal enthusiasm,
knowing that you are imbuedwith the faith of Venezuelans
in Latin America asa community, in its historic destiny and
the role that it will play before mankind.
16. We are also most gratified to place on record the
appreciation of the delegationof Panamafor the praiseworthy work performed by AmbassadorAndrew Young of
the United States when it waskis turn to presideover the
Council during the month of March last. Ambassador
Young, in the brief time in which he hasbeenin office, has
given proof of his great ability asa politician and diplomat.
During his presidency he madeclear his firm willingnessto
reconcile the interests of his country with the idealsof the
United Nations and with the aspirationsof the oppressed
peoplesof the world.

10. The first spcalceristhe representativeof Panama,who,
as Chairman of the Special Mission, will introduce the
report of the Mission.
I I. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (irlterpretation from
Spanisl~): Mr. President, before addressingthe Council as
Chairman of the Special Mission, I should like to make an
initial statement as the representative of Panama. This
statement concerns the position that Venezuela occupies
today.

17. 1 should like now to addressthe Council asChairman
of the Security Council SpecialMission.
18. On behalf of my colleagues,Mr. RameshN. Mulye of
India and AtnbassadorMansur RashidKikhia of Libya, and
on my own behalf, it is my honour to submit to the
Council the report of the SpecialMissionestablishedunder
Council resolution 404 (1977), contained in document
s/12294.

12. The fact that the representativeof Venezuela occupies
the seat of President of the Security Council is a causefor
genuine rejoicing not only for Panama,asthe capital of the
idealsof Bolivar, but also far all of Latin America and the
countries of the third world, which seein the nation of
Venezuela the best champion of the legitimate interests of
the developing countries in the north-south dialogue.

19. AS members will recall, when that resolution was
adopted, the Council decided to send a specialmission
composedof three of its membersto the People’sRepublic
of Benin to carry out an inquiry into the events of 16
January 1977 at Cotonou and report to the Council. After
consultations with membersof the Council, the President
of the Council, AmbassadorJamesMurray of the United
Kingdom, appointed the representativesof India, Libya and
Panamamembersof the SpecialMission.I washonouredto

13. On our continent of many races we can say that
Venezuela, the cradle of Simcin Bolivar, is not only “the
land of the Liberator”, but also “the land of liberators”.
Statesmen of that country, following in the footsteps of
that genius from Caracas,have for successivegenerations
devoted their best efforts within and beyond their
boundaries to an arduous struggle for the freedom, the
tignity, the development and the integration of Latin
America.

1 official Recordsof the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session,
PlenaryMeetings,67th meeting,
para.8

2

be selected to be Chairman
of that important mission. It
___waz
aTai-l%asure
to%?~k~?%&y
colleagues and
friends Mr. Mulye and Ambassador Kikhia. Their great
capacity for work and their spirit of co-operation and
constant good humour made it possible for the Mission to
discharge its arduous task quickly and productively in an
atmosphere of complete harmony. May I therefore avail
myself of this opportunity to express my gratitude once
again to my colleagues for their great intellectual and
practical contribution to the discharge of the task entrusted
to US by the Council. On this occasion I should also like to
express my gratitude to the competent and devoted
Secretariat staff who went with us and contributed to the
success of our mission.

complete transcript of his testimony is included in annex
III. As members of the Council are aware, that prisoner of
his own free will described in detail his recruitment and
training with the attacking force, as well as his own
participation in the operation of 16 January. After exhaustive interrogation, we found no flaws, contradictions or
obvious omissions in his testimony, and his account in
general was the same as other accounts and, in particular,
accorded with the documentation captured by the Government of Benin.
26. Furthermore, I trust that the members of the Council
will pay special attention to the documentation described
in chapter 11, section G of the report, and the photocopies
and translations in annex VI. In submitting all that
documentation to the Special Mission, the Government of
Benin indicated that it had been captured by the armed
forces of Benin after the attackers of 16 January had been
forced to flee. That documentation is voluminous and
constitutes a meticulous and coherent inventory corroborating the testimony of the prisoner and other evidence
obtained by the Mission.

20. Finally, I should like to express the profound appreciation of the Special Mission to the Government of the
People’s Republic of Benin, whose co-operation and goodwill made it possible for us to discharge our duties and
which supplied a substantial part of the information we
used in our report. The list of names of the government
officials and private persons whose warm hospitality made
us feel so at home in their country is so long that I cannot
mention them individually, but the first among them, IHis
Excellency President Mathieu KCrCkou, will, I hope, transmit our gratitude to his fellow citizens.

27. On the basis of the testimony of the member of the
attacking force taken prisoner on 16 January and the
documentation left behind by the attacking force, the
Special Mission deemed it appropriate to indicate in its
conclusions, reflected in paragraph 145 of the report, the
places where the attackers had been recruited and trained
and from where they had departed in order to arrive at
Cotonou on 16 January, as well as the identity of the
person who had been in charge of that military operation.

21. In a lighter vein, I should like to point out that no one
who has picked up the report of the Special Mission can
accuse us of a lack of diligence. With the annexes, the
report weighs more than a pound and contains more than
300 pages. Speaking seriously now, I can affirm my
conviction that it was desirable, even essential, that the
report should be lengthy so as to give a comprehensive
picture of the events that occurred at Cotonou on 16
January.

28. I wish particularly to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to those conclusions which appear
in paragraphs 136-140 inclusive, which give a substantially
accurate description of the events at Cotonou on
1G January.

22. The descriptive part of the report gives, in my opinion,
a clear picture of the Mission’s activities in fulfilment of its
mandate. I hope it will be clear from the report that the
members of the Mission did everything they could not to
miss any opportunity
to investigate every event and
circumstance that might be relevant to what happened on
16 January.

29. Paragraph 141 expresses the conclusion that the
People’s Republic of Benin was the object of an armed
attack perpetrated by a force which arrived at Cotonou
airport on the morning of 16 January. The primary
objective of the invading force was the overthrow of the
present Government of Benin. Inasmuch as the territorial
integrity, independence and sovereignty of the State of
Benin were violated by that invading force which came
from outside the territory of that country, there can be no
doubt, as is stated in paragraph 142, that Benin was
subjected to aggression.

23. In the conclusions of the report, statements are.made
with which the three members of the Mission completely
agree; there are no dissenting opinions on any part of the
report. It is the considered opinion of the members of the
Mission that each of those statements is substantiated by
the evidence obtained, although they did everything possible to limit the number of conclusions, in order to avoid
any possibility of exaggeration. We trust that the members
of the Council have had an opportunity to read the
complete text and the annexes. The importance of the
subject fully merits such personal attention on their part.

30. It is also clear that a majority of the attacking force,
not nationals of Benin, were participating in that flCthl for
pecuniary motives and were therefore mercenaries. That
conclusion appears in paragraph 143.
31. From the manner in which the operation was conceived and executed, the Special Mission believes a similar
operation could be conducted elsewhere against sxmll
defenceless countries for similar purposes. That conclusion
appears in paragraph 144.

24. However, I should like to mention briefly the following points which deserve special attention.
25. I am confident that members of the Council will
careftilly consider the testimony of the member of the
attacking force who was taken prisoner at Cotonou on 16
January. A summary of his testimony before the Special
Mission appears in chapter II, section D of the report and a

32. As I indicated earlier, the Special Mission reached
these conclusions on the basis of its on-the-spot investi3

gations, the comprehensive testimony
the documents which were obtained.

barbarousenslavementand outrageousexploitation of our
peoplesand those of the third world who cherishpeace,
justice and dignity.

presented to it and

33. The members of the Special Mission consider that as
for the origins and the perpetrators of the aggression to
which Benin was subjected on 16 January, particular weight
attaches to the testimony of the prisoner and to the
documentation left behind by the attacking force.

41. The asyet unconcludedCouncil debateon npartheid,
that heinousand atrociousform of enslavement,colonialist
domination and the ferociousexploitation of manby man,
has increasedthe international community’s awareness
of
one of those evils daily threateningthe entire independence
of free and sovereignAfrica, which aspiresonly to peace,
security andthe welfare of its peoples.

34. The Special Mission considers that its conclusions are
w& and conservatively founded. Obviously, however, the
terms of its mandate did not permit the Special Mission to
undertake further investigations in the time available and to
verify all the evidence obtained.

42. Today, under your presidency, the Security Council,
pursuant to the terms of its resolution 404 (1977), is
embarking upon the secondstageof a debateto which the
revolutionary, heroic and intrepid peopleof Beninattaches
vital importance.

35. May I conclude these remarks by expressing appreciation to the members of the Security Council and to its
President for the month of February for the honour they
conferred on us and for the confidence placed in the
representatives of India, Libya and Panama in appointing US
members of the Special Mission.

43. Now that the SpecialMission dispatchedto Cotonou
by the Council haspublishedits conclusions,and the veil of
secrecy which the imperialist Powers, their obsequious
agentsblindly devoted to their cause,and the pressin those
countries have been striving sohard to keepover the armed
aggressionof Sunday, 16 January 1977, hasbeen totally
stripped away, my delegationhopesthis debatewill take
placein an atmosphereof clarity, objectivity and sincerity,
and with a high senseof justice and responsibility.

36. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation jkonz Spanish): I
should like to convey to the Chairman and members of the
Special Mission the Council’s appreciation for the goodwill
and conscientiousness with which they carried out the task
entrusted to them.
37. I am moved by the generous words voiced by the
representative of Panama with respect to my country and
myself. In particular, 1 am most grateful to him for recalling
my years in prison. One tries to forget such things oneself.
It was a useful experience, but let it not be thought that I
am recommending-it.

44. But before coming to the heart of the matter before
the Council, permit me, Mr. President,to voice here the
profound and sinceregratitude of the Beninesepeopleto
the President of the Council for the month of February,
AmbassadorMurray of the United Kingdom. Our great
comrade-in-arms,PresidentKBrCkou, was particularly ap
preciative of the distinguishedrole played by Ambassador
Murray in convening the Council and having it debate the
complaint of Benin, my country, which had fallenvictim to
a dastardly and barbarousact of aggressionon Sunday, 16
January 1977.

38. I wish to inform Council members that I have received
a letter from the representative of Niger, Chairman of the
African Group for the month of April, in which he asks to
be invited, to participate in our debate without the right to
vote. Therefore, in accordance with Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure
and the established practice of the Council, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in our debate without the right to vote.

45. My delegation highly appreciatesthe understanding
and the spirit of co-operationshown it by all the members
of the Council. Wewish to thank them warmly for that.
46. I should like to extend to AmbassadorYoung of the
United States my delegation’sappreciation for the responsiblemanner in which he conducted our proceedings
during the month of March.

39. In view of the limited number of places available at
the Council table, I invite the representative of Niger to
take the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that he will be invited to
take a place at the Council table whenever he wishes to
address the Council.
At thr invitation of the President, Mr. J. Poisson (Niger)
took the place resewed .tor him at the side oJ’ the Council
chamber.
40. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (interpretation .fiom French): Sir,
you are presiding over the Council at a time when it is
consideringan important caserelating to the survival of the
African continent, which is threatened by many scourges
that constitute real dangersfor the peace and security. of
the nations of the world. Those scourgesare to be found in
all forms of imperialist, colonialist and neo-colonialist
foreign domination, racismand apartheid-in a word, in the
4

47. Sir, my delegationwishesmost warmly to congratulate
you on your assumptionof the presidencyof the Council
for the month of April. I know that, thanks to your
experience, our proceedingswill be conductedin a spirit of
sincerity, justice and responsibility. You may rest assured
of my delegation’s whole-hearted support in the performance of your important task.
48. Benin’s causeis a just one. All friendly countrieshave
defended it; their active support and their spirit of
solidarity made it possiblefor us to conclude the initial
phaseof our debate in a positive manner. Although they
were only doing their duty, the militant peopleof Benin is
neverthelessprofoundly grateful to them.

49. My delegation wishes to single out the decisive role
played by the members of the Security Council Special
Mission who went to the scene-to Benin itself-to conduct
their investigation from 16 to 25 February. The Chairman
of the Mission, Ambassador Illueca of Panama, and the two
other members, Ambassador Mansur Kikhia of Libya and
Mr. Ramesh Mulye of India, in the view of our great
comrade-in-arms, President KBrBkou, performed some extremely thorough, responsible and objective work at
Cotonou. Their report and its annexes-more than 300
pages-are a tremendous harvest of particularly edifying,
verifiable and measurable facts that is offered for the
attentive perusal of the Council, whose task it is to
maintain international peace and security.

its African lackeys wanted to hush up their abominable
crime, once they were no longer able to impose their
flagrant lies on international public opinion.
54. Indeed, no one is now unaware that many delegations
have visited the actual scene of the crime committed against
our people. Everyone is aware today that Mr. Peter Onu,
Assistant Secretary-General of OAU, has been to Cotonou
and has made a detailed report in the light of evidence he
examined, and that his report has been supplemented by
the report of a special mission composed of Foreign
Ministers from Angola, Libya, Niger, Nigeria, Mozambique
and Zambia which went to Cotonou on 24 February.
55. Everyone knows today that the International Commission of Inquiry, composed of Nigeria, Guinea and Benin,
worked for many weeks and submitted a report on its
inquiry that shows an objectivity and depth of political
analysis that compels everyone’s admiration. Let us make it
quite clear that that International Commission of Inquiry
began its work on 28 January 1977 and submitted its
report on 18 February. That report was subjected to a
detailed examination by the highest organs of the Party and
revolutionary State of Benin before being finally adopted
on 12 March as our national report on the imperialist armed
aggression of which the People’s Republic of Benin was the
.victim on Sunday, 16 January 1977. Pending the distribution of that report in the appropriate languages as an
official document of the Security Council,2 each member
of the Council can now at least have a copy in French.

50. Mr. President, my delegation is deeply convinced that,
in the light of the irrefutable facts contained in the report’
of the Special Mission, and thanks to your eminent qualities
as an enlightened statesman, you will succeed in conducting
this debate in a spirit of equity, according to the wishes of
the peace-loving people of Benin.
51. My delegation, which is fully acquainted with the
voluminous evidence of the imperialist armed aggression
committed against Benin on Sunday, 16 January 1977, has
a proper appreciation of the gravity of the acts committed
by the allied forces of evil against small defenceless
countries of the third world, which are more concerned
with finding, in a spirit of justice, equality and sovereignty,
rapid and effective solutions to their development problems. That is why the Beninese people, its vanguard party
and its Government have constantly displayed a great deal
of perspicacity, calm and, qbove all, a- high sense of
responsibility, as members of the Council must, in all
conscience, acknowledge.

56. Finally, everyone is aware today that the report of the
Security Council Special Mission [S/l 2294 ami Add. I/ had
an explosive effect within the United Nations.
57. These different reports have made it quite clear that
Benin was the ,victim of an act of armed aggression financed
from the putside.‘These reports agree in concluding that
this &as a clegr-cut case of aggression, carefully prepared
and. carried out by professionals of crime on a massive scale.
The report of the Special Mission says in paragraph 141:

52. The militant people of Benin were very quick to’
unmask the game of their sivom enemies who wanted to
cover up their heinous crime by shamelessly spreading the
most flagrant lies and the most abominable calumnies about
our people, in the cynical .and Machiavellian idea of
misleading international public opinion, to which the
imperialist press so noisily announced the presence of
“mysterious mercenaries” or conflicts within the army and
Government of Benin. The people of Benin refused, as was
quite rightly pointed out by certain of our fellow representatives here, to rush to any hasty conclusions, ill-timed
condemnations or blustering accusations before an inquiry
had taken place. Although we have been deeply wounded
and our dignity has been injured, the people of Benin have
preferred to remain calm and lucid, as this great political
scandal of our century demands, in order to be’better able
to determine the facts, to analyse and appreciate their
profound significance, and above all to give all Governments that sincerely love peace and justice an opportunity
to see, analyse and judge for themselves all the particularly
edifying and irrefutable facts and all the tangible evidence
of the dastardly act of armed aggression perpetrated SO
barbarously on 16 January 1977 against the peace-loving
and heroic people of Benin.

“On the basis of the testimony received and evidence
examined by it, the Special Mission is in a .position to
conclude that the People’s Republic of Benin was thus
subjected to an armed attack by the armed force which
arrived at Cotonou airport on the morning of 16 January
1977. The primary objective of the invading force”yas the
overthrow of the present Government of Benin.”
In paragraph 142 of the report WC find the following:
m
“Inasmuch as the territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty of the State of Benin was violated by this
invading force which came from outside . . , there can be
no doubt that the State of Benin was subjected to
aggression.”
58. These different reports confirm that those responsible
for the abominable crime of 16 January 1977 did not come
from Mars-they are not imaginary, creatures-and,.that the
Beninese people were not the victims of* a collective

53. This attitude is very much appreciated by all and it
has, furthermore, made it possible for us to thwart the great
conspiracy of silence whereby international imperialism and

2 Subsequently circulated as document S/12319/Add.l.

5

hallucination that morning. These different reports confirm
that international imperialism, the sworn enemy of the
peoples of the world, recruited mercenaries in order to
invade Benin and to deliver a stab in the back to its
democratic and popular revolution. Paragraph 143 of the
report of the Special Mission states the following:

sum is $US 475,000 for the pre-operational phaseand
$uS 530,000 for the post-operationalphase,or a total of
$IJS 1,005,000, exclusively for salaries.This is to be found
in paragraph 126, subparagraph17 of the report andin
annex VI. Furthermore, I would add that paragraph126,
subparagraphs46-49 are sufficiently clear with regardto
the financial aspect of the act of armed aggression
stage-managed
by the forces of evil against Benin and its
peace-loving revolutionary people. As we assertedlast
February, no Benin citizen, no group of Benin citizens
traitors to the sacredcauseof our democratic and popular
revolution, possess
suchpowerful financial resources.Thus
it is obvious that the vast sumsnecessaryto finance this
diabolical operation could come only from powerful
financial sources.

“It is also clear that a majority of the attacking force,
not nationals of Benin, were participating in this action
for pecuniary motives and were, therefore, mercenaries.”
This report is therefore quite clear and lucid.
59. Now that the actual facts of the aggression have been
100 per cent established-the material damage, the loss of
life on both sides, the arms and munitions abandoned by
the mercenaries, the mercenary taken prisoner, and the
abundant evidence from so many sources-one would have
to be of congenital bad faith to believe that the people’of
Benin had recourse to falsehood in order to find where to
lay the blame.

64, Secondly, there is the list of the armsand ammunition
that were used for the aggression.The bulky file of the
Special Mission gives a more detailed and more complete
list than the one given by my delegationlast February.
What group of Benin citizens traitors to our sacredcause
could so easily gain accessto the complicatedcircuit of the
acquisition of such sophisticatedweaponsif they did not
enjoy the total support of the financial powers within
certain States?

60. One would have to be naive or really ill-intentioned to
believe that the People’s Republic of Benin had forged the
national identity
card of Lieutenant-Colonel
Gilbert
Bourgeaud or that of Sy SawanC. One would have io be
intellectually dishonest to believe that the People’s Republic of Benin had invented the bank account numbers,
the airline tickets, the names and addresses of those hired
killers who are the mercenaries that invaded Cotonou on
Sunday, 16 January 1977,

65. Thirdly, there is the question of the origin and
recruitment of the mercenaries.The Special Mission’s
report gives the following information:
(a) Most of the membersof the armedforce were white;

61. What the reactionaries and colonialists are afraid of
and what is causingdisarray in the camp of imperialismand
its African lackeys is the fact that Benin is in possession
of
such valuable documents which completely unmask the
whole diaboiicai imperialist plan for the colonial reconquest
of Africa, It is vain, after the scrupulous inquiries conducted by various commissionsand missions,to try to sow
doubt in the minds of the people of the world by
questioningthe authenticity of the documents.

(b) Their lingua franca was French, that is, they spoke
French without a foreign accent;
(c) The chief of staff who personally directed all the
operations in the field is a French officer, Lt. Col. Gilbert
Bourgeaud,born at Caen,France, on 30 January 1929;his
domicilein Franceis at 14 rue Max Dormoy, Paris;
(d) The point of departure and arrival of all the white
mercenarieswas Paris; their air tickets were bought from
Air France and UTA.

62. Everyone knows that mercenariesare skilled technicians in masscrimes, specialistsin massacringinnocent
people and that they sell this skill for money and that,
consequently, there hasto be someoneto recruit them, pay
their salaries, assign them to a particular mission and
provide them with all the necessarymeans to accomplish
that deadly task. The question we have to elucidate now is
a very simple one: who is it that is hiding behind this vast
criminal operation? Who, in the final analysis,is the master
mind, responsible for this desperate attempt at colonial
reconquest? The bulky file of the Special Mission sent to
Cotonou provides all the information necessaryfor obtaining a clear and unequivocal answer to this important
question. Let us try to analysethese elementsobjectively
and in all honesty.

66. In the light of these shameful facts, which arc
absolutely overwhelmingin their accusatory effect, Benin
has well-founded reasonsfor proclaiming aloud that those
primarily responsiblefor this act of armed aggression
againstBenin are the reactionary neo-colonialistcirclesin
France
who have never been able and never will be ableto
put up with the revolutionary processunder way in our
country since 26 October 1972. Those people are the
standard-bearersof French imperialism and as such are
fundamentally hostile to our democratic and popular
revolution. French imperialismhasarmedandlaunchedand
will continue to arm and launch attacks against our
country, by dispatchingits secret servicesand its parallel
and subversivenetworks. The Benin revolutionary process
hasdone away with political slavery and black puppets.The
Benin revolutionary processhasbroken the many closeand
sordid links woven for solong between Benineseagentsof
imperialism and representativesof State authorities, the
exploitative capitalist monopolies.The new Benin wantsto

63. First, there is the financial dossier of the act of
aggression. The gross sum spent on salaries for the
mercenaries whose task it was to overthrow the revolutionary rigime of the People’s Republic of Benin is
mentioned in annex VI of the SpecialMission’sreport, This
6

/i :

be totally independent and free, the absolute master of its
own destiny, which it is busy molding, relying above all on
its own resources.

stated on 7 February in the Council by the representative
of Madagascar, Comrade Rabetafika:
“There will be neither international peace nor international security as long as some people believe that the
interdependence which today’s world calls for can be
manipulated and used in order to promote the establishment of new relations based on dependence, exploitation
and domination,” rl986th meeting, para. 79.1

67. My delegation would like to stress here, for the benefit
of the French delegation, the following point: the people of
Benin have excellent relations with the people of France;
France to this day remains a special partner of the People’s
Republic of Benin and consequently, for us in Benin,
France remains a friendly country. My delegation would,
through the Council, ask the French delegation for its
sincere and honest co-operation in seeing to it that these
persons who have committed crimes against the people of
Benin are properly brought to justice. To the extent that
the French people and the people of Benin remain friends
and attached to much cherished traditions of justice, it is
absolutely indispensable that Lt. COI. Gilbert Bourgeaud
and his French and other accomplices who operated from
Paris should be brought to justice. The people of Benin,
victims of aggression and violence, some of whose valiant
sons were assassinated in such a dastardly fashion, quite
rightly call for appropriate punishment for the crimes
committed against them. The people of Benin will do
everything in their power to see to it that justice is done.

73. The people of Benin, which is still crying out in its
anguish, is asking of the Council: first, vigorous condemnation of the act of armed imperialist aggression committed
on Sunday, 16 January 1977, which would highlight-in
order to avoid misunderstanding-the
role played by the
financial powers which are those truly responsible for that
criminal act; secondly, firm condemnation of international
mercenaries, who are used by imperialism and the forces of
evil as a means of intervention to threaten the lives of the
people of small defenceless countries such as Benin and
attempt to destroy their institutions in order to submit
those countries to pillage and their peoples to oppression.
74. With regard to the Beninese traitors, the people of
Benin, which was by itself able to repel the invaders, more
alert and more hardened than ever before, will be able to
settle accounts with them and render them harmless for the
future.

68. The French people, which is friendly towards the
people of Benin, is a people which loves justice and is
deeply devoted to democracy and liberty. The people of
Benin will never allow the truth to be stifled and the
authorities responsible to cover up their flagrantly criminal
acts which have had such grave consequences.

75. The case against mercenaries that Benin has just made
to the Council is unprecedented but well supported by
detailed information. This dossier now belongs to all
members of the internationaI community, so a concrete and
decisive struggle can be waged against the use of mercenaries to commit aggression against small defenceless
nations. The act of aggression against Benin was an act of
aggression against all the countries of the third world,
because, as the report of the Special Mission says so clearly
in paragraph 144:

69. On this particular question of the punishment of the
mercenary criminals, concerning whom we have sufficient
information to bring them out of their present hiding
places, my delegation would like to make a fraternal appeal
to all Member States to support Benin in its attempts to
unmask them and to prevent them from committing other
crimes.

“From the manner in which the operation was conceived and executed, the Special Mission believes a similar
operation could be conducted elsewhere against small
defenceless countries for similar purposes.”

70. International imperialism cannot carry out its dirty
work without the aid of the lackeys, stooges or local agents
which it keeps on the African, continent with varying
degrees of responsibility and under different covers. It is
clear that, whatever its social and political regime, no
African country, no third-world country and no country
that loves peace and justice can permit such flagrant
intervention in its internal affairs.

Yesterday it was Guinea and Angola; today it, is Benin; and
tomorrow, whose turn will it be?

71. Benin vigorously condemns the gunboat policy and
the policy of colonial reconquest of which the reactionary
and neocolonialist French circles that operate in Africa on
behalf of French and international imperialism are past
masters. As we have said and repeated so often, it is
absolutely necessary for the people of the world to join
forces in order as soon as possible to put an end to this
scourge of our century: international mercenary activity.

76. We know it is the small third-world
countries, and
particularly those whose determination to achieve political
independence is most irritating to the international pillagers, that are the scheduled victims of such acts of
aggression for which white mercenaries, the adventurers of
international capitalism, are the instruments. Under the
cloak provided by certain official authorities, the imperialist countries have set up in different places centres of
recruitment for mercenaries, so that they can commit their
reprehensible acts against small independent countries of
the third world.

72. All countries of the world which respect the Charter
of the United Nations must give their unanimous support to
the cause of Benin, which is a just cause, because, as was

77. The international community must become more and
more aware of the danger to international peace and
7

should be arrested immediately. To that end the co-operation of all the Governments of the world is necessary.

security posed by international mercenary activity. That
activity is. well protected and, while it is the subject of
verbal condemnation, no concrete action is taken to put an
end to this evil of our time. The case of Benin will be a test
of the sincerity and honesty of certain States in the
common struggle against mercenaries. The bringing to
justice of Bourgeaud and ali his living accomplices would be
a test for the whole international community.

83. For its part, the people of Benin has made a free and
irrevocable choice in total independence and in a spirit of
responsibility. Our political option is for scientific SOcialism, with Marxism-Leninism as our guide, and we shall
defend it by all means at our disposal. I want this to be
quite clear to the aggressors.

78. As I said on 7 February [1986th meeting], and as
members of the Special Mission will have noted, my
country, the People’s Republic of Benin, suffered a great
deal from the armed aggression of Sunday, 16 January
1977, committed by a horde of armed mercenaries sent
there by powerful
financial circles. The damage was
considerable, and the consequences have been serious for
our economy. I will not repeat the detailed description of
the damage which I gave in my statement of 7 February but
I should like to make clear to the Council that the
consequences of the aggression for our economy are
tangible.

84. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): In the circumstances,
some of us-myself included-must consider ourselves fortunate not to speak French with a French accent.
85. Mr. President, ever since the beginning of this year 1
have had the privilege, pleasure and honour of working
beside you both in the Group of Non-Aligned and other
countries and in the Council. We have not failed to observe
the quiet, modest and friendly approach with which you so
effectively and skilfully conduct the diplomacy of your
great and beautiful country, which I had the pleasure of
visiting a couple of years ago. The Council benefits greatly
from your vast and varied experience in the fields of public
communication and relations, culture, politics and diplomacy. Your noble and gentle manners, as well as your
credibility and integrity, have earned you the respect of one
and all and secured strong bonds of friendship from aI
quarters for your country. I warmly welcome, and congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April. I feel proud to be
serving under your wise guidance and offer you my full
co-operation.

79. First, the act of aggression has forced US to pay
particular attention to problems of defence and security.
Secondly, the people of Benin have been mobilized, the
civilian and military population has been on the alert since
16 January 1977, although this is a time when it should be
much mom concerned with problems of production,
concerning which a national campaign was successfully
launched in 1976. Thirdly, for reasons of security which
the. documents in our possession make it easy to understand, we have been obliged to close our western frontiers
for a time, This involves certain losses to us and also, of
course, has a negative effect upon our economy.

81. In the light of the foregoing, my country needs the
support of all countries that love peace and justice and of
the whole international community, so that all the damage
caused by the aggression can be repaired. The people of
Benin ask the Council to take measures to ensure compensation for damage and to provide considerable assistance to
our economy. But I want it to bc clearly understood that
the people of Benin, a revolutionary people, is not coming
here begging for international alms. First and foremost we
shall rely on our own resources to deal with the ill effects
of the act of barbarous aggression. What the people of
Benin demands is that justice be done and that there be
compensation for all the damage. That is a moral responsibility for the international community.

86. I should like also to pay a special tribute to another
former Congressman, your distinguished predecessor, our
good friend Ambassador Andrew Young of the United
States. Ambassador Young has brought to the United
Nations, and to the Council in particular, a breath of fresh
southern air. For too long we were presented with a
distorted ugly face of the United States. Ambassador
Young has, in a brief period, succeeded in remedying that
sad situation and has presented to us an acceptable image of
his great country. He has, to my mind, repaired some of the
damage done both to the United Nations and the United
States by some of his immediate predecessors. We no longer
hear the arrogant, belligerent, provocative language of
threat. We hear, rather, the harmonious language of
understanding, co-operation and peace. Ambassador Young
has won our confidence to a great extent. His personal
dynamism and attitude have won him the friendship of all.
His sincerity of purpose goes a long way towards helping to
establish the credibility of his Government. He displayed
saintly patience during our deliberations in the month of
March and his behind-the-scenes activities in the service of
truth and justice have been a source of inspiration to my
delegation.

82. My country calls far the support of all States to ensure
its defence and security and to avoid a repetition of that
barbarous and reprehensible act. That is why exemplary
punishment is so necessary and why the mercenaries who
came to kill our compatriots on Sunday, 16 January 1977,

87. I thank Ambassador Young for his unswerving efforts
and congratulate him on having so skilfully presided over
the Council. He may rest assured of the full co-operation of
my delegation for as long as he remains with us, which 1
hope will be for ever-unless, of course, it is his wish at

80. Damage of all kinds caused by the aggression of
Sunday, 16. January 1977 is considerable. Pursuant to
paragraph I33 of the report of the Special Mission, I have
transmitted to the President our assessment of the damage
(see S/I23I8 and Add. If. It is estimated that it amounts to
6 billion CFA francs.

8

some appropriate time to run for the presidency of the
United States of America. In such an event, I shall seriously
consider relinquishing my post as the Permanent Representative of Mauritius SO as to be free to work for my friend
Andy. Working for Andrew Yoimg will perhaps provide me
with a better platform to work for the United States of
Africa, the continent of the twenty-first century.
88. I shall

95. It iS obvious to all that an unprovoked armed
aggression by international imperialist mercenaries3 took
place against the People’s Republic of Benin. It cannot be
denied that loss of lives and extensive material damage to
Cotonou resulted from this barbaric act.
96. We have listened attentively to the statement of
Ambassador Illueca, Chairman of the Special Mission, and
to that of my beloved brother, Ambassador Boya of Benin.

now speak on the question of Benin.

89. First of all, I should like to congratulate the members
of the Special Mission as well as the Secretariat on their
voluminous report. The Mission was eminently qualified in
that, apart from the wide experience of its members, it had
the good fortune to be assisted by military experts from
Libya and Panama. The Chairman of the Special Mission,
our good friend Ambassador Illueca of Panama, deserves
our highest praise for leading and guiding the Mission. I
thank him for the presentation of the report to the Council.

97. 1 do not believe it is necessary for me at this stage to
make an in-depth analysis of the report and the annexes.
Frankly, I do not believe I could even attempt such an
andysis
without expert advice. But I do feel that, in the
light of the report and the statements we have heard, the
Security Council is in a position where it can, without
hesitancy, strongly condemn the activities of international
mercenaries and acts of aggression to destabilize States. The
Council can, I believe, decide to appeal to the international
community to assist Benin, through material aid, for the
purpose of repairing and remedying damage caused. The
Council could also decide that compensation should be paid
to Benin by those responsible. The amount of the damage
could, I suggest, be worked out by the representatives of
the Secretary-General. I take the view that our international
community is under a moral obligation to help Benin in
every way possible.

90, Meeting at Lomd, Togo, from 21 to 28 February
1977, under the guidance of its current Chairman, His
Excellency Mr. Edem Kodjo, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Co-operation of Togo, the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity adopted a resolution on the
question of Benin, paragraph 1 of which reads as follows:
“Strongl?/ condenzns the act of armed aggression against
the People’s Republic of Benin and congratulates the
heroic brotherly people of Benin on their courageous
routing of the aggression”.

98. Regarding the definition of the word “aggression”, as
recommended by the Sixth Committee and adopted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 3314 (XXIX), I should
like to point out to members of the Council article 4 of the
annex to that resolution, which reads as follows:

91. While it is true that this sad affair is still under
consideration by OAU, it is nevertheless of such importance
that it is only right that the niatter should be not only
regionalized but internationalized through the Security
Council, Indeed, in its resolution, the Council of Ministers
requested the African Group at the United Nations to act in
solidarity with Benin during the Security Council debates
on the matter.

“The acts enumerated above”-that is, in articles 1, 2
and 3-“are not exhaustive and the Security Council may
determine that other acts constitute aggression under the
provisions of the Charter.”
99. That leads me to attempt a brief analysis of the whole
question of mercenaries, as so far dealt with at the United
Nations and elsewhere.

92. The report of the Special Mission was prepared rather
hurriedly, in too short a time and without adequate
facilities. That is made clear by the authors themselves at
the end of their conclusion. However, in my view, the
report is conclusive enough to allow the Council to arrive at
an immediate decision in respect of the more serious
aspects of the matter.

loo. I should therefore like now to dwell for a moment on
the phenomenon of “mercenarism”
which has been
plaguing the international scene for some time. 1 appreciate
the fact that the word “mercenarism” has not yet found its
my into fie English dictionary, but 1 hope that the
members will bear with me if I use it for the purpose of
convenience.

93. The evidence on which the authors have based
themselves seems to fall into three categories: first, observation; secondly, testimony of the only mercenary held
prisoner; thirdly, documents which were left behind by the
mercenaries and which seem to corroborate the evidence of
the prisoner.

101. On several occasions the Security Council and the
General Assembly have expressed themselves on the question of mercenaries in modern inter-nation relations, and
those statements clearly contained elements of emerging
international legal principles governing the matter. lt seems
to me eat the following principles are now fairly well
established.

94. It will, of course, require several forensic experts to
unravel some of the mysteries surrounding this whole affair
and the complexities of the documents themselves. There
can be no doubt, however, about what actually happened at
Cotonou on the morning of 16 January 1977. I believe it
would be correct to say that all members of the Council can
agree at least on that point.

3 see paragraph207 of the preSentrecord.
9

b

102. First, mercenaries, and certainly those fighting
against national liberation movements within the context of
the decolonization process, are outlaws.
103. Secondly, mercenaries, if captured, should consequently be punished as criminals. This principle is to be
found in paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution
3103 (XXVIII),
entitled “Basic principles of the legal status
of the combatants struggling against colonial and alien
domination and racist rigimes”.
104. Thirdly, States are under an obligation to take all
measures to prevent the recruitment, financing or training
in their territories of any persons as mercenaries for
colonial wars.
10.5. Fourthly, States have the same obligation concerning
a much broader category of mercenaries, that is those used
for violating the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
independent States. In this connexion, one can quote the
Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in the
Domestic Affairs of States and the Protection of Their
Independence and Sovereignty, adopted by the General
Assembly /rrsnhtion
2131 (XX)] on 21 December 1965:

need clarification if the problem of mercenarism is to be
solved on the international level. First of all, there is still no
agreement on how to define precisely the term “mercenary”. During the third session of the Humanitarian Law
Conference, which is entrusted with reviewing the 1949
Geneva Conventions, a definition was submitted by the
delegation of Nigeria. That definition runs as follows:
“A mercenary includes any person not a member of the
armed forces of a Party to the conflict who is specially
recruited abroad and who ,is motivated to fight or to take
part in armed conflict essentially for monetary payment,
reward or other private gain.“4
110. That proposal, however, has not yet been adopted,
and it is expected that the Conference will come up with a
generally acceptable definition at its fourth session to be
held during these weeks at Geneva. The question of
defining mercenaries was examined also by the Committee
of Privy Counsellors of the United Kingdom appointed by
the British Prime Minister in 1976 to inquire into the
recruitment of mercenaries-the so-called Diplock Committee. That Committee adopted the following definition
for “mercenaries in the broad sense”:

“ . . . no State shall organize, assist, foment, finance,
incite or tolerate subversive, terrorist or armed activities
directed towards the violent overthrow of the rBgimc of
another State, or interfere in civil strife in another
State.”

“ ‘Mercenaries’ in the broad sense are persons who serve
voluntarily for pay in armed forces other than the regular
forces of their own country.“”
111, Another area which needs clarification is the extent
to which the national legislation contains statutes or rules
concerning mercenaries. We may recall that the General
Assembly has, in several resolutions, called upon States to
take appropriate measures to prevent the recruitment,
financing and training of mercenaries. We have not been
able to verify to what extent Member States have followed
up on those recommendations. The Diplock Committee,
which I have just mentioned, was appointed in order to
consider the need for legislation, including possible amendment of the Foreign Enlistment Act in the United
Kingdom,. Other States may have taken either legislative or
administrative measures in order to cope with the problem
of mercenaries, and it would be extremely useful to gather
more information on the nature and content of those
measures in order to ;;tart a comparative study from which
one could draw generally accepted legal principles to be
incorporated in an international convention.

106. Fifthly, the sending by or on behalf of a State of
mercenaries who carry out against another State acts of
armed force of such gravity as to amount to those listed in
the Definition of Aggression as adopted by the General
Assembly is itself an act of aggression.
107. Sixthly, as the recruitment, financing and training of
mercenaries is very often undertaken by private groups, the
international responsibility of the State on whose territory
those activities take place will bc involved if it fails to take
the necessary preventive measures or if, having taken those
measures, it does not punish those involved. Furthermore,
the State is under an obligation to prohibit its nationals
from serving as mercenaries.
108. General Assembly resolutions 2465 (XXIII)
and
2548 (XXIV) therefore call upon the Governments of all
countries to enact legislation declaring the recruitment,
financing and training of mercenaries in their territory to be
a punishable offence and prohibiting their nationals from
serving as mercenaries. The international responsibility of
the State is expressed clearly in Security Council resolution
239 (1967), which

112. At the twenty-seventh regular session of the Council
of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, held at
Port-Louis in June and July 1976, a resolution was adopted
calling for a further study of a draft convention on
mercenaries submitted at that session by Angola. That was
the first proposal to deal with the question on an
international, albeit regional, level. It is our view that the
adoption of international criminal legislation through a
convention would be a timely initiative for dealing with
mercenarism, which should be outlawed as an international

“Condemns any State which persists in permitting or
tolerating the recruitment of mercenaries, and the provision of facilities to them, with the objective of
overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the
United Nations”.

4 Diplomatic Confcrcnce 011Rcaft’irmation ~IKI Dcvelopment (lr
International IHumanitarian Law Applicnblc in Armed Conflicts. SCC

109. Notwithstanding
the clear enunciation of these principles, there are still some gray areas which, in our view,

A/31/163 of 18 August 1976, pi,,. 70.
5 Cmnd. 656~ (London, FLM. StationeryOffice,19761,
p. 1.

10

crime of the same kind
genocide.

as, for example, piracy and

116. I hope that these quotations will help members of
the Council to realize the seriousness of the problem and
how even more serious it will become if a solution js not
found as soon as possible.

113. I suggest that the more powerful nations of the world
should not be too complacent. I shudder at the thought
that what happened at Cotonou could easily happen in
most capitals. It is neither too early nor too late to deal
with the question of mercenarism for the evil is very much
with us, even today, when we are discussing the complaint
by Benin.

117. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fionz Spanish):
I
thank the representative of Mauritius for the kinds words
aat he addressed to my country and to me. I am pleased to
inform him that Fagree with his remarks about Ambassador
Young’s filture plans and about the possibility of his
wishing to form an international cabinet, It would be very
good experience for the third-world
countries to be
represented in the cabinets of the great POW~K

114. It is not my intention to provoke a debate on what is
happening in another African State, but I cannot help
drawing the attention of the Council to an article by David
Anable published yesterday in the widely read The Chtisfian Scicrrce Monitor. I shall quote the following passages
without comment, in support of my plea that a convention
on mercenarism has become imperative. The title of the
article is “Africa mercenary recruiting resumes”:

118. The next speaker is the representative of Niger. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
119. Mr. POISSON (Niger) (interpretation jfom French):
Mr. President, before going into the substance of the
question with which we are dealing today, 1 should like,
first of all, to congratulate you most warmly on your
accession to the important and responsiblepost of President of the Security Council. We know that your long
experience and your unanimously recognizedcompetence
will be equal to the delicate task that you will be carrying
out during this month.

“A new attempt to recruit American and British
mercenaries to fight in Africa appears to be getting under
way.
“A previous mercenary venture involving Britons and
Americans ended in fiasco, imprisonment, and death in
Angola last year.
“Now, if sources involved in both the 1976 Angolan
episode and the current effort are to be believed, the
ostensible aim of the recruiting is to find 100 American
ex-servicemen and 350 Britons to join Zai’re Government
forces fighting Katangan rebels in southern Zaire.

120. I shouldnot wish to conclude this brief introduction
without paying a well-deservedtribute to your predecessor,
the representative of the United States, Ambassador
Andrew Young, who wascalled upon to guidethe work of
the Council when one of the most burning issuesof our
time was being considered,namely, the situation in South
Africa. Everyone is aware of the commitment and the
militancy of AmbassadorYoung in all mattersconcerning
men and their rights. His presencehere is,beyond doubt, a
patent sign that there is a new spirit in the international
policy of the United States. We can only rejoice and
congratulate our colleague AmbassadorYoung for the
hopesthat he hasarousedfor our strugglein Africa to find
peaceand internationalsecurity and to inauguratethe reign
of justice throughout the world.

,.
“The first visible sign in the United States of a new
mercenary recruiting effort was a ‘help wanted’ advcrtisement placed in the Fresno Bee (California) on April 1.
It asked for r&urn& from people with military backgrounds for ‘high risk’ work in Africa at $1,200 to $2,000
a month, depending on qualifications.
“In addition, an American mercenary source who
recently returned from Africa claims that the organization which last year recruited the Britons for Angola
ROWis looking for fresh British recruits to go to Zafre.

121. While I am speakingabout peacein the world, the
Security Council is considering a situation which, unfortunately, makesthe att’ainment of peacemore difficult. I
am speaking,of course,of the airborne armed aggression
againstthe independentand sovereignStateof Benin.

“Neither Britain nor the United States appear to have
adequate laws to prevent mercenary recruitments and
enlistments. But both governments expressed strong
disapproval of the 1976 Angolan mercenary intervention
and denied any involvement.”

122. Before going into the substanceof the question, 1
should like to thank alI the membersof the Council for
dlowjng me to address
this august body in my capacity as
Chairmanof the African Group for this month.

115. To be fair, I think I should also quote what
Mr. Herbert Hetu, a spokesman for the United States
Central Intelligence Agency, said when asked about the
latest reports of mercenary recruiting. He said:

123. Approximately two and a half monthsago,when the
first information on the stupid and barbaric aggression
against
the State of Benin reached US through the deforming prism of the international press,world opinion
could not fail to wonderwhether that aggression
wasreal or
not. Wasit possible?Everything had beenskilfully orches-

“We have absolutely, categorically nothing to do with
recruiting Americans or anybody else as mercenaries
anywhere in Africa.”
11

127. At the recent summit meeting of OCAMM [/lf’cun,
Malagasy and Mauritian Common Organization] at Bangui
as well as at the last meeting of the OAU Ministerial
Committee at LomC, the voice of Africa was unanimously
raised to condemn strongly the use of mercenaries to
destabilize certain r8gimes. For many years now imperialism, scared, in retreat and at bay, has been developing a
new technique for colonial reconquest by the use of
mercenaries. At OAU as well as in the non-aligned group,
the third world has protested against those new manoeuvres. Africa must put an end to mercenary activities,
and the Security Council must assist by adopting appropriate measures and by unequivocally condemning such
manoeuvres.

trated. to camouflage and distort the truth. It was apparently necessary at all costs to prevent international
public opinion from seeing clearly the plot that had been
hatched against a brother State for reasons which could
only be ideological and material. Some had certain doubts
for a moment, since they were not used to seeing African
problems in the post-colonial context. But the facts are
there and they are unyielding.
124. Be that as it may, as far as we in Africa are
concerned, we had no doubt that the brother State of
Benin had actually been the object of an act OF aggression
planned, organized and controlled from abroad. That is
why spontaneously from every part of the continent and
the islands messages of support were sent to President
K&Bkou, the head of State of Benin, as well as to the
valiant people of Benin in their struggle against that
unjustifiable attack.

128. Nevertheless, imperialism at bay does not despair, in
spite of its terrible failures in the former Congo as well as in
Guinea. Let us hope that the lesson of Cotonou will be
cause for reflection. In any case, no country, small or
medium-sized, can henceforth rest secure. The air piracy of
Entebbe, the attempts to destabilize Mozambique and
Angola and the territorial occupation of Zaire are all cases
which require Africa to be vigilant and firm.

125. My country, Niger, which shares a long common
history with Benin and which works with Benin in many
international, continental, regional and bilateral organizations for the socio-economic development of our two
peoples, felt profound indignation at that savage act
perpetrated against a brother State by a horde of mercenaries with no faith and no country, in the service of
powerful financial circles. That is why the President of the
Supreme Military Council and chief of State of Niger,
Lieutenant-Colonel Scyni Kountch& immediately addressed
to his brother and friend, President Mathieu KCrBkou, a
message of solidarity, the text of which reads as follows:

129. Today we have before us the reports of both the
Security Council Special Mission and of the OAU secretariat. The facts are overwhelming and decisively foil the
attempts at diversion orchestrated by the very ones who are
attempting to destabilize certain African Governments
which are working with dignity for the freely conceived
emancipation of their peoples.
130. The Security Council cannot be blind to these
ignoble acts whose seriousness not only endangers the
sovereignty and integrity of small States but also international peace and security.

“We have learnt with deep anguish and profound
indignation that mercenaries in the pay of international
imperialisti attacked the airport at Cotonou on Sunday,
16 January, with the mad intention of overthrowing the
rbgime which you lead.

131. As the peoples of both Guinea and Benin proved
when they fell victim to dastardly attacks, we believe first
of all in our own choices. We are devoted above all to the
values and systems that we have freely chosen. Other
Powers must realize that we cannot bc like them. To be
ourselves with our conception of life in a humane, just and
tolerant community--that is what our peoples aspire to.

“The people of Niger congratulate the people of Benin
and the armed forces for their vigilance and assure
President Kerdkdu of our fraternal and constant solidarity. All Niger denounces that attempt and calls on the
solidarity and vigilance of Africa unanimously to deter
and discourage such attempts wherever they may be
made.”

132. Mercenaries and the Powers which support and
maintain them will bring desolation and ruin for a time, but
our independent States will fight steadfastly with the help
of all peace-loving peoples so as to bar the way to the forces
of reconquest and domination.

Some days later, the chief of State of Niger sent to
Cotonou His Excellency Moumouni Djermakoyc Adamou,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation, bearing a
special message of solidarity to President KBrbkou. In
replying to questions from journalists in the capital of
Benin, Minister Djermakoye declared: “The aggression of
16 January was an abject act committed against all of
militant Africa which wants to be free.”

133. The aggression against Benin caused enormous losses
whose consequences will be felt for a long time by its
people. Many human lives were lost and civilian and official
installations were destroyed or seriously damaged. All
Africa, side by side with Benin, demands compensatiop.
The proud people of Benin, which has laboriously worked
to build a new society, never hesitated to make major
sacrifices to give Cotonou, its capital, a new image worthy
of the aspiration of a people in a revolution which admits
no disguise. Mortars, bazookas, machine-guns, the engines

126. That example of African reaction, among others, is
an expression of the profound indignation felt throughout
all Africa at that perfidious aggression, Africa is indignant
and denounces those new techniques conceived and practised by those who still dream of keeping Africa in their
grip solely for the benefit of their base material interests.
12

of-deatil of the imperialists, coming from beyond the sea,
have killed and ,destroyed. Is it fair that, after that horrible
storm, the COurageOUS
people of Benin’ should be condemned to repair everything themselves? It is not a matter
of international charity but one of just reparation.

140. Permit me to recall here .the motto of the national
political party of our country-the
Democratic Party of
Gabon: “Dialogue, Tolerance, Peace”, a motto which
underlies both our domestic and our foreign policy. In this
regard, there is really no need to reaffirm that, in its foreign
policy, my country has always applied’ the fundamental
principles of peaceful coexistence and non-intervention in
the internal affairs of other States, as I previously asserted.
Is there any need to remind the Council that Benin and
Gabon have at all times maintained and continue to
maintain fraternal and special relations? Is there any need
to remind the Council that the Republic of Gabon
maintains excellent fraternal relations with all African
countries, whatever their political orientation, both regionally and on the continental scale? Is there any need to
remind the Council of the multifaceted and disinterested
assistance which Gabon has continually given to fraternal
countries?

134. We therefore expect the Security Council, in its
wisdom and objectivity, to decide not only firmly to
condemn that dastardly attack against Benin but also to
provide the means necessary for making just and equitable
Compensation for the moral and material damage caused
the brother people of Benin.
135. We are pleased at the failure of that cowardly attack,
The Council must face its historical responsibility, namely,
to safeguard international peace and security so as to put an
end once and for all to the use of stateless mercenaries.
Africa needs stability to build, and we ask that that be
respected.

141. Benin, whose President, His Excellency Mr. Mathieu
KBrBkou, made an official visit to Gabon, is best placed to
appreciate the fraternal and disinterested co-operation of the,
Gabonese authorities, as well as their sincerity, good faith
and militant devotion to the cause of African unity.
President Kbrikou, incidentally, paid eloquent testimony to
this himself at the end of his official visit.

136. l%e PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Gabon. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
137. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretation from French):,
I should like first of all to thank you, Mr. President, and all
the members of the Council for permitting my delegation
to take part in this debate. I should also like to associate
myself with those representatives who have congratulated
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. I
am convinced that your experience in international relations, your talents and your tact are sufficient guarantee
that we will find a good solution to the problem with which
we are concerned right now.

142. The Govemmcnt of Gabon ventures to hope that the
Government of the People’s Republic of Benin will come to
understand that it has been misled by the enemies of Africa
in general and of Gabon in particular. Otherwise, we should
have to conclude, as did the President of the Republic of
.Gabon, His Excellency El Hadj Omar Bongo, that “Decidedly, the vagaries of the retiolution are most comical and
depressing in Africa.”
143. In this context, my country cannot but vigorously
condemn any foreign intervention, whatever its form,
including the use of international mercenaries.

138. Permit me also to pay a warm tribute to Ambassador
Andrew Young, Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, for the masterly
way in which he conducted the proceedings of the Council
during the month of March.

144. The major concern of the Government of my
country is, on the one hand, to strive for the well-being of
its people by promoting its development in all areas and,
on the other, to foster the realization of the ideal of
African unity. In this connexion, as was stressed by His
Excellency Mr. Martin Bongo, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Gabon, in his press conference of
4 March at the Waldorf Astoria in New York: “Gabon does
not have the time to waste in meddling in matters which do
not concern it. Gabon is busy working and building.”

139. After having acquainted ourselves with the report of
the Security Council Special Mission to the People’s
Republic
of
Benin, established
under resolution
404 (1977), a report which alludes to Gabon, my own
country-l
repeat “which alludes to Gabon”, because I
cannot and will not believe that Gabon is in fact involved in
this affair-the
Gabonese delegation protests with the
utmost vigour against those unfounded and unverified
references and solemnly denies them because their only
purpose is to tarnish the image and good standing of my
country, a founding member of the African Democratic
Assembly, the Organization of African Unity and the
movement of the non-aligned countries; a country which,
moreover, in its international policy, has been particularly
devoted to the five principles of peaceful coexistence Which
are in all respects in keeping with those of the Organization
of African Unity and the United Nations itself. ,The
President of the Gabonese Republic, His ExceUency El Hadj
Omar Bongo, made a point, during his press conference on
11 March at Libreville, of refuting those allegations, Which
are, to put it mildly, fantastic.

145. 1 hope that our brothers in the People’s Republic of
Benin will be reassured: my country did not intervene,
either directly or indirectly, in this murky business, in this
brazen piratical raid by outlaws who know no allegiance
and whom my country can never condemn sufficiently,
because the attack on Benin is tantamount to an attack on
the whole of Africa, whose hard-won independence was
thus called into question.
146. That said, let us consider the report before US.What
evidence does it provide to substantiate the conclusion that
my country may have been involved in this unprecedented
affair? Let us consider the evidence provided and begin
13

with the testimony before going into the documents. Let us
consider, in turn, the testimony of the one alleged prisoner,
the testimony of Beninese citizens and the testimony of
foreigners living at Cotonou.
147. It is particularly difficult for us to remain unmoved
by the meanderings of Mr. B;i Alpha Oumarou, who, to our
great surprise, turned out to be the only “prisoner”,
although my colleague and brother from Benin, Mr. Boya,
had stated here on 7 February:
“Their pirate aircraft had to take off very rapidly,
leaving behind quite a number of mercenaries, who were
heavily drugged and out of their minds, as well as the
bodies of their accomplices which they could not take
with them.” J1986th meeting, para. 19.1
We cannot help wondering what became of those mercenaries and why the Security Council Special Mission
restricted itself to the testimony of a single alleged prisoner,
who, it so happens, is a citizen of Guinea and the
circumstances surrounding whose arrest remain, to say the
least, dubious. Are we thus to believe that “quite a number
of mercenaries, who were heavily drugged and out of their
minds, as we11 as the bodies of their accomplices”-to
use
the words of my colleague and brother from Benin-and I
cmphasize “quite a number of mercenaries, who were
heavily drugged and out of their minds, as well as the
bodies of their accomplices”-seem
not to have been
presented to the members of the Mission because they had
disappeared as if by magic? Indeed, as was stated by the
President of the Republic of Gabon in his 11 March press
conference at Libreville: “All the white mercenaries have
disappeared and been transformed into a single black.” 1s
there any need to remind the members of the Mission
-whose objectivity is beyond question-of the old Latin
adage: “Testis unus, testis nullus”?

151. In the light of all this alleged evidence, instead of
speaking to us of a commando operation by professional
mercenaries, they should really have spoken about a
piratical act committed by privateers whose motives were
not very praiseworthy. One of the eye-witnesses, in his
statement, expressed surprise at seeing them-the merccnaries-all looking so relaxed and casual.
152. Inasmuch as my country ‘has been named in the
report, and in the light of all the foregoing, we cannot but
conclude that this whole affair was thought up in order to
sow discord among African States. While conceding to its
authors that this scenario was quite well staged-,from their
point of view, of course---and might even make a good
movie, Gabon wishes to repeat that no one is convinced
by it.
153. All this leads us to call into question not the
objectivity of the report-because my country has every
confidence in the members of the Council--but the credibility of the information it contains, particularly because
the Mission itself states that it was unable to pursue its
inquiries any further and, “for lack of time”, to verify the
evidence gathered. The same applies to the authenticity of
the documents mentioned in the report.
154. We believe that the Security Council is here faced
with a problem of choice. The Council, the supretne organ
of the United Nations, should first of all analyse the
information contained in any report submitted by a mission
it has set up before allowing Member States to be publicly
impugned.
155. There is another choice that faces the Council, IIOW
that it has taken cognizance of this affair. Are WC to
impugn the good name of distinguished heads of State 011
the evidence of a single alleged mercenary who was taken
prisoner, whose allegationshave not beenverified for “lack
of time”, as we have said, and on the basisof alleged
documentsabandonedby allegedmercenaries
whoseactual
existence hasnot even beenclearly and finally established,
again for “lack of time”? Also, what proof is there that
that allegedprisoner, the conditions of whosearrestremain,
to say the least, dubious and who was detainedfor more
than a month by the authoritiesof the People’sRepublicO/
Benin before his deposition-what proof is there that this
allegedprisoner was not subjectedto pressureon the part
of these satneauthorities, sincehe asksthem, accordingto
the report, to deal with him leniently?

148. As to the testimony of the Beninese citizens, it is of
no objective value to us, to the extent that they cannot be
both judges of and parties to the event. 1 am a nationalist
and a patriot, as they are, and we know that in a country’s
dark hours the national feelings of its inhabitants are
strengthened.
149. With regard to the testimony of the foreigners living
at Cotonou, it would have been difficult for them to make
statements different from those in the report, since their
interests were at stake. In this regard, all of us here know
what happens to foreigners who, after events which have
occurred in their country of residence, have ventured to
give a version differing from the official one.

156. Gabon can never sufficiently expressits surpriseat
these allegations since, so far, there has never been any
provocation on either its part or on that of Benin. We
should like to repeathere that we will neverallow ourselves
to be intimidated by the hostile policy or statementsof ally
country.

150. Let us turn now to the documents which were found,.
I find it rather paradoxical that a highly trained commando
group, composed of professional “mercenaries”,
should
have embarked on the attack of a country taking with them
such compromising personal articles as identity cards,
cheque-books, family photos, credit slips and even pay slips
and bank statements. Are they trying to make us, responsible adults, believe in Santa Claus? No, we in Gabon are
firmly convinced that this was a rather clumsily staged
scenario, hastily pieced together, and we would even go so
far as to say that it is a joke in very bad taste.

157. The GaboneseGovernmenthopesthat Beninwill not
allow itself to be taken in by the subtle and insidious
manoeuvresof Africa’s enemieswho relishits divisionsand
thus seek to increaseand entrench the polarization of the
so-called revolutionary or progressivecountries and the
so-calledmoderate countries,which my Presidentdescribes
asrealistic countries. 1would, in this regard,like to makeiI
14

clear that Africa is one, indivisible, anti-imperialist and
anti-colonialist, and those are the only epithets that can be
properly applied to it.

express our gratitude, also, to Ambassador Illueca of
Panama. Mr. Mulve of India and Ambassador Mansur
Kikhia of Libya, aswell asto their assistantsfor the efforts
they madein order to shedlight on the aggressionof which
the heroic peopleof Benin were the victim.

158. Gabon remains convinced that these attempts at
implicating our country--which
are, to say the least, a
matter of fantasy-serve no purpose other than to divide
Africa and to call into question our country’s sense of
commitment which has Ied us to agree to act as host to the
forthcoming meeting of the Organization of African Unity.

164. At the first meeting of the Council, my delegation
explained fIY86th meeting/ the importance of our debate
and its impact on the lift of the African peoplesin general,
and the people of Benin in particular. Indeed, His Excellency President Ahmed SBkouTour& the supremeleader of
the revolution in Guinea, applied personally to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council,
requestingthat the considerationof the complaint by Benin
should not be subjected to any manoeuvre that would
distract us from the truth.

159. In conclusion, I should like-still in connexion with
the tnatter before us-to quote a passage from an article
that appeared in a weekly with a good reputation in the
field of African and international politics:
“The file is not complete. WC believe, for our part, that
we must continue to look for and to establish the truth
about this matter.”

16.5. The people of Guineaare fully aware of the existence
of renegadesand statelesspersonsin the pay of imperialism,
trained by evil people so asto participate asmercenariesill
interventions in certain African countries, We denounce to
the world the complicity of certain brother countries which
give asylum to those bandits and, what is worse, provide
them with arms and ammunition so that they may
perpetrate their crimes.

I would add that this must be for the benefit of that
African unity which we cherish so much, and for international peace and security which remain the fundamental
objectives of this organization.
“Otherwise, wrapped up in partial and one-sided arguments resting only on untrustworthy
evidence, the
aggression against the people of Benin is liable to remain
unexplained and even unbelieved. It is not Benin which
will benefit from this.”

166. In 1970, President Ahmcd SBkou Tour6 drew the
attention of the people of the world to the preparation of
an act of aggressionagainst the Republic of Guinea. The
imperialist pressat the time protected the evil-doers by
spreadingfalse rumours. A few weeks later, the brother
Government of Gambia proceeded to arrest mercenaries
who were about to invade Guinea. That brotherly act by
President El ffadji Kairaba Jawara could have been an
inspiration for all African States, but for someit wasnot.
The recruiting and training of the mercenariescontinued
and on 22 November 1970 it wasproved to the world that
the people of Guinea had been right. The failure of the
Conakry invasion did not teach imperialism a lesson.Thus
the continuing conspiracy was aimed at other traitors
within the Government of Guinea, with the objective of
staginganother aggressionof the same kind. The vigiliant
people of Guinea was able to defusethe new bomb in time
and, after the inside acolytes of the aggressorshad been
identified and neutralized, the aggressionscheduled fol
1976wasaborted.

160. Therefore, in order to demonstrate our good faith
and to contribute towards establishing the truth, I would
venture to repeat here the invitation which His Excellency
El Hadj Omar Bongo, President of the Republic of Gabon,
extended through the Secretary-General to the Security
Council Special Mission to come to Gabon, together with
the alleged mercenary captured at Cotonou, in order to
supplement his information on the spot [see S/1231 7’. The
Republic of Gabon would particularly like to stress this
point so that the truth may be establishedon the ba$isof a
countervaningandmore detailedinquiry.
161. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):The
next speakeris the representativeof Guinea, I invite him to
take a seatat the Council table and to make his statement.
162. Mr, M. S. CAMARA (Guinea) (interpreratiot? from
I+cnchJ: Mr. President,the delegation of the Republic of
Guinea is most happy to congratulate you 011 your
accessionto the presidencyof the Council. We are pleased
to seeyou presidingover the Council becauseof all the
hopes that WCplace in you, in view of the exceptional
qualities you possessas the spokesman of a country
friendly to us and better able to understandour problems.

167. The renegadeshave usedevery meansto bring about
a civil war, vainly trying to create an ethnic conflict in
Guinea. But the Guinean revolution has gone beyond the
stage of tribalism, and that is why the Peulhs, GucrzCs,
Malink&, Soussous,Tomasetc., in the Republic of Guinea
areGuineansof African race.

168. Paragraph 63 of the report of the Special Mission
/S/12294] is very explicit about the shameful manner in
which persons of ill repute go about training Guinean
163. In accordance with Security Council
resolution
404 (,3977), we are meeting to discussthe report prepared citizens abroad for criminal action against their country.
The Association of GuineansAbroad, enjoying the support
by the SpecialMission to the People’sRepublic of Benin.
of African Governmentsnot of the people, hasjust shown
My delegationwishesto congratulate the membersof the
what its intentions are and has revealed the true nature of
Mission who brought from Benin a harvest of objective
information that will enable us to make a valid assessment those journalists of a certain press who claim that they
of what happened at Cotonou on 16 January 1977. We speakobjectively about what is happening in Guinea,
15

learn of the intentions of the master-minds of the aggression by reading the “proclamation” which provided for tlrc
establishment of the Leadership Committee of the Front
for the Liberation and Rehabilitation of Dahomey.

169. The confession of the mercenary BL Alpha Oumarou
is edifying. It reveals not only the identity of the instigators
of the crimes but further informs us that
“ . . . if the States themselves were not directly involved,
some of their officials were, because they did document
forging, camouflaging and so forth. Those officials of the
countries concerned knew all about this matter.” [Ibid.,
para. 69.1

174. The aggression perpetrated against the People’s
Republic of Benin is far from being an isolated act. As
representative of the Republic of Guinea, I know what
armed aggression is. If we analyse the informative report of
the Special Mission and the important documents included
in it, we shall see that that diabolical operation, far from
being an isolated adventure, was a vast plan of neocolonial
reconquest, aimed at the destabilization and overthrow of
regimes whose options and tendencies are contrary to the
objectives of imperialism on the African continent. If
imperialism did not enjoy the complicity of certain African
Governments that are already won over and subservient to
its cynical designs, you can be certain that we should not be
here today in the Council because, for aggression of the
scope of that committed against the Republic of Benin on
16 January 1977 to have been carried out, imperialism had
to have the support of puppet regimes that have become
past masters of the betrayal of their peoples and of all
Africa.

This specific information given by a participant in the
ignoble aggression of which Benin was the victim is of great
importance to the Security Council, all the more since the
criminal actions of the mercenaries are supported and
encouraged by authorities of States Members of the United
Nations.
170. The butchery which was to have taken place at
Cotonou would have spared no country, and, in this
respect, the statements of the diplomats accredited to the
Government of Benin have enlightened us as to the gravity
of the aggression. In fact, the Embassies of the United
States, the Soviet Union and Nigeria, for example, and the
lodgings of the foreign experts etc., still bear traces of the
deadly bullets. Only providence saved the life of the
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, who was on an
official visit to Benin.

175. In this regard, I should like to provide some very
interesting information received from a patriot of a
neighbouring country, who speaks not only of the aggrcssion of which Benin was the victim, but also of that being
prepared against the Republic of Guinea:

171. In previous debates, my delegation insisted on the
imperialist nature of the aggression and stated that it was
nothing new. A correct analysis of the situation will enable
us to find elements of every stage of the history of Africa
and, as proof, you will find that some of those who
committed aggression against Benin actively participated in
the war in Algeria, as is borne out by the AFN insignia, or
in the Biafra war, as is attested to by the identity cards of
the mercenary Isberg Bjorg Leo, issued in 1968 and 1969
by the Swedish and the Swiss Red Cross.

“ . . . The operation against Benin had been planned for
the benefit of the former President Derlin Zinsou and his
partisans. The contacts to obtain the support of African
Governments had been made under the direction of the
Organization of Free Africa. This movement, in which arc
numbered all the puppets and the stateless persons of
Africa, was formed by imperialism to serve as a screen for
it. That it should enjoy considerable financial support
from the Powers seeking the neo-colonization of our
continent is therefore to be expected.

172. The white mercenaries captured in Benin are certainly fellow travellers of Congo Muller, Schramm or
Steiner, who, as indicated in the documents of the
mercenary Gilbert Bourgeaud, were to Africanize their
murderous activities by using emotionally sick blacks of the
I36 Alpha Oumarou kind. Those men who know no faith
and no law, can only commit their evil deeds with the
complicity of imperialism, which finances movements like
the Association of Guineans Abroad and the Front for the
Liberation and Rehabilitation of Dahomey. The purpose of
imperialism is to set up in the front-line States in Africa
,regimes that are in their pay. Secret service agents are found
in profusion in African capitah seeking accomplices and are
well camouflaged as technical counsellors in certain countries whose Governments they control. They are prepared
to assassinate and massacre any African people that wants
to remain authentic and sovereign. The remuneration of
agents of the Bourgeaud type tells us much about the
situation.

“Mr. Zinsou himself and Mr. Pognon, as well as other
leaders of the Organization of Free Africa, have had
frequent contacts with African heads of State. They had
tried to involve other heads of State who categorically
refused to act against peace in Africa.
“ . * . To avoid any leakage of the plot hatched against
militant Africa, imperialism and its Organization of Free
Africa had entrusted a certain Michel Lambine, a jonrnalist with Lettres d’Afrique, residing at 37 Rue Eticnne
Marcel, in Paris, with finding a former officer specialized
in commando operations to direct the aggression.
“Thus was found Colonel Bob Donare, who agreed to
conduct military preparations for the attack, provided
that the indispensable psychological conditions were
created in the country with the complicity of civilian and
military authorities of Benin. He did receive assurances to
that effect, after direct consultations with certain Presidents who, thanks to ex-General Soglo and certain
embassies in Cotonou, had established the necessary
contacts at a price. At the outset, imperialism and its

173. By consulting the documents about the planning and
execution of the 16 January attack, members will see that
the commander of the armed intervention had a discreet
meeting with heads of State on 2 January. One may also
16

ant&African Organization of Free Africa movement had
also, considered forming mercenary units the majority of
which would be of Beninese origin. But the funds for the
aggression transmitted to Colonel Donare were such as to
lead him to try to help former soldiers in financial
difficulties or unemployed. That is why he decided that
the shock troops should be Europeans, who were reputed
to be effective. The price of 7,000 French francs per tnan
proposed by the recruiters was not accepted by the
European mercenaries, who asked for 10,000 French
francs. The sum of 9,500 French francs was fmally
agreed upon-that is, 475,000 CFA francs . . .

Republic of Guinea, broadcasts evidence of the training of
those mercenaries in neighbouring countries. Today we
have proof. From the report of the Special Mission it cati be
seen that Guinea is right.
178. We reaffirm our total solidarity with the people and
Government of the People’s Republic of Benin, our
complete support for the Charter and our unwavering
devotion to the principles which govern the coexistence of
States. The delegation of the Republic of Guinea is firmly
convinced, first, that the Security Council will take the
necessary measures to permit the people of Benin to receive
compensation for the injuries caused by the mercenaries in
the dourse of their adventure of 16 January 1977; secondly,
that the Security Council will most strongly condemn the
act of aggression against the People’s Republic of Benin as
well as alI those who directly or indirectly assisted the
mercenaries; thirdly, that in the near future the General
Assembly will decide to adopt a convention to put an end
to the use of international mercenaries and to condemn the
use of force to destabilize States.

“ , . . All these preparations were made in only three
weeks: studies of the lay of the land and the training of
shock troops and supportive troops in African countries,
where many mercenaries were recruited and trained
before their transfer with weapons and munitions to their
departure base. The recruiters of the mercenaries were
Guinean traitors in the pay of international imperialism.”
(That statement appeared in our national newspaper
Horoya, No. 2264, of March 1977. It was widely distributed.)

179. May I express my support for the statement
paragraph I44 of the report, which reads:

in

“From the manner in which the operation was conceived and executed, the Special Mission believes a similar
operation could be conducted elsewhere against small
defenceless countries for similar purposes.”

176. This letter was accompanied by important documents now in the possession of the Guinean authorities
who may bring them to the attention of international
public opinion, which was quite recently put on alert by
our head of State, President Ahmed ,%kou Tour& At the
opening of the thirty-eighth session of the National
Revolutionary Council, Comrade Ahmed SCkou Tour6
declared:

180. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
should like to inform the Council that 1 have received a
letter from the representative of Saudi Arabia in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
question on the agenda. Accordingly, I propose, in accordance with the usual practice and with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, under the provisions
of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

“imperialism, colonialism and neo-colonialism are ever
vigilant with regard to the Guinean revolution, The
national bourgeoisie, all those who have fraudulently
amassed funds at the expense of the people and who wish
to enjoy their gains without being discovered or punished
by the people, strive to weaken the basis of the revolution
and to strike blows against it so as to bring to power
those who will favour their capitalist and reactionary
aspirations.

At the invitation of the President, Mr, J. M. Baroodv
(Saudi Arabia) took a place at the Council table.

“African puppets always at the service of imperialism
continue to hatch plots and organize attempts at aggression using stateless mercenaries with the aim of halting
the normal course of the revolution both in Guinea and in
other progressive countries.

181. Mr. UAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, besides the fact that Venezuela and Saudi Arabia have
something in common, namely, that we are bath members
of OPEC / Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries/,
we have always done well in our mutual negotiations. I
believe the Venezuelans arc a very reasonable people. You
represent them and I have observed you here, You are the
epitome of kindness and moderation and, no doubt,
sagacity. No wonder. Perhaps the good virtues of the Arabs
that were transmitted to your country through Spain make
me a little prone to praise you. I shall not engage in flattery
because we have enough inflation in currencies and do not
want to have inflation in personalities. Rut you arc immune
to any praise I may offer you.

“We are informed that, all along our frontiers with our
brother countries, mercenary troops are massing. We
await them steadfastly night and day, and we are
prepared pitilessly to throw those European and African
mercenaries into the grave dug for imperialism and its
lackeys . . .“.
177. The Government of the Republic of Guinea has used
all possible diplomatic means to bring the Governments of
certain neighbouring States to cease giving assistance to the
mercenaries grouped in their countries. They have always
denied the existence of those renegades assembling on our
frontiers. Yet their peoples know that every day our
national radio station, the voice of the revolution of the

182. I thank YOU, Sir, and the members of the Council for
allowing me to speak. I had not intended to speak at this
meeting, and I was hesitant to do so until I had had the
time to listen to all my African friends, especially those
belonging to the same region as Benin. However, something
17

aircraft, military weapons and ammunition,
necessary logistical support (provisions,
etc.)? “6

very serious has caught my attention and I feel it my duty
to speak lest things get out of hand, and we have
fragmentation among our African and Asian friends, not in
the sense of geography but in the sense of disunity.

and all the
medicines

183. I listened attentively to Ambassador Boya and was
deeply touched when I heard him talk about the subversion
perpetrated against his country. This kind of thing could
happen to any country, but we feel particularly sympathetic when it happens to small States. For, like all new
States, they are in an evolutionary process and have not yet
become consolidated, and these mercenaries come there to
subvert the sovereignty of these States and their way of life.
The purpose is perhaps to bring about upheaval, not only in
Benin but elsewhere, which will redound to the interests of
States hiding behind the screen.

188. That passage makes it appear that those who seat
instructions to Ambassador Boya have absolute proof of
what they are saying about a chief of State, none other
than King Hassan II. I knew his father, Mohammed V. He
was one of the Arab patriots, not only in North Africa but
in the whole Arab world. He fought against colonialism. I
have had the privilege of meeting King Hassan on several
occasions. It is not in his nature to be a conspirator.
Someone might say “Well, anything can happen”. But do
those who have sent instructions to our friend and brother
Ambassador Boya have any proof of what is said in this
report about King Hassan?

184. As I have said, I was deeply touched by the
statement of Ambassador Boya, our brother from Benin.
But my attention was caught by certain passages in the
report he circulated to the members of the Security
Council. Of course, the representative of Benin is free to
circulate any report he wishes to place before the members
of the Council, even if it contains tendentious passages
about certain personalities. Ambassador Boya has the right
to do with it what he wants; that is his prerogative. But if a
report like this becomes official in the sense that the
Council agrees-and I hope it will not agree-to circulate it
as a Council document, I shall have to take strong
exception. Ambassador Boya may circulate the report, if he
so desires, to each and every Member State of the United
Nations, just as he has circulated it to all the members of
the Council. If, however, the report should come out as an
official document of the Council, that would in my view set
a very dangerous precedent. Why? I shall explain.

189. They hint that there were some Frenchmen involved.
Why do they not mention the President of the French
Republic or the Prime Minister? And I would say i&t
away that I am glad they did not do so. But why, then, do
they mention King Hassan? They implicate Morocco. ISit
merely because this DC-8 passed through Morocco? After
all, even in this great country, our host country, the
Government does not always know what is happening.
Everywhere, there are gangsters in gentlemen’s clothing; I
hope there are none among us here. Sometimes they even
run parts of the Government. In fairness to the United
States, I must say that that can happen in any country. For
instance, in Marseilles, they used to manufacture narcotic
drugs; I do not know whether they still do. Does this mean
that the French Government says amen to that? No.
France fights all the crimes and misdemeanours of which it
is aware. If it dots not know about them, what can it do’!
No Government can know everything.

18.5. The report is entitled-and I shall read this out in
French-“Rapport
sur I’agression arm6e imperialjste du
dimanche 16 janvier 1977 centre la RBpublique populaire
du B&in”.

190. It is the privilege of the authorities in Benin to be
leftist. They can choose their own ideology. Is Hassan 11to
be accused of imperialist machinations just because 1~ is a
king? There are probably kings who arc more leftist in the
way they treat their people than many so-called ideologically leftist leaders. The tribal system which I have
studied and to some extent represented is the most
democratic. The king is accessible. III some leftist countries
can one go up and talk to the head of State‘? Anybody in
the street can call our king by his name and address him.
That is the essence of democracy, not the ritual of
ideology.

186. I was relieved to find that Ambassador Boya spared
the Prime Minister of France, Mr. Barre, and the President
of the French Republic, Mr. Giscard d’Estaing. I was afraid
that he might say something about them and that would
have embarrassed me, not only because we have friendly
relations with France, but also because no one should
throw mud at a chief of State without having proof of the
accusation. Fortunately, so far as I know-of course, I have
not read the entire report-there
is no proof that the
Government of France was implicated in what happened.

191. If we allow these unproved accusations to be made,
God help us. Everybody will be throwing stones at
everybody else because of ideology. Benin has a right to be
leftist, and nobody should interfere. Nobody should think
that it will redound to his benefit to interfere in Benin. But,
on the other hand, nobody should be implicated lightly,
without full proof. To the glory of Anglo-Saxon Iaw-and
this is true of Islamic law too-a person is innocent until
proven guilty.

187. But what do I see in the preliminary statement of
this report? I shall read it out:
“How else can one describe the role played by the
Kingdom of Morocco and its head of State, Hassan II,
who placed the military base of Bengu&r, near Marrakesh, at the disposal of the mercenary army for training
purposes?

192. And here a king, who happens to be a good man, hiIs
been put in the dock on hearsay evidence. Where is the
proof? Why has the proof not been included? It is not fair.

“HOW else can one describe the role played by King
Hassan II, who supplied the aggressors with a DC-8

6 Quoted
18

in French by tllc speaker.

if we should establish such a precedent, God help us all,
becausi: we might then find fault which did not exist and
we might go on to expand and dramatize it. Then, instead
of trying to find solutions to our problems, we would be
casting stones at each other’s glass houses.

198. We have all ideologies represented at the United
Nations, and rightly so. There is always some gain to be
derived from variety. Why? Perhaps it is because it prevents
us from becoming too self-righteous. If we can observe the
different kinds of governments of others, we might learn
from them. But no one should be sanctimonious and
holier-than-thou, saying “I am a communist” or “I am a
capitalist”, as they say here when they refer to private
enterprise. What private enterprise? With. the kind of
taxation here, there is no more private enterprise. But they
cling to their “private enterprise”, although a man earning
$20,000 is left with $12,000 after taxation, and he has to
pay $500 for a room. I am sure that the technocrats in the
Soviet Union live much better than those making $20,000
here. I do not know the worth of the rouble. But that is the
business of the Russians and the Americans.

193. We have recently had an example of what can
happen. Almost everybody- but not we, because we are
not involved in this-wants
to reform the way in which
human rights are applied by other peoples. My message is
that each country has a glass house and each country has
stones. Let each country, each Government and each
people reform itself before it tries to reform others and not
go by hearsay. Who is perfect?
194. This report should not have been allowed, and I warn
the Council gently but firmly that, should this report be
circulated as an official document, God help the Council
and me. It should not be done, otherwise we shall be
opening the door to mud-slinging, to accusations on the
basis of doubt. We have an Arabic proverb which says: “A
little doubt is sinful, unIess you have proof.”

199. I take exception to what was mentioned here about
an illustrious gentleman whose father I knew. We are loyal
and if we find something wrong we tell our leaders about it.
I have spoken openly to kings and prime ministers outside
the Arab world. Why? Because it was in good faith and not
with the desire to hurt or calumniate them. And they
accept the remarks of those who may sometimes have
criticism. These are our kings.

195. Nso, when many representatives around this table
call us imperialists, without naming us, just because we
happen to have kings, let those who do not have kings look
closely at what they do and see on what machinations their
intelligence services are spending billions-and I am not
going to mention in what currency-in order to subvert
other peoples. I should not want representatives to think
that 1 was speaking only of the big Powers. 1 am also
referring to the lesser Powers, because we learn from the big
Powers, we ape them. It used to be that intelligence services
were to gather information, to find out if anybody was
conspiring against the State. I bet you anything-to USCa
phrase coined by our American friends--that only a fraction
of the money allocated for intelligence services is actually
spent on gathering legitimate information in order to
determine if anyone is conspiring against the State. Ninety
per cent of it is spent on subversion, coup d’dat,
cloak-and-dagger and surreptitious activities, bribing, collusion-money, money: mammon.

200. How does anyone know that when, a few years ago,
there was trouble and it was alleged that the army had
rebelled against King Hassan II and he re-established order,
the rebellion was not financed from outside? We do not
know. Never did the king say that a foreign Power had paid
some of his men to rebel against him; because he is a
gentleman. Perhaps he had no proof or he thought that the
better part of wisdom was to keep silent.
201. So, without bitterness or acrimony I say to my
brother from Benin, in order that he may tell his leaders,
that this is not done here at the United Nations, that one
does not pick on some people just because an aircraft
passed through their territory. As I said, many aircraft pass
through territories everywhere carrying drugs and ammunition. I say this without acrimony and as an elder who has
seen a lot in his life-eruptions, revolutions and upheavals.
Let us not be hasty and implicate others. And even if we do
have proof, it should be sound proof not based on a little
doubt.

196. How does my good friend and brother from Benin
know that some of those intelligence service funds were not
siphoned from outside instead of from inside an African
State? We have no right to come to a conclusion unless we
can prove it. One should not put it the way it was put in
the report, throwing mud at a gentleman whom I have
known for some time. He is human; he may have made
mistakes. One’s own brother makes mistakes. But prove it;
do not throw mud just because he happens to be a king and
does not espouse a so-called leftist ideology.

202. I beg to be forgiven if I have perhaps been a little
vehement in making my remarks. I feel well disposed
towards all the members of the Council, regardless of their
ideologies, because we are all brothers under the skin. We
are all human beings. We are guests in this world-here
today, gone tomorrow. Each one, including me; is but a
grain of sand on the shores of eternity. So let US behave
with good mannen while we are still on the face of this
earth because sooner or later we shall make our exit, and let
us make it gracefully.

197. It is not my wish to make things worse. 1 was
amused, but I am not so amused any more. One of our
colleagues here has called another colleague “socialistimperialist”. I do not have to mention them; representatives
know whom I mean. Now, I am lost-leftist
and imperialist? But the rubric has always been that kings are
reactionary and, therefore, because we are leftist and Benin
is leftist and Morocco has a king, let us sling some mud.
This is not fair.

203. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
should like to thank the representative of Saudi Arabia for
the reference that he made to the deep bonds which unite
his country and mine.
19

Benin has never made, nor would it ever make, accusations
lightly against any country.

204. I give the floor to the representative of Benin who
has asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of the right of
reply.

207. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): I feel that I ought to
thank Ambassador Baroody for having spoken about the
Looking again at the text of my
word “imperialist”.
statement, I find that although I spoke of the activities of
international mercenaries, there was one paragraph in which
I referred to “unprovoked armed aggression by international imperialist mercenaries” /see para. 95 above]. 1
should like to inform the members of the Council that
when I used the word “imperialist” I was not thinking in
terms of kings and queens, but rather in terms of former or
present colonial or reactionary Powers, and that I was nor
aiming at any particular country. I wish to make this very
clear. If this term causes confusion, I should like the
verbatim reporters to withdraw it from my statement,
which I wrote in rather a hurry.

205. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (interpretation from French): I
should like to mention very briefly that, just now, my
delegation displayed its sense of responsibility and confined
itself in our statement essentially to the chief instigator of
the armed aggression which was perpetrated on 16 January
1977 against my country. However, the representative of
Gabon, in his statement, gravely offended the honour of
the Benin people as a whole. My delegation would like to
reserve its right to reply to the representative of Gabon
point by point when the time is ripe.
206. With respect to the representative of Saudi Arabia,
for whom we have great admiration and, above all, respect,
we should merely like to say that the People’s Republic of

The meeting rose at 6.35 p. m

20

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENTSE

may be obtained
your bookstore

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

PROCURERLESPUBLICATIONSDESNATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
TJnies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaims
du monde entier. Informer.-voua
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
2t : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
RA‘IC HOJIYUHTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

H3AAHHR

OPFAHB

PUBLICACIONES

3AHKH

DE LAS

OBZEANHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAHUB

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estsn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte
a su librero o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

price:

$U.S. 2.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70901-March

1978--2,990
