V.

Mindful of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Antigua, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, Saint
Lucia and Saint Vincent, 150
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
ali other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the Territories of Antigua and St. Kitts-NevisAnguilla and their peoples,
Recalling also that the question of the Territories of
Antigua and St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla is currently under
consideration in the relevant and competent organs of
the United Nations,
Noting with satisfaction the recent attainment of independence by Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent,
Mindful that Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent, as well
as the Territories of Antigua and St. Kitts-NevisAnguilla, require the continued attention and assistance
of the United Nations in the achievement by their peoples of their development objectives,
Emphasizing the special problems faced by Antigua,
St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent
with regard to territorial size, geographical Iocation,
highly limited interna! markets and limited economic
resources, as well as the serious adverse effects of recent
world-wide economic and financia! problems,
Recalling resolution 111 (V), adopted by the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its
fifth session, held at Manila from 7 May to 3 June
1979 151 in which specific action in a number of identified areas was urged in respect of island developing
countries,
Aware of the fact that a conference of severa! Govemments and agencies interested in economic development in the Caribbean was held at Washington, D.C.,
on 14 and 15 December 1977, with the purpose of reviewing the economic development needs of the Caribbean region, and that, as a consequence, the Caribbean
Group for Co-operation in Economic Development was
established,
Aware also of the establishment and operation of the
Caribbean Development Facility by the Caribbean
Group for Co-operation in Economic Development,

I
T akes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Antigua, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, Saint
Lucia and Saint Vincent;

11
1. Emphasizes the urgency of rendering ali necessary assistance to the peoples of Antigua and St. KittsNevis-Anguilla in their efforts to strengthen and develop
their national economies and calls upon the Govemment of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northem Ireland, in consultation with the freely elected
representatives of the peoples of Antigua and St. KittsNevis-Anguilla, to continue to take adequate steps to
establish and finance an appropriate programme of development for those Territories;
2. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, including
in particular the United Nations Development Pro15º A/34/563.
151 See Proceedings

133

Resolutlons adopted on the reports of tbe Second Commlttee

of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14),
part one, sect. A.

gramme and intemational fin_ancial institu!ions,. as we~I
as aid donors, to continue to mcrease and mtens1fy their
assistance within their respective spheres of competence
to the peoples of those Territories;

111
1. Emphasizes the urgency of rendering ali necessary assistance to Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent in their
efforts to strengthen and develop their economies;
2. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, including
in particular the United Nations Development Programme, international financia) institutions and aid
donors, to continue to increase and intensify their assistance to Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent within their respective spheres of competence;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
financia!, technical and economic assistance of the international community, in particular that of the developed
countries and the appropriate organizations of the
United Nations system, with a view to helping to meet
the short-term and long-term development needs of
Saint Lucia and St. Vincent;

IV

Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session an
analytical report on the implementation of the present
resolution.
109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979

34/195.

United Nations Conference on an International Code of Conduct on the Transfer of
Technology

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New Intemational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and intemational
economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolutions 32/188 of 19 December 1977 and 33/157 of 20 December 1978,
Bearing in mind resolution 89 (IV) of 30 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development152 on an intemational code of conduct on
the transfer of technology and decision 113 (V) of 3
June 1979 of the Conference158 on the same subject,
Taking note of the recommendation made by the
United Nations Conference on an International Code
of Conduct on the Transfer of Technology, at its second
session, to convene, under the auspices of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, a third
session in the first half of 1980,
Deeply concerned that during the second session of
the United Nations Conference on an International
Code of Conduct on the Transfer of Technology no
U 2 fbid., Fourth Session, vol. 1, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10 and corrigendum),
part one, sect. A.
158 lbid., Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), part one, sect. A.

134

General Allembly-'lblrty-fomth Session

agreement was achieved on a number of fundamental
issues of interest to the developing countries,
1. Decides to convene a third session of the United
Nations Conference on an International Code of Conduct on the Transfer of Technology in the first half of
1980 and requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to undertake the necessary preparations;
2. Calls for the necessary political will and fl.exibility
at the third session of the Conference to complete negotiations and take ali decisions necessary for the adoption
of an international code of conduct on the transfer of
technology, bearing in mind the interests and concerns
of the developing countries.
109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979

34/196.

Report of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development on its fifth sesslon

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic
co-operation,
Recalling a/so its resolution 3 3/ 154 of 20 December 1978,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development on its fifth session, 154 held at Manila from 7 May to 3 June 1979, and
the report of the Trade and Development Board on its
tenth special session and its nineteenth session, 155
Noting the Arusha Programme for Collective SelfReliance and Framework for Negotiations, 156 adopted
by the Fourth Ministerial Meeting of the Group of
Seventy-seven; held at Arusha, United Republic of
Tanzania, from 12 to 16 February 1979, setting forth
the objectives and proposals of the developiog couotries
for the fifth session of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development,
Noting further the views and recommendations of the
Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Govemment of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana from 3 to 9
September 1979, relating to economic problems, 157
Considering that a number of important issues relating to the establishment of the new intemational economic arder are under negotiation or consideration in
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, such as the Integrated Programme for Commodities and, in particular, the establishment of the
Common Fund, protectionism and structural adjustment,
economic co-operation among developing countries, the
debt problem of developing countries, the transfer of
real resources to developing countries, interrelations between trade, development, money and finance, the international code of conduct on the transfer of technology,
154

lbid. (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14).
Offecial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/34/15 and Corr.1).
156
Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, Fifth Session, vol. 1, Report and Annexes
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), annex VI.
10 7 See A/34/542, annex, sect. IV.
155

equitable principies and rules for restrictive business
practices, the participation of developing countries in
world shipping, a convention on international multimodal transport, and trade relations among countries
with different economic and social systems and ali trade
fl.ows resulting therefrom,
Emphasizing that the concerns of the developing
countries deserve the urgent attention of the world
community,
1. Takes note of the report of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development on its fifth session and the report of the Trade and Development Board
on its tenth special session and its nineteenth session;
2. Notes with concern that the results achieved by
thc United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its fifth session were limited, especially in the
areas of major concern to developing countries;
3. Cal/s for appropriate urgent action to implement
at the national and international levels the resolutions
and decisions as adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its fifth session
and by the Trade and Development Board at its nineteenth session;
4. Urges ali States to reach early agreement on the
remaining issues of importance to all countries, particularly those of majar importance to the developing
countries, which were remitted by the Conference at its
fifth session to its permanent machinery;
5. Endorses resolution 131 (V) of 3 June 1979 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Developmentm on protectionism and structural adjustment,
takes note of Trade and Development Board decision
199 (XIX) of 20 October 1979 1 " 1' on the same subject
and calls for their full implementation by Governments;
6. A /so endorses resolution 124 (V) of 3 June 1979
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 108 in which the Conference called for prompt
action for finalizing and adopting the articles of agreement of the Common Fund at the fourth session of the
United Nations Negotiating Conference on a Common
Fund under the lntegrated Programme for Commodities
and for the conclusion of negotiations, where appropriate, on individual commodities, agreements or arrangements and for the establishment of a framework of
international co-operation, within the over-all context
of the Integrated Programme for Commodities, for expanding in developing countries the processing of
primary commodities and for the greater participation of
developing countries in the marketing and distribution
thereof;
1. Welcomes the announcement of pledges of
voluntary contributions to the second account as well as
declarations of intent in this regard made at the fifth
session of the United N ations Conference on Trade and
Development and the important announcement concerning contributions to the Common Fund made by the
Special Fund of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries at the second session of the Interim
Committee of the United Nations Negotiating Conference on a Common Fund under the Integrated Programme for Commodities, and urges the countries and
international institutions which have not yet done so to
1 8
~ See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.Il.D.14),
part one, sect. A.
u 9 See Offecial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtyfourth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/34/15 and Corr.l), vol.
11, part one, annex l.
