United Nations

S/PV.4343

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4343rd meeting
Friday, 29 June 2001, 12.40 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Chowdhury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bangladesh)

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Ryan
Mr. Ward
Mr. Maiga
Mr. Neewoor
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Lavrov
Ms. Lee
Mr. Mejdoub
Mr. Kuchinsky
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Hume

Agenda
Wrap-up discussion on the work of the Security Council for the month of June 2001

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-43298 (E)

*0143298*

S/PV.4343

The meeting was called to order at 12.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Wrap-up discussion on the work of the Security
Council for the month of June 2001
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
This is the first meeting of the Security Council
being held in public to take into account an assessment
and evaluation of its work during the preceding month.
This is an occasion on which I believe I should like to
pay a tribute to my colleagues in the Council who
decided to hold this public meeting in order to share
our thoughts, views and ideas about how the Council
works, particularly how it works during a very busy
month, and how we should look ahead to the future
with regard to the Council.
This meeting, of course, is restricted to
contributions by the 15 members of the Council, but it
is my fervent hope and wish that in the future there will
be an opportunity for non-Council members to join us
in this process.
We are privileged to have the Secretary-General
with us this morning. Today was a momentous day,
with the General Assembly taking action on his
reappointment to a second term. I would like to take
this opportunity at this formal meeting of the Security
Council to convey on behalf of all my Council
colleagues our deep appreciation for the services he has
provided to the world body and for his continued
commitment to the objectives and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. We look forward in the
Council to working closely with him in the coming
years, and we believe that under his leadership the
Organization will achieve even greater glory.
The Security Council renews its trust in
Secretary-General Kofi Annan to carry forward the
United Nations mission of peace and security.
It has been a very difficult month for my
presidency, for Bangladesh, the colleagues on my team.
It has been very busy, and unexpectedly new items and
issues came up that took up our time. But let me say
also that quite a lot was achieved in this month,

2

particularly in discussing the major areas of conflict of
the world. We also devoted a day-long debate to the
prevention of armed conflict, discussing the first-ever
report of the Secretary-General on the subject. I must
say that this was a very comprehensive report, touching
on all aspects of conflict prevention in a broader
perspective.
And we believe that this subject, as it is at the
heart of the Council’s primary responsibilities, will
receive our attention in the Council, as well as in the
other organs and organizations of the United Nations.
The General Assembly has scheduled a debate on 12
and 13 July on this subject, perhaps in response to the
Security Council debate under the presidency of the
Foreign Minister of Bangladesh. We believe there is a
desire among the members Council to adopt a
resolution on that subject as far as the competence of
the Security Council is concerned. So, I have been
advised that the Bangladesh delegation is preparing one
and will be circulating it for adoption, very soon
hopefully, under the Chinese presidency.
I am not going to recount what happened during
the month but let me take up one or two issues that I
believe may be useful for the round of discussion.
One aspect that came up time and again in our
deliberations is how decisions are translated into
action. We have to ensure that the Secretary-General is
given the human, material, and financial resources to
implement our decisions. We have to reflect on how the
follow-up of issues, not as routine calendar events, but
as conscious policy decisions, are to be pursued in a
proactive manner. What we have found is that, in view
of the issuance of a number of reports during the month
and of the required extension of the mandates of
various peacekeeping operations, the Council is
somewhat bound by the issuing of these reports. This is
not necessarily a bad thing, but sometimes the Council
does not consciously take up issues that need our
attention and need a very thorough, in-depth discussion
in the Council. So, we believe that subsequent
presidencies will be able to give that opportunity to the
Council, to give some thought to the issues that are not
constrained or bound by the submission of a report or
the extension of a mandate.
We also found a proactive attitude or the intention
to be proactive on the part of the Security Council in
the initiative of sending out missions to conflict areas.
In the past year, useful missions were the mission to

S/PV.4343

the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), the
mission to Kosovo. This month followed that trend. We
believe that this kind of proactive attitude on the part
of the Council through its missions to the conflict areas
have found considerable support, even outside the
Council, and we believe this activity should be
continued. In those cases, the Council has generated
major decisions by the Organization with regard to the
conflict areas. I have in mind the mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), which
engaged in real negotiations with the parties concerned
in the region. The mission came up with very positive
and forward-looking recommendations, and the
Council acted on those recommendations. We believe
we achieved a very good outcome of the deliberations
on that mission’s report.
So, these are the issues that work well. This
month we adopted resolution 1353 (2001) on
cooperation with troop-contributing countries. I think
this is a major operational resolution by the Security
Council, and streamlines many of the deliberations that
used to go on between the troop-contributing countries,
the Council itself, and the Secretariat. This trilateral
relationship has been further refined, strengthened, and
re-made, I think, to the satisfaction of the troopcontributing countries, in particular. We believe that is
a major area to which the Council has contributed. I
would encourage the Council in the future to also give
its attention to some of these operational areas, which
is necessary — apart from addressing the major
responsibilities — because refining those areas would
really help the Council and the mission of the Council
greatly.
The Secretary-General has reported at some
length in his recent report on the Brahimi report
implementation, addressing the problems concerning
civilian components in peace operations, with the need
of larger and wider civilian components in the
missions, such as the United Nations Observer Mission
in the Democratic Republic of Congo (MONUC)and
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL). The Council needs to bring that issue
into focus. We wish to hear the views of the Council
members today or in subsequent session on this topic.
Finally, the Council’s relations with the press, the
media and the public need specific attention. We
should make an effort to see that the Council’s work
receives the attention of the outside world. The
possibility of having a spokesperson of the Security

Council President was discussed informally at the
retreat. You, Mr. Secretary-General, suggested that and,
because of the rotating presidency, the option needs to
be examined further. I took up that idea seriously with
the Department of Public Information (DPI), and with
your spokesperson, Mr. Secretary-General. I would
leave it to the subsequent presidencies to address that
matter, but what we did this month was arrange that
every morning, the representative of the spokesperson
of the Secretary-General would come and meet with us
and work out the day’s program, the issues, and how
the Council sees the issues as they emerge that day. I
am told that a five-minute meeting every morning
helped the spokesperson’s office, as well as the media
representative, because he or she is the main conduit
between the Council and the media as a whole. That
worked well and we encourage successive presidencies
to follow that practice and build upon it for the greater
advantage of the Security Council.
With the strong support of the Council, we also
took considerable steps regarding communicating the
decisions and statements of the Council to the parties
concerned. The Council has agreed to issue a note on
that subject, identifying the way and the manner in
which such communications should take place. I
believe this is an improvement in the working methods
of the Security Council, and we are very happy and
proud that all of us could join in that decision.
Those are the initial thoughts I wanted to share
with all of you and I would now like to open the floor
for your comments.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): Let me commend you for
the manner in which you have conducted the
presidency during this month, including the
unprecedented degree of openness, of which our
meeting here today is an illustration. For nonpermanent members in particular, openness and
transparency in the way the Security Council conducts
its business is of pivotal importance. We welcome the
initiatives you have taken in this regard.
In particular, we emphasize the usefulness of
open briefings, allowing the full United Nations
membership better and more equal access to
information regarding developments in international
peace and security and related United Nations
operations and assistance efforts. With regard to open
meetings, which we support, it is important that we
maintain a focussed approach without lengthy

3

S/PV.4343

repetitions, while hearing from Member States
particularly involved in, or affected by, the issue at
hand. Moreover, debriefings from Council missions, et
cetera, can often be given by the chair without a
mandatory round of Council members’ commentary.
Above all, our culture should be one of sharing
information and viewpoints on an interactive and
integrative basis.
In this regard, my delegation had hoped that the
important resolution adopted this month on cooperation
with troop-contributing countries could have gone
further in incorporating proposals and signals put
forward by a number of those countries during what we
saw as a very useful consultation process. At the same
time, we acknowledge that careful consideration is
needed for new mechanisms and arrangements. My
delegation will continue its efforts to further this
process.
In order for the various delegations — whether
currently members of the Council or not — to be able
to digest information provided and establish positions
on what often tend to be issues that are complex in
nature, there must be sufficient time between the
issuing of reports and the scheduling of meetings to
consider issues in a substantive manner. Lately, there
have been instances in which documentation was made
available only 24 hours prior to consideration by the
Security Council. This clearly is not sufficient and
must be avoided in the future. For non-members it is
especially important that the nature of upcoming
meetings be made clear in order to facilitate their
participation.
It is paramount that resolutions and statements by
the President of the Security Council reach the
Governments, groups and individuals for which they
are intended. Recent steps taken to transmit the
contents of Council action to the parties in conflict
must become standard practice. Special representatives
of the Secretary-General and other diplomatic channels
need to be fully utilized in this regard. Also, the
international community at large should, as far as
possible, seek to reinforce Council action in conflict
areas.
Council missions to conflict areas are important
to our work. It is indeed the most direct way of
conducting dialogue and impressing the Council’s
encouragement and/or warnings upon belligerent
parties. Furthermore, Council missions — such as

4

those recently carried out to the Great Lakes region and
to Kosovo/Belgrade — have proved beneficial in
providing Council members with deeper insight and
updated information on crisis situations.
Following the mission to the Great Lakes region,
the Council, in our view, has arrived at an increasingly
common analysis and approach to the conflict
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
based on its underlying causes. Significantly, this was
reflected in the balanced and comprehensive resolution
adopted on the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) earlier this month.
We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative Mr. Haekkerup and
the Kosovo Force Commander (KFOR) LieutenantGeneral Skiaker for facilitating the useful meetings in
Kosovo and to thank President Koštunica and Yugoslav
authorities for the constructive talks in Belgrade.
We should be ready to consider similar Council
missions in the future to other conflict areas.
Let me take this opportunity to again thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for its effective facilitation
and for having brought to a successful conclusion the
initiatives put forward by my delegation this month
regarding HIV/AIDS and the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The presidential statement welcoming
the successful holding of the special session of the
General Assembly on HIV/AIDS and encouraging
further action to address the problem of HIV/AIDS
was, in our view, a timely and appropriate step by the
Council.
Likewise, the letter from the President of the
Security Council to the Secretary-General inviting
further advice for the Council’s consideration regarding
the protection of civilians in armed conflict is intended
to bring forward a matter we consider to be of great
importance. We welcome our fellow Council members’
indicated willingness to jointly pursue this matter
further.
Finally, Mr. President, I would like to join you in
congratulating
the
Secretary-General
on
his
appointment to a new term.
The President: Before giving the floor to the
next speaker, let me say that when we decided on this
meeting, we also wanted this to be somewhat
interactive, so that members would ask questions and

S/PV.4343

raise issues. That way I think that we will enjoy this
meeting, and we will also get some results.

striking meeting and reaffirmed our belief that we have
to keep channels open.

Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): In
addition to your comment, Mr. President, we also have
time limits. But I would like first of all to highlight
your commitment to making this a more open Council,
which was achieved, and your great capacity for work,
your leadership of the Mission to Kosovo and also of
the process of selecting the Secretary-General.

I would just like to emphasize one of the topics
covered there: to whom should the Council be
accountable? Accountability is a term that has no
precise translation in Spanish. But I was struck by the
fact that there have been many requests, demands and
claims emanating from Member States that are not
members of the Council. What was discussed was the
need to change both the content and the form of the
report of the Security Council.

As for our working methods, I see that much
progress was achieved. The drafting of the lists, while
still mysterious, has improved. As regards the subjects
covered, it was a very busy, very varied, but also a very
balanced month. There was also much controversy. I
am thinking of yesterday, when the representative of
Iraq was quite aggressive with some of us that are not
the main actors.
Now I would like to make a few comments in the
form of suggestions, addressing myself to you,
Mr. President, the other members and all others
present. As regards the agenda for consultations, it
seemed to me that this month the “other matters” were
not being taken up at the end of each meeting. In other
words, it was asked if anyone wanted to raise other
matters — they were mentioned and then they were put
aside. I think it is more interesting — no, in fact,
indispensable — that we continue to deal with other
matters at the end of the meeting, even if items are
mentioned at the beginning, because sometimes we do
not have time to call in our experts in time. So let us
have the agenda continue to be an agenda.
The other suggestion I have relates to a general
omission, of which all of us members were guilty,
when we did not decide that the private meeting during
which the Secretary-General was selected could have
been a meeting that other Members could have
attended. I think that we have to leave this suggestion
open so that five years hence it can perhaps be taken
up. In other words, it could have been a private
meeting, but non-members of the Council could have
attended without the right to speak.
Finally, I think that it is important to increase the
opportunities for the Council to have relationships with
other United Nations bodies. During this month, we
missed an opportunity to assess the interesting
discussion of the Working Group on Security Council
reform, where three Members of the Council did
participate and found it very interesting. It was quite a

So this month we missed an opportunity to
explore this topic, and I think that it is something we
can cover in the next few months.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I associate myself with the warm words of
congratulations to the Secretary-General. We are all
looking forward to continuing to support his efforts for
the reform of the United Nations. His presence here
today confirms his intention to work in the closest way
possible with the Security Council.
I would also like to express gratitude to you and
to your delegation, Mr. President. You had a very
difficult month, filled with events that arose
unexpectedly, but, in my view, you coped with your
duties very well. Despite all of the difficulties, it was
possible both to find solutions to specific problems
which could not be postponed — as the resolutions on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and on Western
Sahara — and to make further progress in the
development of the instruments available to the
Security Council. We have already referred to the
meetings on the report of the Secretary-General on the
prevention of conflict.
All of this was a direct act of implementing the
decisions
of
the
Millennium
Summit
and,
unquestionably, I agree that such meetings should be as
informal and interactive as possible. They can be
useful as we try to draw lessons from the past month
and think about how we will be working in the future.
In that connection, I recall the mission to Kosovo
and the discussion that took place afterwards. We did
not have Macedonia on the agenda, but it was always
invisibly present, as were the Balkans as a whole. So I
think that the dialogue that we began with the
Secretary-General on these issues should be more
specific in the months to come. The Security Council

5

S/PV.4343

should look at how its relevant resolutions on the
Balkans are being implemented.
I share the assessment of the importance of the
resolution on cooperation with troop-contributing
countries. The activity of the Security Council on the
question of United Nations peacekeeping will continue.
The report of the Secretary-General on peacekeeping
has already been issued, and we consider that the
Council must actively support the Secretary-General’s
efforts to continue to improve the United Nations
peacekeeping machinery; but the Security Council
itself, of course, must make its own contribution to this
work in accordance with its own competencies.
Here I would like to recall that we, of course, also
need to follow up the implementation of our decisions.
One of the mechanisms which must be useful for our
work on peacekeeping so far is not helping us very
much. I am referring to the Military Staff Committee.
The Security Council has twice already — in
resolutions 1327 (2000) and 1353 (2001) —
emphasized the need for the study of means to make
more active use of the Military Staff Committee in
order to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and we are expecting the Military Staff
Committee do respond to the Council’s resolutions.
In conclusion, I would like to support
Ambassador Valdivieso in saying that for planning our
work it is extremely important to stick to the agenda,
and that those questions that need to be discussed
under “other matters” should be discussed after the
planned items on the agenda.
Once again, Mr. President, I would like to
congratulate you and the Secretary-General.
Ms. Lee (Singapore): At the outset, may I also
express our delegation’s words of congratulations to
the Secretary-General and assure him of our continued
wholehearted support.
Mr. President, we welcome your initiative to
conduct a wrap-up session of the work of the Security
Council in this chamber. As you yourself noted,
previous wrap-up sessions were conducted in the
informal consultations, and members of the general
membership had no opportunity to listen to what we
were saying about the work of the Council. We
therefore feel that your initiative testifies to your
delegation’s dedication to the promotion of
transparency in the work of the Council and

6

enhancement of its accountability to the general
membership, on whose behalf the Council exercises its
functions under the Charter. The Singapore delegation
fully supports these very important objectives.
We feel that it is a good exercise to ask ourselves
periodically if we have had a positive impact on the
issues that arose for the Council’s consideration each
month; and, if we have not had a positive impact, we
think that we should ask ourselves why, try to find out
the reasons, identify the steps that the Council can take
and the tools that the Council can try to find and use to
inject momentum and progress. Also, of course, the
whole objective is to draw lessons, where appropriate,
so that we can apply them in the future.
From the outset, Mr. President, we note that you
had prepared a very full programme. You had even
managed to lead a Security Council mission to Kosovo
in the middle of the month. Time does not allow me to
make an exhaustive review of the work of the
Bangladeshi presidency, but I would like to touch on
some of the items that we feel are important. Basically,
we would like to give our views on where we feel the
Council has done well and where we could have done
better.
On the substantive issues, let us start with
Burundi. We feel that it was right to keep a close watch
on the volatile developments in Burundi. As to the
statement that you read just this morning, while an
important one, we feel that we should have had a more
reflective discussion so that we could agree on the
steps that the Council should take to bolster the highly
fragile peace process in cooperation with the regional
organizations and other relevant actors. Therefore, we
look forward to further discussion on this issue fairly
soon so that we can build on the outlines of our policy
on Burundi.
In relation to Western Sahara, it is obvious that
discussions on the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) was not just a routine affair this
month. We feel that this marked a turning point. Here
the Council was faced with a difficult choice on this
long-standing item on its agenda, and there were
deeply held interests and principles that we needed to
reconcile. The shared objective, however, which we
note was positive — that is to say, that we deliver a
clear mandate to the Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral — would not unfairly compromise the just

S/PV.4343

interests of the parties. However, in keeping with the
responsibility of the Council as a whole, to exercise
due diligence before taking action, we would have
preferred to have a fuller discussion in the Council on
the terms of the draft resolution to extend MINURSO’s
mandate. In our view, it also raised the issue of the
“Group of Friends” practice and whether we can
improve our working methods in this regard.
On the substance of the matter, of course, we will
fully support the Secretary-General and his Personal
Envoy for Western Sahara, Mr. James Baker III, over
the next five months in their efforts to find a mutually
acceptable political solution, including possibly on the
basis of the draft framework agreement or any other
proposal that may be submitted.
On Kosovo, we found the activities very useful,
especially the important stop in Belgrade. It allowed
the Council to update itself on the recent developments
in Kosovo and the wider region and assess the impact
on the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). It is also
commendable, Mr. President, that you convened an
open debate to enable non-members to express their
views on issues that arose out of the mission.
We feel that Kosovo is not yet out of the woods.
Many problems of a fundamental nature remain, not
least among them, the issue of inter-ethnic
reconciliation. There are also differences within the
Council of which we need to be aware and that we
should bridge. Nevertheless, it should be recalled that
Kosovo is a ward of the Security Council and the
international community as a whole, and we should not
spare any effort to build a consensus within the Council
on our policy in Kosovo, of course within the
framework of existing Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 1244 (1999).
On Afghanistan, while the Council discussed the
report and recommendations of the Committee of
Experts in an open debate, we feel that there is a need
for the Council to follow up on the recommendations
of the Committee, and we also hope that there will
soon be an opportunity for the Council to engage in a
discussion on finding a well-defined long-term and
comprehensive strategy on Afghanistan. We fully
appreciate that adequate preparation must be made, and
intensive consultations have to be undertaken, if such a
discussion is to be substantive and useful, but we hope
to have such a discussion soon.

In relation to the situation in the Middle East, we
appreciate the updates which the Council has received
on the efforts of the Secretary-General, particularly in
connection with his recent visit to the region. The
situation in the Middle East remains delicate, and the
Council should continue to remain actively seized of
this matter and follow developments there closely.
On Iraq, work on this issue focused on the
follow-up to resolution 1352 (2001), which was
adopted very early in your presidency, Sir. It was right
and timely, we feel, that you responded swiftly to the
request of the Russian Federation and convened a
public meeting on the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait.
The open debate attracted the largest number of
speakers from outside the Council this month,
demonstrating the importance attached by the
international community to the work of the Council on
its sanctions policy towards Iraq and the Iraq
humanitarian programme.
The work of the Council on this issue, as we all
know, is not complete, and we will have informal
consultations this afternoon to enable us to further
discuss the draft resolution proposed by the United
Kingdom. While we are not altogether sure whether we
will be able to remove all of the difficulties and reach
an agreement, we should recall the statements made by
several non-members of the Council suggesting that the
Council should not squander the present opportunity to
inject greater focus into the Iraq humanitarian
programme and address many of the perceived
shortcomings of the programme.
Before closing, I should like to make some
comments on the issue of the procedures and working
methods of the Council. I would like to touch on two
significant developments during your presidency that
we think will substantially enhance the working
methods of the Council.
First, the Council adopted a resolution to enhance
cooperation between the Council and troopcontributing countries, which was the result of the
good work done by the Council’s working group on
peacekeeping operations, led by Ambassador Curtis
Ward of Jamaica.
Secondly, after an inexplicable hiatus of several
months, the working group on documents and
procedures met again to consider proposals of the

7

S/PV.4343

presidency to improve the working methods of the
Council. We congratulate you, Sir, on your delegation’s
initiative on the note that will be issued that will clarify
the procedures to be followed to communicate
messages to parties involved in issues discussed by the
Council.
In relation to this issue, which Ambassador
Valdivieso earlier raised, we recall that he said that he,
along with you, Mr. President, and Ambassador
Greenstock of the United Kingdom, were members of
the troika that made a presentation at a meeting of the
Open-ended Working Group on Council reform earlier
this month. We recall also that Ambassador Valdivieso
suggested that the Council have a briefing on this
meeting. We heard that it was a very substantive
meeting, and we note that this has not been taken up.
We hope that it will be taken up without further delay.
Lastly, I should like to raise the issue of the
speakers’ list. Members will recall that Ambassador
Mahbubani had brought to the attention of the previous
presidency a recurrent problem in the Council on the
drawing up of the speakers’ list. We are grateful to the
Bangladeshi presidency for innovating practical
improvements to the existing system. At the earlier
stage of your presidency, Sir, you made it a point to
announce during informal consultations or at Council
meetings when the speakers’ list would be opened.
Later we noted that the announcement was only put in
the daily Journal, and we appear to have regressed on
this issue.
While the initiatives taken under your presidency
have enhanced transparency in form, we regret to note
that in substance the drawing up of the speakers’ list,
particularly on certain key issues, has not entirely lost
its Byzantine character. We find that the Orwellian
principle is still alive and kicking – that is to say, that
some members are more equal than others.
If the rules of sovereign equality enshrined in the
United Nations Charter were to be strictly applied, the
principle of first come, first served should be the
primary guide in the drawing up of the speakers’ list.
We will continue to speak out on this matter as long as
the phenomenon is not corrected.
I should like to repeat what we have said before:
that while we could accept some degree of inequality
on matters of substance in the work of the Council, on
matters of procedure there should always be a level
playing field, and we will continue to insist on this.

8

The President: I think that the representative of
Singapore raised some very interesting points.
Very quickly, because the Secretary-General has
to go to another appointment, let me mention two
things.
First, as Minister Lee pointed out, Ambassador
Wang Yingfan has already included, an open briefing
on Burundi in his draft programme, so that question
will be taken up. Bangladesh is also working on an
Arria-formula meeting to bring in other non-State
actors involved in Burundi to be heard by Council
members.
Secondly,
on
the
Working
Group
on
Documentation, if the Council wants to have a second
meeting, it has to bring back Bangladesh as the
President again, because the last time such a meeting
took place was in March 2000, during our presidency,
and that was the second time in two years. As the
representative of Singapore said, it is inexplicable, but
we need to pull ourselves together and have that
Working Group meet.
I think that we can have the briefing suggested by
Ambassador Valdivieso tomorrow. I think that
tomorrow is an available day on Bangladesh’s calendar.
In any case, before the Secretary-General leaves,
let me take this opportunity to say that today happens
to be the last working day for one of our dear
colleagues, Ambassador Anund Neewoor, Permanent
Representative of Mauritius, who will soon return to
Mauritius after completing his tour of duty in New
York as his country’s Permanent Representative. It is
also with great pleasure that I recognize the gracious
presence of Mrs. Neewoor among us today, and we
convey to her our greetings.
I should like to recall Ambassador Neewoor’s
excellent work and his contribution to the work of the
Security Council as the Permanent Representative of
Mauritius over the last six months. First, getting
elected to the Council was a difficult job, and then,
after getting elected, to settle down and to make a very
positive and substantive contribution is a tall order. He
has made his country, Mauritius, and all of us proud.
On behalf of the members of the Council and on
my own behalf, I wish him and his family all the best
in their future endeavours.

S/PV.4343

Perhaps Ambassador Neewoor would like to
make some comments?

critical study in the future as well, by students of
international relations.

Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for the very generous and kind
sentiments that you have just expressed towards me.

We are fully conscious of the complexity of
national and international politics and of their
dynamics in the Security Council’s decision-making
process. We believe that, in spite of the constraints, it
should be possible for members of the Security Council
to work on the basis of certain norms, on which we
should not compromise at any time. The basic norms in
that regard should be, as I have said, even-handedness,
fairness and justice. I have sometimes wished that there
was a meditation room somewhere in the corner near
the Security Council Chamber, where from time to
time, when in doubt, we could go and reflect,
individually or collectively, and then begin
deliberations in the consultation room.

Today I conclude a long journey of 33 years in
the foreign service of Mauritius and in the wonderful
world of diplomacy. My foreign service career began
with the independence of our country in 1968 and ends
here, in the Security Council Chamber, where
Mauritius is serving its two-year term, having been
elected by the General Assembly last fall to a nonpermanent seat in the Council.
I take this opportunity to express my thanks and
gratitude
to
my
colleagues
the
Permanent
Representatives for the confidence they placed in us in
voting us into the Security Council. I have tried my
best to live up to this confidence, which has been at the
centre of my preoccupations in our participation in the
work of the Security Council over the last six months,
since we assumed our term here.
I also take this opportunity to warmly thank the
close friends, including several members of the
Council, who encouraged us and actively assisted us in
our bid for a Security Council seat.
The Security Council is an entity that evokes all
kinds of imagings around the world — among nations,
among peoples, among academics and among students
alike. Beyond the known platitude that it is the
supreme instrument for the maintenance of
international peace and security, it is regarded as the
embodiment of hope and justice, not only by nations
that feel aggrieved by the actions of other States or
face unmanageable internal strife, but by the ordinary
people — men, women and children — who are usually
the innocent victims and whose lives are shattered by
wars and conflicts.
Therefore, Security Council members —
permanent and non-permanent alike — bear an
awesome responsibility on behalf of all the people of
the world. That is why the Members of the United
Nations expect all Security Council decisions to be
even-handed, fair and just. Members need always to
bear in mind that the decisions they take in this
Chamber and in the consultation room are the object of
scrutiny by the international community as soon as
they become public, and that they will be the object of

Before I became a diplomat, I was a teacher, and I
may have pontificated a little bit in this, my final
statement in the Council. But I have, I hope, done that
with the President’s indulgence. I hope that what I have
said contains a little bit of material to reflect on.
For me, it has been a wonderful experience to
work in the Security Council together with colleagues
who are the top diplomats of their respective countries.
In the Council, we have, during the past six months,
addressed every issue today affecting international
peace and security. We have done that in a wonderful
spirit of mutual respect and compromise, understanding
and camaraderie. I thank all delegations for the
courtesy they have extended to me. I also thank the
members of the Secretariat at all levels, who have been
just wonderful.
Your presidency, Sir, has been of a quality that we
all know very well and about which we have spoken
before in the consultation room; it has been of the
highest standard, and you have set extremely high
standards for us all — and have kept us all very busy as
well. But the highlight of your presidency was the
appointment of the Secretary-General. We are glad that
the Secretary-General is present at this wrap-up
meeting. I congratulate him very warmly.
I thank you, Mr. President, and I thank all my
other colleagues.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his gracious presence and for his flexibility, on a very
busy day, in adjusting his timetable to our timetable.
We had been in the consultation room, and we never

9

S/PV.4343

know when we will come out of it. I thank him for
waiting for us, and for coming down at the right
moment. We appreciate his presence; I think it gives us
a strong boost in holding this kind of wrap-up. We look
forward to hearing his views about our views.

seen as yet another achievement of the Security
Council in June. We commend Ambassador Ward of
Jamaica for his leadership, and all the members of the
Working Group for their efforts in preparing the draft
resolution.

Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Mr. President, I have
prepared quite a long statement addressing various
aspects of our work under your leadership this month.
But, conscious of the time constraints, I will try to
brief, and will touch on only a few of the most
important issues.

Let me say a couple of words on the issue of the
communication of Council decisions. Although it took
quite a long time — more than a year, in fact — your
determination, Sir, has been rewarded with a note
issued today regarding the communication of the
Council’s decisions. We consider this a clear
demonstration of your country’s commitment to
improving the working methods and transparency of
the Council.

It has in fact been a remarkable month in many
respects. It has been remarkable, first and foremost, in
terms of the impact of our decisions on the future work
of the entire Organization. It has been remarkable also
in terms of the efficiency and professionalism
demonstrated by you, Sir, and by your excellent team
in managing the heavy schedule of meetings and
consultations, combined with a mission to Kosovo, and
in steering our work towards effective results. You
have achieved practically everything that we had
expected from your presidency, and we commend you
for your perseverance and resoluteness.
Among the decisions with which the Bangladeshi
presidency will be associated is, first and foremost, the
Council’s recommendation to the General Assembly
regarding the reappointment of the Secretary-General.
It was an easy decision for all of us: the candidature of
Mr. Kofi Annan can hardly be challenged, after all. Yet
your boldness in taking that decision forward, Sir,
deserves our praise and support. Let me take this
opportunity
to
convey
Ukraine’s
warmest
congratulations to Mr. Kofi Annan on his appointment
as Secretary-General for a second term.
We would also like to thank the Bangladeshi
presidency for taking the initiative to hold an important
debate on conflict prevention. The significant number
of participants in that debate testifies to the keen
interest in that meeting on the part of States Members of
the United Nations. We are grateful also for the
submission of the draft resolution that followed the
debate, which provides a very good basis for further
work.
The adoption of resolution 1353 (2001), on the
basis of the four months of activity of the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations in examining ways
to strengthen cooperation among the Council, troopcontributing countries and the Secretariat, should be

10

Finally, Sir, I welcome the initiative to hold wrapup meetings. My country has always favoured the idea
of holding a wrap-up meeting at the end of a
presidency, and your initiative in holding an open
wrap-up meeting deserves our full support. We hope
that this will be continued in the future.
Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French) I have
so many scruples with regard to taking the floor at such
a late hour that I have voluntarily reduced my
statement to three minutes.
First of all, I would like to extend to you, as well
as to your delegation, all the congratulations of the
Tunisian delegation on the outstanding way in which
you were able to guide the work of the Council during
this month, a month rich in activity and marked by the
consideration of a great number of important subjects
with telling results. You just summarized all of the
items which the Council considered this month, be they
African, Saharan or Balkan. An enormous effort was
made by all delegations, who sometimes went on site,
so there is not need to reiterate.
I merely would like to limit this intervention to
two points. The first is that the Council gave its
attention throughout the last few weeks to the question
of the oil-for-food programme and the Kuwaiti
property. The Iraq question in the same way was the
subject of a very important Security Council debate, in
which we were able to take full account of the interest
Member States of our Organization take in this subject.
It came at a time after the earlier debate which the
Council held in March 2000, also, incidently, under
your presidence, Sir, on the humanitarian question in
Iraq. The debate, which the Council has just held, will
promote dialogue and transparency in dealing with

S/PV.4343

issues before the Council, in addition to the intensive
consultations carried out by the Council on the
proposals before it. Our major object remains that of
putting an end to the sufferings of the Iraqi people by
doing away with and lifting as soon as possible the
sanctions against Iraq.
The second point is that the debate on the
prevention of conflicts, which took place when the
important report to the Secretary-General on this issue
was presented, inspired genuine interest on the part of
Member States. The subject of the prevention of
conflicts lies at the heart of the responsibilities of our
Organization. It should receive sustained attention from
the international community in order to give it its
proper role in the areas of peace and development in
the light of its link to peace-building, as was
emphasized by the Council in its presidential
statement, adopted, as you will recall, in February
under the presidency of Tunisia. It is better to prevent
than to have to intervene later when it is too expensive
on both the humanitarian and financial levels.
The month of June was also an important
occasion for my country to become a co-sponsor of the
Council’s resolution recommending to the General
Assembly the reappointment of Mr. Kofi Annan as
Secretary-General of our Organization. On behalf of
my country and my delegation, we would like to
reiterate to him our full support and wish him all
success at a time when our world, which is undergoing
such great changes, needs the United Nations so badly.
Finally, allow me to voice our best wishes to our
colleague and brother, Ambassador Neewoor.
Mr. Cooney (Ireland): First of all I’d like to say
what a pleasure it was to have the Secretary-General
here with us on what is clearly his day. Secondly, to
thank you for your dynamic and courteous leadership
of the Council during this month and for the very
effective work of your team. We welcome today’s
wrap-up discussion. We think this is a useful initiative,
not necessarily for the end of every month, but
periodically it does do us well to reflect on our work,
and in that spirit I would just like to pick up a couple
of highlights of the month, which I feel have particular
implications for the work of the Council.
The first was the mission to Kosovo, which was
clearly a considerable success and, I think, underlined
the usefulness of these Security Council missions.
Preparation of these missions is particularly important,

and I was privileged enough to participate in the
preparation of the visit to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Great Lakes Mission, at Pocantico, and
I certainly feel that there is a role for Pocantico-style
meetings. As I’ve said before, they don’t have to take
place outside Headquarters, but if this kind of meeting
involving the Secretary-General and a wider range of
people in a kind of private environment could take
place more often, I think it would make a significant
contribution.
On conflict resolution, I think the SecretaryGeneral’s report offered a challenge to the entire
United Nations system and the Member States and we
look forward to the General Assembly debate and to
discussing the draft resolution prepared by Bangladesh.
This brings home, I think, the importance of following
up on the discussions in the Security Council, and
indeed of monitoring the follow-up.
On the resolution on the relations with troop
contributors, I think this was a very good initiative, a
very good piece of work by the working group, very
ably chaired by Ambassador Ward, but we do feel we
can go further. We are looking forward to discussing
the proposal put forward by the six troop-contributing
countries. Again, the lesson we would draw here is
how important it is to reinforce the sense of
involvement of troop contributors in the decisionmaking on peacekeeping operations.
On the Great Lakes and Burundi, we are coming
up to interesting times here because we are working
now to develop a relationship between the Security
Council and regional organizations and initiatives. It is
clear that, while that Security Council is keen to
encourage and support these initiatives, it does not
want to be seen to impose solutions. The problem we
face as a result is that if and when things go wrong, the
Security Council or the United Nations is going to a
certain extent be blamed and will be invited to pick up
the pieces. So it will be useful in our discussions over
the next month in this area to reflect on this
relationship and how it can evolve.
Finally, on Western Sahara, we adopted a
resolution this morning that clearly offers a change of
tack in the policy to date, and it may be that the next
time the Secretary-General reports to us we might want
to reflect on whether to have an open discussion on the
Western Sahara. In terms of procedure, I would pick up
on the point that was raised by Singapore. We feel that

11

S/PV.4343

the Group of Friends is a very valuable instrument in
terms of bringing in the views of Members of the
Organization who are not members of the Security
Council, but we do feel, as I have said before, that
these views should be shared, and the work should take
place with all 15 members of the Council so that we all
come to the resolution with the same sense of
ownership and same sense of having an input into the
resolution.
Mr. Levitte: (France) (spoke in French) Given
the hour, I too will be very brief. Bravo, Mr. President,
bravo to you, bravo to your entire delegation. You
made us work a lot during the month of June, but above
all, you made us work effectively, and that is due to
your talent. Just one example for today was the
resolution on the Western Sahara, which is the very
delicate balancing point which we were able all
together to find, thanks to you and thanks to your last
proposal this morning, which allowed us to meet here,
as David Cooney said, at an important time.
It has very often been said that the Security
Council is slow or indeed even lags behind events. I
think that from that point of view we are making
progress; thanks to you we even sometimes manage to
get ahead of our timetable, for we have recommended a
second term of office for our favourite SecretaryGeneral six months ahead of the official timetable.
I agree with David Cooney when he suggests new
meetings — not necessarily at Pocantico but certainly
of the brainstorming-type — not just to prepare for the
coming event, but also to ensure regular follow up for
those issues that deserve that. I am referring to
Burundi, which was also referred to by Christine Lee. I
am also thinking of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and several other items which merit having the
Council return to them at least once a month and taking
all the time necessary for real deliberations with the
Secretary-General, the Secretariat and all those who
can assist us in properly defining the stages, the
necessary initiatives and the steps to be taken.
I think that every time we consider the timetable
of the coming month, we should all reserve a few hours
for one or two issues in order to think together about
appropriate initiatives.
Mr. Ward (Jamaica): Under your presidency, Sir,
the Security Council certainly tackled a number of
difficult issues. Despite the tremendous efforts of your
team, there are issues that are not easily resolved. One

12

such issue is the sanctions regime against Iraq and all
the issues related to that situation. There are differing
views on the way forward on this issue, and the
Council will continue to grapple with them over the
next few days of your presidency and perhaps into the
presidency of Ambassador Wang Yingfan. He probably
will prefer for us to agree before we get there.
Having had an open debate and having listened to
the views of non-members of the Security Council,
including the views of Iraq, the onus is now on the
Council to clearly define the way forward to find a
resolution of all outstanding issues with respect to Iraq.
I dare say, to be successful the Council will have to put
the interests of the international community ahead of
national interests. Far too often the latter has
overshadowed our work, in particular on this issue.
On the issue of Western Sahara, the Council
adopted resolution 1359 (2001) earlier today in
response to the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral and his personal envoy. That too proved to be
a very difficult issue. But we were able to resolve it.
And while allowing for new approaches to settling the
political issues, the Council, in its wisdom, ensured
that the principles for which it and the United Nations
stand are preserved, in particular that the people of
Western Sahara will not be denied the opportunity to
exercise their inalienable right to self-determination. I
agree with Ambassador Cooney on the idea of an open
debate at some time in the future on Western Sahara.
As you have indicated, Sir, the Security Council
acted in a decidedly comprehensive manner in seeking
to improve the relationships between the Security
Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries. However, despite the good faith effort of the
Council to address the most critical issues of
consultation and decision-making and to improve
peacekeeping operations, many troop-contributing
countries are not fully satisfied, and we will have to
continue our work in this area.
I thank colleagues for the statements made with
respect to my leadership of the working group, and I
look forward to continued cooperation as we tackle the
more difficult issues ahead. During the month we
considered the very well prepared report of the
Secretary-General on conflict prevention. Undoubtedly,
our work will continue with consideration of the draft
resolution proposed by your presidency. Beyond that,
however, the Security Council must become proactive

S/PV.4343

in conflict prevention and give full support to the
Secretary-General in building the capacity of the
Secretariat to carry out effective conflict prevention. I
agree with the statements of Ambassadors Valdivieso
and Lavrov with respect to dealing with other matters
during consultations of the whole. I am sure that
Ambassador Wang Yingfan has taken note of these
concerns, and we will receive some relief in July.
My colleague of Singapore, Minister Lee, raised a
number of important issues, which should be further
discussed in the Council. I hope we are afforded an
opportunity to do so. On one of the issues — the
working of the Friends Group — I share the views
expressed by Minister Lee and Ambassador Cooney.
I would like to end by extending my warmest
congratulations to you, Mr. President, and to your
team. I pay a special tribute to your coordinator for the
wonderful work and the tremendous zeal that your
delegation has put into the workings of the Security
Council.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China)(spoke in Chinese):
Given the lateness of the hour, I would like to associate
myself with the statements and assessments on this
month’s work given by other colleagues.
I wish to touch on one point regarding the
Council’s working methods concerning the month of
June. During the month of June, Ambassador
Greenstock held a lunch party and carried out informal
discussions on improving the Council’s working
methods of the Council. I am very glad to note that a
lunch party will also be held in the month of July, and
Ambassador Mahbubani is going to host that lunch
party.
We had a very heavy schedule in the month of
June. We debated several issues. With regard to
enhancing transparency, I must say that we did that
very well for the month June. However, we still have
expectations about other issues. We need more time to
prepare for the issues to be discussed, so that we may
have a discussion of the items and highlight our
greatest concerns.
Ambassador Levitte mentioned that follow-up
actions or discussions need to be taken. There is a
problem with how to schedule the work for a given
month. I do not think it is possible to work from early
morning late into the night, from Monday through
Friday. Therefore, we must address this question. I

would like to invite all members to give proper thought
to this problem and to attend the informal consultations
to be hosted by Ambassador Mahbubani.
Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I am speaking in
an interactive mode, if you like, so I will be very brief.
But firstly, congratulations to you, Sir, and to your
team for the way in which you have handled the
presidency this month.
I would like to make two and a half quick points.
Firstly, I want to take up the point made by David
Cooney and Jean-David Levitte about the preparation
of Security Council missions. I think this is indeed
very important. The way in which each mission is
prepared will depend to a certain degree on what it is
doing and where it is going. But I would simply say
that from my own experience on the second East Timor
mission, we found it very valuable indeed to have a
number of meetings before we left, not only with
Council members, but also with troop-contributors
and — this will be related to my second point — with
other interested parties who feel they have views to
convey about the particular situation, be they United
Nations agencies or perhaps even non-governmental
organizations, as the situation demands.
So, I thoroughly agree with the importance of the
point. I simply hope we won’t limit ourselves to the
Pocantico Hills style meetings, which were very useful,
but I think we need to be flexible and imaginative
about how we take this forward.
Secondly, on the working group on peacekeeping:
I think this has been a very valuable innovation, and I
would like to add to the avalanche of congratulations to
Curtis Ward. We are looking forward to the review of
the arrangements for relations with troop contributors
in six months time. As we said before the resolution
was adopted, we will have some ideas of our own to
suggest. In the meantime, in our view, there is plenty of
other work for the working group to be doing, and I
look forward to seeing a significant expansion of its
agenda over the coming months. There are some big
issues out there and we must stress them.
Mr. Ward (Jamaica): I would be remiss if I did
not mention the valuable work that Matthew Taylor of
the United Kingdom Mission provided to the working
group, and I understand that he is leaving. I hope I
have an opportunity to say this to him directly, but I
will ask Ambassador Eldon to convey to him this
sincere appreciation on the part of the Chair of the

13

S/PV.4343

working group and all the members of the working
group for the valuable work of Matthew Taylor of the
United Kingdom Mission.
The President: The Council joins you in this. I
have not said it individually, but let me convey to all of
you my very sincere thanks on my behalf and on behalf
of the Bangladesh Security Council team, and convey
how grateful we are for your very gracious words. I
think they were overwhelming. We in the Bangladesh
team are immensely grateful to all of you for
facilitating the discharge of our responsibility of the
Council presidency. We do not know how to thank you
for all the trust, support and cooperation you have
given us in the discharge of our responsibility.
From the comments that have been made, we will
prepare a compendium, gleaned from the statements
made today, and perhaps circulate it to all of you. It
will be a point for future work, in order to carry
forward the very valuable comments we have received
here. I look forward to the important presidency of
Ambassador Wang, coming up next month. I believe all
of you will join in conveying to him our best wishes

14

and our full commitment of support to him and his
team in the discharge of the responsibility for the
month of July. Since this will be the last public meeting
under the Bangladesh presidency, I take this
opportunity to express my sincere thanks. If we have
an oil-for-food resolution tomorrow, we can adopt it. I
take this opportunity to express my sincerest thanks to
the Secretariat, Mr. Stephanides and his team, to the
Conference Services, who have been very effective and
very supportive, to the interpreters, very sincerely, for
bearing with us, and to all the men and women who
worked day and night, supporting the work of the
Council.
I will also add a special word of thanks to the
security team, who worked with us throughout the
period. With those words, I would like to thank all of
you again, and I promise my friends from the broader
membership of the United Nations that the next debate
here for the wrap-up will include an opportunity for the
others to speak as well. I think I can express that hope
on behalf of all of us.
The meeting rose at 2:00 p.m.
