16

General A11embly-Twentieth Session

2053 (XX), Comprehensive review of the whole
qu~stion of peace-keeping operations in all
their aspects
A
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 authorizing the President of the General
Assembly to establish a Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, under the chairmanship of the
President of the Assembly and with the collaboration
of the Secretary-General, and instructing the Special
Committee to undertake as soon as possible a comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects, including ways
of overcoming the present financial difficulties of the
Organization,
Noting the reports of the Special Committee dated
15 June 19653 and 31 August 1965,4
Noting the replies of Member States to the request
of the Special Committee that Member States submit
their views on the guidelines in regard to future peacekeeping operations contained in paragraph 52 of the
report of 31 May 1965 submitted jointly to that
Committee by the Secretary-General and the President
of the General Assembly, 11
Noting also the consensus of the Special Committee,
set forth in its report of 31 August 1965, which was
adopted by the General Assembly at its 1331st plenary
meeting, on 1 September 1965, and the SecretaryGeneral's consequent appeal to the Governments of
all Member States to make voluntary contributions so
that the financial difficulties of the Organization may
be solved and the future may be faced with renewed
hope and confidence,
Recalling the decision taken by the General Assembly at its 1331st plenary meeting that the modalities
for the continuance of the work of the Special Committee should be decided upon at the twentieth session,
Taking into account the views expressed and the
proposals made on peace-keeping -during the debate
on the item entitled "Comprehensive review of the
whole question of peace-keeping operations in all their
aspects",
1. Requests the Special Committee on Peace-keeping
Operations to continue and to complete as soon as
possible the work assigned to it by the General Assembly in paragraph 3 of its resolution 2006 (XIX)
and to report to the Assembly at its twenty-first session:
2. Transmits to the Special Committee the records
of the debates during the present session on the item
entitled "Comprehensive review of the whole question
of peace-keeping operations in all their aspects" ;
3. Inmtes the Special Committee to elect its officers
from among its members and expresses the hope that
the Committee will continue to enjoy the counsel of
the President of the General Assembly and the close
collaboration of the Secretary-General in its work ;
4 .. Cal!s upon all Member States to make voluntary
contributions so that the future may be faced with
renewed hope and confidence.
1395th plenary meetinq,
15 December 1965.
8 lbid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 21, documents

A/5915 and Add.1.
4 [bid., documents A/5916 and Add.I.
11 [Ind., document A/591S/ Add.I, annex II.

B
The Gener0f Assembly,
Desirous that the consideration in the United Nations
organs of the whole question of peace-keeping operations in all their aspects should continued in an atmosphere of harmony and co-operation,
Having considered the important contribution of the
delegation of Ireland and of Mr. Frank Aiken, the
distinguished Minister for External Affairs of Ireland,
in the search for a solution to the question of peacekeeping operations,
Noting the suggestions contained in the draft resolution submitted by Ceylon, Costa Rica, Ghana, Ireland,
the Ivory Coast, Liberia, Nepal, the Philippines and
Somalia, 6
Having adopted resolution A above instructing the
~pecial Committee on Peace-keeping Operations to contmue and to complete as soon as possible the work
assigned to it by the General Assembly in paragraph
3 of its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965
and to report to the Assembly at its twenty-first
session,
·
Refers to the Special Committee on Peace-keeping
Operations the draft resolution mentioned in the third
preambular paragraph above and invites the Committee
to give it careful consideration.
1395th plenary meetinq.
15 December 1965.

2054 (XX). The policies of apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South Africa
A
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the policies of apartheid
of the Government of the Republic of South Africa,
_Having considf;~d the reports of the Special Committee on the Policies of apartheid of the Government
of the Republic of South Africa, 7
Considering the recommendations and conclusions
contai_ned in the report 8 of the Group of Experts
established under Security Council resolution 182
(1963) of 4 December 1963.
Recalling Security Council resolution 191 (1964) of
18 June 1964,
. Gr~velY_ concerned at the aggravation of the explosive
s1tuat1on m the Republic of South Africa as a result
of the .continued implementation of the policies of
apartheid by the Government of South Africa in violation of its obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations and in defiance of the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assemblv
Profo:tndly disturbed at the fact that th e policies
and actions of the Government of South Africa are
thus aggravating the situation in neighbouring territories in southern Africa,
0

6
Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annr.res agenda item 101, dornment A/SPC/L.121/Rev.1.
'
7 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes. annex No. 12, doC!lment_s A/5692, A/5707, A/5825 and Add.I ; ibid., Twentiet/1
Annrxes, agenda item 3'6, documents A/5932 and

"i;s9S7'.

8
See Official Records of the Sernrity Council Ninrtnntlt
Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1964, document
S/5658, annex.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the ~peeial Political Committee

Noting the measures taken by Member States in
µursuance of the resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council,
Having studied the notes, annexed to the Special
Committee's report of 17 June 1965, on the build-up of
military and police forces in the Republic of South
Africa and on recent investments by foreign-owned
corporations in that country ,9
Considering that prompt and effective international
action is imperative in order to avert the grave danger
of a violent racial conflict in Africa, which would
inevitably have grave reperrussions throughout the
world,
Recalling its resolution 1761 (XVII) of 6 November
1962 recommending the application of economic and
rliplomatic sanctions against South Africa,
1. Urgently appeals to the major trading partners
of the Republic of South Africa to cease their increasing
economic collaboration with the Government of South
Africa, which enrourages that Government to defy
world opinion and to accelerate the implementation of
the policies of apartheid;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee on the Policies of apartheid of the Government
of the Republic of South Africa nn<l requests it to
continue to perform i~s functions;
3. Decides to enlarge the Special Committee by the
addition of six members, to be appointed by the President of the General Assemblv on the basis of the
following criteria :10
'
(a) Primary responsibility with regard to world
trade;
( b) Primary responsibility under the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security ;
( c) Equitable geographical distribution ;
4. Condemns the Government of South Africa for
its refusal to comply with the resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly and its continued
implementation of the policies of apartheid;
5. Firmly supports all those who are opposing the
policies of apartheid and particularly those who are
combating such policies in South Africa ;
6. Draws the attention of the Security Council to
the fact that the situation in South Africa constitutes
a threat to international peace and security, that action
under Chapter VII of the Charter is essential in
order to solve the problem of apartheid and that
universally applied economic sanctions are the only
means of achieving a peaceful solution ;
7. Deplores the actions of those States which,
through political, economic and military collaboration
with the Government of South Africa, are encouraging
it to persist in its racial policies;
8. Again requests all States to comply fully with
all the resolutions of the Security Council on this
question and to halt forthwith the sale and delivery
to South Africa of arms, ammunition of all types,
military vehicles, and equipment and materials intended
for their manufacture and maintenance ;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Special Committee, to take appropriate
11 Official

sio>i,

Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth SesAnnexes, agenda item 36, doc11ment A/5932, annext's I

and II.
10 See A/6226.

17

measures for the widest possible dissemination of information on the policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa and on United Nations efforts to
deal with the situation, and requests all Member
States, specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations to co-operate with the Secretary-General
and the Special Committee in this regard;
10. Invites the specialized agencies:
(a) To take the necessary steps to deny technical
and economic assistance to the Government of South
Africa, without, however, interfering with humanitarian
assistance to the victims of the policies of apartheid;
( b) To take active measures, within their fields of
competence, to compel the Government of South
Africa to abandon its racial policies ;
( c) To co-operate with the Special Committee in
the implementation of its terms of reference;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with all the necessary means, including appropriate financial means, for the effective
accomplishment of its task.
1395th plenary meeting,
15 December 1965.

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1978 B (XVIII) of 16 December 1963,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General
in pursuance of that resolution, 11
Considering the recommendation contained in paragraphs 161 to 164 of the report of 16 August 1965
submitted by the Special Committee on the Policies
of apartheid of the Government of the Republic of
South Africa, 12
Deeply concerned at the plight of numerous persons
persecuted by the Government of South Africa for
their opposition to the policies of apartheid and repression, and at the plight of their families,
Considering that humanitarian assistance to such
persons and their families is in keeping with the
purposes of the enited Nations,
1. Expresses its great appreciation to the Governments which have made contributions in response to
General Assembly resolution 1978 B (XVIII) and to
the appeal made on 26 October 1964 by the Special
Committee on the Policies of apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South Africa ;13
2. Requests the Secretary-General to establish a
United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa, made
up of voluntary contributions from States, organizations and individuals, to be used for grants to voluntary
organizations, Governments of host countries of refugees
from South Africa and other appropriate bodies,
towards:
(a) Legal assistance to persons charged under
discriminatory and repressive legislation in South
Africa;
11 !bid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 12, doC11ment A/5850; A/5850/Add.l; ibid., Twentieth Session. A1111e.~es.
cigenda item 36, documents A/6025 and Add.I.
12 Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 36. dornment A./5957.
111 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No 12, clornm<'nt
'\ /~825. para. 118.

18

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

•

•

•

The Preside11t of the General Assembly. in pursuance of
paragraph 3 of resolution B above, nominated 1hr fo!lowinn
Member States: CHILE, MoRocco, NlGERlA, PAKISTAN and
SWEDEN.14

2078 (XX). Effects of atomic radiation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955,
which established the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and its
subsequent resolutions reaffirming the desirability of
the Committee continuing its work,
14 [bid., Twentieth Session, Plenary Meetings,

. _15 [bid., N_ineteenth. Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/5814) ;
ibid., Twentieth Sess1011, Annexes, agenda item 34, document
A/6123.

1408th meeting,

para. 174.

•

--------- - - - - - - - - - - -

Concerned about the potentially harmful effects to
present and future generations resulting from the levels
of rc1diation to which man is exposed,
Conscious of the continued need for compiling mformation on atomic radiation and for analysing its
effects on man and his environment,
1. Takes note of the reports of the United Nations
Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation on the work of its thirteenth. fourteenth and
fifteenth sessions ;1 ~
2. C om111ends the Scientific Committee for its
valuable contributions to wider knowledge and understanding of the effects and levels of atomic radiation
during the ten years of the Committee's existence:
3. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its
programme, including its co-ordinating activities, to
increase the knowledge of the levels and effects of
atomic radiation from all sources:
4. Commends the \,Vor!d Meteorological Organization for its work in carrying forward the scheme for
monitoring and reporting levels of atmospheric radioactivity;
5. Acknowledges with appreciation the assistance
rendered to the Scientific Committee by the World
Meteorological Organization, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the International Atomic Energy Agency:
6. Recommends that all parties concerned continue
their co-operation with the Scientific Committee;
7. N ates the intention of the Scientific Committee
to submit a report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-first session ;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Scientific Committee with the assistance
necessary for the conduct of its work and the dissemination of its findings to the public.
1403ra plenary meeting,
18 December 1965.

( b) Relief for dependants of persons persecuted by
the Government of South Africa for acts arising from
opposition to the policies of apartheid;
( c) Education of prisoners, their children and other
dependants ;
( d) Relief for refugees from South Africa;
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to nominate five Member States, each of which should
appoint a person to serve on a Committee of Trustees
of the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa,
which will decide on the uses of the Fund;
4. Authorizes and requests the Committee of
Trustees to take steps to promote contributions to the
Fund, and to promote co-operation and co-ordination
in the activities of voluntary organizations concerned
with relief and assistance to the victims of the policies
of apartheid of the Government of South Africa ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary assistance to the Committee of Trustees in
the discharge of its responsibilities ;
6. Appeals to Governments, organizations and individuals to contribute generously to the Fund.
1395th plenary meeting.
15 December 1965.

*

•

Note

Peaceful settlement of disputes (item 99)
At its 1403rd plenary meeting, on 18 December 1965, the General Assembly
approved the recommendation of the Special Political Cornmittee 16 that the consideration of this item should be postponed to the twenty-first session.
16

Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 99, document A/6187, para. 11.
