S/PV.7401

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7401st meeting

Friday, 6 March 2015, 12.40 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. McLay
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Fernández-Arias Minuesa
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 25 February 2015 from the Secretary-general addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2015/138)

15-06194 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1506194*

Syria

S/PV.7401

The meeting was called to order at 12.40 p.m.

Abstaining:
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

Adoption of the agenda

The President (spoke in French): There were 14
votes in favour and one abstention. The draft resolution
has been adopted as resolution 2209 (2015).

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.

Letter dated 25 February 2015 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2015/138)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Albania,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and
Sweden to participate in the meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2015/161, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/138, which contains a letter dated
25 February 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America

2/7

06/03/2015

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela abstained in the voting on
resolution 2209 (2015) on chemical weapons in Syria
because it believes that it prejudges the investigative
process being conducted by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), linking the
use of chlorine gas as a chemical weapon in the conflict
taking place in that country.
In that respect, we consider it necessary, prior to the
adoption of a resolution such as that on which we have
abstained, to conclude the investigation to determine
who is responsible for such an abominable act, above
all given the fact that Syria has been a victim of the
barbarism of terrorist groups that have moved into that
country with the goal of sowing hatred, intolerance and
violence, and that enjoy major military capacities.
Venezuela condemns the use of chemical weapons
anywhere in the world, whatever the circumstances or
motives, since their use constitutes a war crime. In that
regard, we attach great importance to the information
provided by the OPCW that all of the chemical
weapons declared on the part of Syria have been
removed from its territory. That demonstrates the will
and commitment of the Syrian authorities to strictly
observe the provisions of resolution 2118 (2013) and of
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction. The information presented
by the OCPW on the removal of chemical weapons
is evidence that Syria has fully complied with the
provisions of resolution 2118 (2013).
We reiterate our call for a peaceful resolution of the
conflict among all parties, in conformity with Chapter
VI of the Charter of the United Nations. We affirm our
full support for the diplomatic efforts of Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
to achieve a firm and lasting peace with the full
participation of all sectors of Syrian society. We wish

15-06194

06/03/2015

Syria

to responsibly call attention to the fact that resolution
2209 (2015), on which we abstained in the voting,
opens a dangerous path to the use of force, which could
jeopardize the dialogue process based on the Moscow,
Cairo and United Nations initiatives with a view to
peacefully ending the conflict.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation voted in favour of
resolution 2209 (2015), in connection with the reports
of the fact-finding mission of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) regarding
the use of chlorine as a chemical weapon in the
Syrian Arab Republic (S/2015/138, annex). In that
regard, we were guided by our principled position on
the unacceptability of the use of chemical weapons
by anyone. We also took into account the need for
the Security Council to maintain a unified position
regarding the Syrian chemical weapons dossier, as
embodied in resolution 2118 (2013).
We stress that further activity of the OPCW factfinding mission should be based on professionalism,
objectivity and impartiality. Any conclusions on the
facts related to the use of chemical weapons should be
based on sound proof. To that end, we should strictly
observe the provisions of the General Assembly’s
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the OPCW, which envisions that cases of particular
gravity and urgency shall be brought directly to the
attention of the General Assembly and the Security
Council by the OPCW Executive Council, by way of
the Secretary-General, in accordance with existing
procedures.
In future, we will strictly base our position on
the fact that only the guiding bodies of the OPCW
may confirm the facts of alleged violations of the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction and resolution 2118 (2013).
That approach is envisaged both in the Convention and
in the communiqué on the Syrian chemical weapons
programme agreed upon by the United States and the
Russian Federation on 14 September 2013 in Geneva.
We wish to once again state categorically that we do
not accept the possible use of sanctions under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations without an
attempt to confirm any allegations based on proof.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China voted in favour of resolution 2209 (2015).

S/PV.7401

China’s position on chemical weapons is clear and
consistent. We resolutely oppose the use of chemical
weapons by anyone in any circumstances, and support
the concerted efforts of all relevant parties to fully
implement the decisions and resolutions adopted by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and the Security Council concerning Syrian
chemical weapons. In that process, the authority of the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the OPCW must be
maintained. The Security Council should remain united
and always speak with a unanimous voice, which is
important in achieving success in the Council’s relevant
work.
On the basis of this position, China actively
participated in the consultations on resolution 2209
(2015) and vigorously pushed for consensus among
the relevant parties. We hope that the relevant parties
will implement resolution 2209 (2015) in an earnest,
comprehensive and precise manner. Any further actions
taken by the Council on the Syrian chemical weapons
issue should be separately discussed and decided upon
by Council members. We hope that resolution 2209
(2015) will help to fostering further Council consensus
on the Syrian chemical weapons, facilitate the early
completion of the destruction of Syrian chemical
weapons, and provide new impetus for a political
settlement of the Syrian issue.
China will continue to play its active and
constructive role towards a comprehensive, lasting and
appropriate solution of the Syrian issue.
Ms. Power (United States of America): We have
adopted resolution 2209 (2015) today, a year and a
half after the Council adopted a binding resolution in
the wake of a horrific, gruesome chemical weapons
attack that left more than 1,000 civilians and hundreds
of children dead. Resolution 2118 (2013) required the
Syrian regime to dismantle and destroy its chemical
weapons programme under international supervision.
The joint mission of the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), with the assistance of numerous Member
States, largely succeeded in that task. Yet significant
discrepancies remain with Syria’s declaration to the
OPCW, and the Al-Assad regime must cooperate, as per
its obligations under resolution 2118 (2013), to resolve
those.
Despite having acceded to the Chemical
Weapons Convention, the Al-Assad regime has again

15-061943/7

S/PV.7401

Syria

demonstrated its brutality by turning to chlorine as
another barbaric weapon in its arsenal against the Syrian
people. Today the Council has made it crystal clear that
the use of chlorine as a chemical weapon is no less evil
than the use of any other chemical as a weapon. The
Syrian regime’s use of any toxic chemical as a weapon
is prohibited by the Chemical Weapons Convention and
constitutes a violation of resolution 2118 (2013).
The OPCW’s fact-finding mission was not
mandated to assign culpability for the chlorine attacks.
It was not mandated to do so, yet a couple of Council
members are suggesting that the absence of explicit
finger-pointing is a form of absolution. Let us look,
instead, at what the report actually says. The factfinding mission concluded with high confidence that
there is, “compelling confirmation that a toxic chemical
was used as a weapon, systematically and repeatedly”
(S/2015/138, annex 2, para. 29), in Syria between April
and August of 2014.
Further, the third fact-finding mission report lists
32 witnesses who saw or heard the sound of helicopters
over three opposition-held villages — Talmenes, Al
Tamanah and Kafr Zita in north-west Syria — at the
time of the attacks; the vast majority of interviewees
either heard or saw barrel bombs falling. Twenty-six
witnesses saw a yellow cloud or dust released from those
barrel bombs upon impact and 29 smelled a chlorine
odour. All of us, of course, know the smell of chlorine.
So let us ask ourselves, “Who has helicopters in Syria?”
Certainly, the opposition does not. Only the regime
does, and we have seen them use their helicopters in
countless other attacks on innocent Syrians using
barrel bombs.
In resolution 2118 (2013) the Security Council
determined that “the use of chemical weapons
anywhere constitutes a threat international peace and
security”. And today we have reaffirmed that any use
of a chemical as a weapon, be it sarin or chlorine, is
prohibited by the Security Council. As we approach the
centenary the first use of chemical weapons on a large
scale, at the battle of Ypres, the Security Council must
continue to uphold the standards and norms against
chemical weapons use and we must work individually
and collectively to hold those responsible for such use
accountable.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Since
the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013) in September
2013, many welcome steps of been taken to destroy the
Syrian regime’s chemical-weapon stockpile. Yet nearly
4/7

06/03/2015

18 months on, we are will still faced with the persistent
credible reports of chemical-weapon use.
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) fact-finding mission concluded
last December with a high degree of confidence that
chlorine gas had been systematically used as a weapon.
It also noted witness reports that these attacks were
carried out by helicopter, which means carried out by the
regime. We cannot accept this as a “business as usual”.
The use of chemical weapons presents a clear threat to
international peace and security. it is a must exactly
100 years since the first recorded use of chlorine as a
weapon of war, in April 1915. It was horrific then and it
is totally unacceptable in the twenty-first century. We
cannot change the past but we can prevent the future
use of these barbaric weapons.
Resolution 2209 (2015) makes clear that use of
chlorine constitutes a breach of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Its use by the regime constitutes yet one
more human rights violation. The regime’s continued
use of barrel bombs, starvation and denial of medical
supplies amount to crimes against humanity. The
United Kingdom as long argued that the situation in
Syria should be referred to the International Criminal
Court but, in the face of vetoes by two other Council
members, that has not been possible. Today’s important
resolution puts the Syrian regime on notice that if we
receive further credible reports of the use of chlorine
as a weapon then the Security Council will take action.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
voted in favor of resolution 2209 (2015), introduced by
the United States, related to the use of chemical weapons
in Syria. The resolution prohibits the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. We voted based on our conviction
that the Security Council must deal with the issue in
accordance with its prerogatives under the Charter
of the United Nations The use of weapons of mass
destruction in Syria would have serious consequences
for the country and the region.
Jordan condemns the use of all chemical weapons
in Syria. It stresses that those who perpetrate such acts
must be prosecuted. These are war crimes and crimes
against humanity, perpetrated against thousands of
innocent civilians. The perpetrators must not be above
the law. Furthermore, Jordan fully the supports the
activities of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons fact-finding mission. We stress
the need to take its conclusions into consideration, in
particular those pertaining to the use of chlorine as
15-06194

06/03/2015

Syria

a weapon in Syria. That is a crime and a violation of
international humanitarian law and of international
criminal law, as well as of resolution 2118 (2013). Such
acts are indeed a threat to international peace and
security. Jordan stresses that measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations should be
imposed in the case of non-implementation of resolution
2118 (2013) and that a monitoring mechanism should
be put in place to ensure that chemical weapons and
facilities are never again used in Syria.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.
I would like to thank the United States delegation
for having prepared resolution 2209 (2015), on the use
of chlorine gas as a weapon of war in the conflict in
Syria. France co-sponsored and voted in favor of this
important resolution for several reasons. First of all, a
year and a half after the adoption resolution 2118 (2013),
the Security Council could not remain silent in the face
of the horror and the unacceptable character of the
attacks using chemical weapons that have continued in
Syria in 2014. Today’s resolution therefore sends a very
strong and clear message against the use of chemical
toxins as a weapon of war in Syria, by any party.
The various investigations of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) that
have confirmed that chlorine gas has been used as a
weapon of war in Syria, along with troubling details
on the systematic presence of helicopters during these
attacks, are profoundly worrisome. We know that only
the Al-Assad regime has such capacities. It is indeed a
tragic irony that it is just as the removal and destruction
of almost all of the chemical weapons stockpiles having
been declared by Syria is being completed that a toxic
material not specifically banned by the Convention on
Chemical Weapons has been used against the civilian
population.
Secondly, through resolution 2209 (2015), the
Security Council supports the important work under way
in The Hague by OPCW experts aiming to shed light on
the allegations on the use of chemical toxic substances
in Syria. However, the allegations are continuing and
we should maintain a high level of vigilance to events
in Syria and urge the Syrian authorities to cooperate
fully with the inquiry.
Finally, we hope that the adoption of resolution
2209 (2015) by the Security Council will send a clear

S/PV.7401

message of deterrence on the ground to all the parties
to the Syrian conflict. The Security Council cannot
and will not stand idly by in the face of violations
of resolution 2118 (2013). It commits through this
resolution to taking the necessary steps under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations against any
party that continues to violate this ban and to continue
to seek to bring to Justice all those responsible for such
crimes. As we commemorate the hundredth anniversary
of the tragic battle of Ypres, where my country, Europe
and the world discovered the horror of chemical war,
we have a duty to reassert that never again shall such
weapons be used.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative the Russian Federation has
requested take the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Unfortunately, the statement made by the the
representative of the United States forces me to make
rather detailed comments, since Ambassador Power
cast the situation in such a light as to suggest that the
onus is exclusively on the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Let me start with resolution 2118 (2013). She
presented the situation as though that resolution were
written in such a way as to prove or demonstrate
something, and that only the Government of Syria had
to comply. That is not the case. If we look at the text
of the resolution, we see that it is clearly addressed to
all parties to the Syrian conflict and that a great deal
is said about non-State actors. That is no coincidence.
Why was it done? It was done because in 2013 two very
serious cases concerning the use of chemical weapons
occurred in Syria. The first occurred on 19 March in
the area of Ghouta, after which the Syrian Government
immediately called for an independent United Nations
inquiry. It was only as a result of the opposition of
several Western members of the Security Council that
the inquiry was not carried out immediately.
There was an even more tragic case on 21 August.
Ambassador Power alleged, although she did not state it
explicitly, that the Syrian Government was behind it. It
was not. We deeply discussed that case in the Council’s
consultations on 16 December, at which we presented
an extensive argument that not only was the Syrian
Government not behind the sarin attack of 21 August,
but that, for technical reasons, it could not have been

15-061945/7

S/PV.7401

Syria

behind it. At the time, our Western colleagues did
not provide any counter-argument, but merely made
unsubstantiated accusations against the Government
of Syria. By the way, our statement at that time can
be found on our Permanent Mission’s website, and I
suggest that Council members familiarize themselves
with it.
As for the fact-finding mission on the use of chlorine,
it seems that even today the United Kingdom and the
United States are pointing fingers at the Government
of Syria with regard to the use of chlorine. That forces
me to share with the Council our experts’ assessments
of that report, which we have already shared in detail
in closed consultations. However, since we have heard
these accusations in the Chamber, I am compelled to
repeat them.
First, the entire inquiry of the OPCW is based on
subjective facts provided by certain witnesses. The
criteria for their selection and their status are not
clear — whether they were civilians or members of
illegal armed groups. Since there was a lack of clarity
with the way evidence was maintained, the OPCW did
not accept from witnesses and survivors samples of
chemicals allegedly found at the site of the barrel bomb
explosions. The clinical condition of certain witnesses
described in the report corresponds to the effects of
chlorine on the human body. At the same time, similar
symptoms could be displayed as a result of poisoning
by other toxic substances. According to the report, the
Mission could not reach a concrete conclusion on which
toxic substances were used in the incidents in question.
Thus, it is impossible to say unequivocally that those
substances contained chlorine.
During the investigation, none of the victims
revealed obvious symptoms. There were no analysis
of the samples immediately after the incidents, nor
was there any pathological assessment of the causes
of death. There are no exact figures on the number
of people who suffered and there is no indication that
they were present at the places where the attacks took
place. It is unclear what kind of detonator was used
for the gas containers, or what the purpose was of the
other chemicals and ammunition — sulphuric acid and
yellow and brown substances.
In the photographs and videos annexed to the
report, all the ammunition appears to be primitive and
homemade. Its manufacture does not correspond to the
information provided by the witnesses with regard to
possible methods of delivery raises questions about the
6/7

06/03/2015

possibility that Government aviation could have been
used. With regard to its construction, the ammunition
are casings containing 50 litres. Their detonation could
not have to have the kind of consequences described
by witnesses. For explosions of such wide coverage,
each barrel bomb would need to contain at least 150
kilograms of trinitrotoluene-equivalent explosives, and
it would be almost impossible to have that amount in
those casings.
The document does not provide information about
the direct links between the overflight of helicopters
and the explosion of ammunition containing chlorine.
Only a few witnesses heard the sound of helicopters.
No one actually saw or captured the dropping of
ordnance on film. In other words, the explosives could
have been exploded on the ground during overflight
by helicopters, especially at night. The barrel bombs
described are not the made of the precursor chemicals
available to the Syrian Army. The use of homemade
explosives by the Syrian Army would be difficult to
explain because they would cause much less damage
than the powerful conventional, aviation-delivered
ordnance that the Syrian Air Force is equipped with.
This is unfortunately a highly technical matter, but
we have two options. We may either adopt a professional
and expert approach. Of course, some people may
find this boring, as the reports need to be discussed
and experts must consider them, which is why no one
reads them; or we can go meet the press and say that
the Syrian Government is at fault. Such a media-based
approach is very advantageous, but it may in practice
protect those who were actually responsible for the acts
that took place on 19 March and 21 August 2013 and the
more recent ones involving the use of chlorine.
We provide these technical details, but our
colleagues find it easier to just smile and say “We know
that it is the Government that is responsible”. Can we
seriously work like that in the Security Council? No. We
must not protect the terrorists who have use chemical
weapons more than once and have used chemical
substances in Iraq and Syria. Yet that is precisely the
position of our colleagues. They are providing de facto
protection to those individuals.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the United States has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I will be
extremely brief. I would just refer Council members and

15-06194

06/03/2015

Syria

anybody watching this meeting to the reports that have
been prepared by the experts of the fact-finding mission
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. I would not myself deign to weigh in at the
level of detail as somebody who is a diplomat and not a
chemical weapons expert. I would note, however, that
the Council, in the wake of the monstrous attack in
August 2013, came together and did decide, very much
with the Russian Federation’s support and partnership,
to take away one party’s chemical weapons. It is a little
strange to take away one party’s entire stockpile of
chemical weapons in the wake of a monstrous attack
and then later claim that the party whose chemical
weapons one has taken away is not implicated in that
attack.

S/PV.7401

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): That logic is completely distorted. I would
even put it another way. It is very strange that the
United States stated that the use of chemical weapons
by the Government of Syria would be a red line and that
it would cause the Unites States to use force, and yet
after the events of 21 August it did not do so. Therefore,
the Al-Assad Government did not cross that red line.
The President of the United States stated that it was a
red line and then he did nothing. That means that the
Al-Assad Government did not use chemical weapons.
It is not just my assumption. Many observers think the
same thing.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.

15-061947/7
