Re11olutions adopted on th., reports uf the Second wmmittee

--------~---------

5. Requests the Secretary-General, without prejudice to the need for organizational changes, to initiate
consultation and studies with States Members of the
United Nations and members of the specialized agencies,
with the specialized agencies, the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the regional economic commissions and
the Committee for Industrial Development, on the
advisability of holding, not later than 1966, an international symposium, preceded, as appropriate, by regional and sub-regional symposia, relating to the
problems of industrialization of developing countries,
and to report to the Economic and Social Council at its
thirty-seventh session and to the General Assembly at
its nineteenth session.
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.
1941 (XVIII). Decentralization of the economic
and social activities of the United Nations
and strengthening of the regional economic
commissions and the United Nations Office
in Beirut

The General Assembly
1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
decentralization of the economic and social activities
of the United Nations and strengthening of the regional
economic commissions, 12 and his first report on the
meeting with the executive secretaries of those commissions13 indicating the steps that have been taken
and his intention of further implementing the policy of
decentralization;
2. Welcomes in particular:
(a) The decision of the Secretary-General that the
executive secretaries will participate actively in the
programming of technical co-operation for the biennium
1965-1966;
( b) The growing number of regional advisers in the
regional secretariats, which enhances the capacity and
the expertise necessary for efficient advisory services
to the Governments at their request;
3. ~~, elcomes the report of ,the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Q'.Iestions to the
General Assembly at its eighteenth session on the
subject,1~ and the very constructive comments and
recommendations contained therein pertaining both to
the concept and to the process of implementing the
policy of decentralization;
4. Endorses the views and recommendations of the
Economic and Social Council set forth in its resolution
955 (XXXVI) of 5 July 1963, particularly paragraph
5 thereof relating to the participation of the regional
secretariats in the preparation for the forthcoming
. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
and paragraph 3 regarding the United Nations Office
in Beirut, and recommends to the Secretary-General
the establishment of a technical assistance co-ordination
unit in the United Nations Office in Beirut;
5. Reaffirms its conviction that all regional economic
commissions, as the principal United Nations bodies in
the economic and social field in the various regions,
12 lbid., Thirty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 12,
document E/3786.
18 /bid., document E/3798.
a Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighteenth Session, Annexes, agenda items 12, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39 and 76,
document A/5584.

31

as well as the United Nations Office in Beirut, have a
special and increasing role to play with regard to the
Expanded Programme and the regular programme of
technical assistance as well as the projects of the Special
Fund, in full co-operation with the resident representatives of the Technical Assistance Board and the
directors of Special Fund programmes wherever
necessary;
6. Reaffirms also that its resolutions 1518 (XV) of
15 December 1960, 1709 (XVI) of 19 December 1%1
and 1823 (XVII) of 18 December 1%2 concerning
decentralization of the economic and social activities
of the United Nations and strengthening of the regional
economic commissions apply to all the existing regional
economic commissions, in so far as they affect Member
States;
7. Endorses the view ,that the regional secretariats
should continue, as appropriate, to increase their contribution to the United Nations technical assistance
programmes, with respect not only to the formulation
of projects but also to their execution and evaluation,
and to undertake some financial and administrative
responsibilities related thereto;
8. Looks forward to the forthcoming study by the
Administrative Management Service concerning the
utilization of staff in the economic and social fields;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to accelerate the
continuing implementation of the policy of decentralization and strengthening of the regional economic commissions set out in General Assembly resolutions 1709
(XVI) and 1823 (XVII) and to submit, as part of
his activities · during the International Co-operation
Year and within the framework of the United Nations
Development Decade, a comprehensive report on this
question for consideration by the Economic and Social
Council at its 1%5 summer session and by the General
Assembly at its twentieth session;
10. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to assess, in the light
of the Secretary-General's report referred to in paragraph 9 above and the study of the Administrative
Management Service, the results of decentralization in
terms of its fundamental objectives as defined in
General Assembly resolutions 1709 (XVI) and 1823
(XVII) and Economic and Social Council resolutions
823 (XXXII) and 955 (XXXVI), and to submit its
report to the Assembly at its twentieth session.
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.
1942 (XVIII). Question of a declaration on international economic co-operation

The General Assembly,
Attaching particular importance to the need for a
declaration on international economic co-operation as
a means of promoting sound, stable and fair economic
relations between all States and of stimulating the
efforts aimed at the economic and social progress of
all peoples of the world,
Taking note of the progress made by the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
ad hoe Working Group established under Council resolution 875 (XXXIII) of 13 and 18 April 1962 in the
elaboration of a draft declaration on the principles of
international economic co-operation,

General A1111embly-Eishteenth Session

------------------------Noting with satisfaction that the Economic and Social
Council, in its resolution 939 (XXXV) of 11 April
1963, has already drawn the attention of the Prepz.ratory
Committee of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development to , · •.f' paragraphs of the report of the
ad hoe Working Grl>1,p15 concerning problems of international trade, specifically paragraphs 58 to 64,
1. Expresses the hope that the examination of those
problems in the Preparatory Committee of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
at the Conference will contribute to the speeding-up
of the final elaboration and adoption of the principles
of international economic co--operation;
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council and,
through it, the ad hoe Working Group, to expedite the
work on the question of a draft declaration reforred to
in Council resolution 939 ( XXXV).
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.
1943 (XVIII). World campaign against hunger,
disease and ignorance

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1710 (XVI) of 19 December
1961, establishing the United Nations Development
Decade,
Convinced that the achievement of the objectives of
the Decade requires investment in human resources
by a world-wide effort against hunger, disease and
ignorance,
Recalling that 1965 has been designated as International Co-operation Year by the General Assembly in
its resolution 1907 (XVIII) of 21 November 1963,
Recognizing the great contribution made by nongovernmental organizations to international co-operation
and to furthering the objectives of the United Nations,
Believing that widespread support can be engendered
for a concerted effort to combat hunger, disease and
ignorance, which would mark the second half of the
Decade,
l. Appeals to all non-governmental organizations to
put their increased enthusiasm, energy and other resources into a world campaign in the basic human fields
of food, health and education, including training, to
start in 1965 and to continue for the remainder of the
United Nations Development Decade;
2. Urges States to facilitate in all appropriate ways
the efforts of their non-governmental organizations
taking part in such a campaign in the fields of food,
health and education and contributing to the achievement of the objectives of the Decade ;
3. Requests the Secretary-GePeral to consult with
the Governments of Member States and the specialized
agencies, as well as wi_th_ non-governmental organizations in consultative status, and to report to the Economic and Social Council at its thirty-seventh session
on the feasibility and the methods of stimulating such
a campaign of non-governmental organizations under
the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind
the following considerations:
(a) The value of closer contact between peoples and
non-governmental organizations in the developed and
the developing countries in order to improve understanding between them ;
111 Official

Records of the Economic and Social C01tncil,
Thirty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document E/3725.

( b) The desirability of developing more active methods of co-operation between the United Nati.ons-including the specialized agencies-and non-governmental
organiz8.tions. designed to extend non-governmental
particip;:ition in the progress of the Decade, particularly
in the fie1ds of food, health and education;
( c) The need to ensure that such a campaign is conducted under conditions which are acceptable to, and
receive the approval and support of, the Governments
of the countries concerned; ·
4. Invites the Economic and Social Council to consider the Secretary-General's report af its thirty-seventh
session. and to t::ike s1 1ch action as it may deem
appropriate.
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1944 (XVIll). International co-operation in the
application of science and technology to
economic and social development

The General Assembly,
Having noted the sustained efforts the Governments
of the developing countries are making in their en?eavour to raise the standards of living of their peoples,
m accordance with the purposes and objectives of the
United Nations Development Decade as set forth in
Economic and Social Council res(\llution 916 (XXXIV)
of 3 August 1962,
Recalling with appreciation the assistance provided
for economic and social development by the United
Nations, the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Special Fund, the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and the
United Nations Children's Fund,
Considering that science and technology, when suitably adapted and applied to the specific conditions of
the developing countries, can make an outstanding contribution to the achievement of the aims of the Decade
and the aspirations of the people,
1. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts and
achievements of the United Nations Conference on the
Application of Science and Technology for the Benefit
of the Less Developed Areas;
2. Welcomes the statements on the subject by the
Secretary-General in his report18 and his address to the
Economic and Social Council on the follow-up to th~
Conference,17 as well as the action taken by the Ad!11-inistrative Committee_ on Co-ordination in creating an
inter-agency _s?b-comm1ttee on science and technology,
and the dec1s1on taken by the Council in resolution
980 A (XXXVI) of 1 August 1963 to seek to intensify
practical efforts in this field by establishing an Advisory
Committee on the Application of Science and Technology to Development ;
3. Requests the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology to Development
to examine, in keeping with its terms of reference
the possibility of establishing a programme on intern.a~
tional co-operation in science and technology for economic and social development, in which scientists and
technicians of the highly developed countries would
as a matter of priority, help to study the problems of
the developing countries and explore suitable solutions
having regard to limitations upon the material resource~
HI Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 15,
document E/3772.
17 Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, 1271st meeting.
