United Nations

A/RES/69/182

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 January 2015

Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 68 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2014
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/69/488/Add.2 and Corr.1)]

69/182. Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 which guarantees the
right to life, liberty and security of person, the relevant provisions of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 2 and other relevant human
rights conventions,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights
Council on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, as set out in Council
resolution 26/12 of 26 June 2014,3
Welcoming the universal ratification of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949, 4 which, alongside international human rights law, provide important legal
frameworks of accountability in relation to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions during armed conflict,
Recalling all its resolutions on the subject of extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions as well as the resolutions of the Commission on Human Rights
and the Human Rights Council on the subject, and emphasizing the importance of
their full and effective implementation,
Recognizing the positive role that regional human rights systems can play in
the global protection against arbitrary deprivation of life,
Noting with deep concern that impunity continues to be a major cause of the
perpetuation of violations of human rights, including extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions,
Noting that enforced disappearances can end up in extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, recalling the importance in this regard of the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, 5 and
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53),
chap. V, sect. A.
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
5
Resolution 61/177, annex.
2

14-67671 (E)

*1467671*

Please recycle

A/RES/69/182

Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions

calling upon all States which have not yet done so to consider signing and ratifying
or acceding to the Convention,
Acknowledging that international human rights law and international
humanitarian law are complementary and mutually reinforcing,
Noting with deep concern the growing number of civilians and persons hors de
combat killed in situations of armed conflict and internal strife,
Noting also with deep concern the continuing instances of the arbitrary
deprivation of life, resulting from, inter alia, the imposition and implementation of
capital punishment when carried out in a manner that violates international law,
Deeply concerned about acts that can amount to extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions committed against persons exercising their rights of peaceful
assembly and freedom of expression in all regions of the world,
Deeply concerned also about killings committed by non-State actors, including
terrorist groups and criminal organizations, which may amount to abuses of
international human rights law and violations of international humanitarian law,
Acknowledging that extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions may under
certain circumstances amount to genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes,
as defined in international law, including in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, 6 and recalling in this regard that each individual State has the
responsibility to protect its populations from such crimes, as set out by the General
Assembly in its resolutions 60/1 of 16 September 2005 and 63/308 of 14 September
2009,
Convinced of the need for effective action to prevent, combat and eliminate the
abhorrent practice of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, which
represent flagrant violations of international human rights law, particularly the right
to life, as well as of international humanitarian law,
1.
Reiterates its strong condemnation of all the extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions that continue to occur throughout the world;
2.
Demands that all States ensure that the practice of extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions is brought to an end and that they take effective action to
prevent, combat and eliminate the phenomenon in all its forms and manifestations;
3.
Reiterates that all States must conduct prompt, exhaustive and impartial
investigations into all suspected cases of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions, identify and bring to justice those responsible, while ensuring the right of
every person to a fair hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal
established by law, grant adequate compensation within a reasonable time to the
victims or their families and adopt all necessary measures, including legal and judicial
measures, to put an end to impunity and prevent the further occurrence of such
executions, as recommended in the Principles on the Effective Prevention and
Investigation of Extralegal, Arbitrary and Summary Executions,7 fully consistent with
their obligations under international law;
4.
Calls upon Governments, and invites intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, to pay greater attention to the work of national-level
_______________
6
7

2/6

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
Economic and Social Council resolution 1989/65, annex.

Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions

A/RES/69/182

commissions of inquiry into extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, with a
view to ensuring the effective contribution of these commissions to accountability and
to combating impunity;
5.
Calls upon all States, in order to prevent extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, to comply with their obligations under the relevant provisions of
international human rights instruments, and also calls upon States which retain the
death penalty to pay particular regard to the provisions contained in articles 6, 14 and
15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights2 and articles 37 and 40
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,8 bearing in mind the safeguards and
guarantees set out in Economic and Social Council resolutions 1984/50 of 25 May
1984 and 1989/64 of 24 May 1989 and taking into account the recommendations of
the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions in his reports to the Council and the General Assembly, including
the report submitted to the Assembly at its sixty-seventh session,9 regarding the need
to respect all safeguards and restrictions, including limitation to the most serious
crimes, stringent respect of due process and fair trial safeguards and the right to seek
pardon or commutation of sentence;
6.

Urges all States:

(a) To take all measures required by international human rights law and
international humanitarian law to prevent loss of life, in particular that of children,
during detention, arrest, public demonstrations, internal and communal violence,
civil unrest, public emergencies or armed conflicts and to ensure that the police, law
enforcement agents, armed forces and other agents acting on behalf of or with the
consent or acquiescence of the State act with restraint and in conformity with
international human rights law and international humanitarian law, including the
principles of proportionality and necessity, and in this regard to ensure that police
and law enforcement officials are guided by the Code of Conduct for Law
Enforcement Officials10 and the Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms
by Law Enforcement Officials;11
(b) To ensure the effective protection of the right to life of all persons, to
conduct, when required by obligations under international law, prompt, exhaustive and
impartial investigations into all killings, including those targeted at specific groups of
persons, such as racially motivated violence leading to the death of the victim, killings
of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities or
because of their sexual orientation or gender identity, killings of persons affected by
terrorism or hostage-taking or living under foreign occupation, killings of refugees,
internally displaced persons, migrants, street children or members of indigenous
communities, killings of persons for reasons related to their activities as human rights
defenders, lawyers, journalists or demonstrators, killings committed in the name of
passion or in the name of honour and killings committed for discriminatory reasons on
any basis, to bring those responsible to justice before a competent, independent and
impartial judiciary at the national or, where appropriate, international level and to
ensure that such killings, including those committed by security forces, police and law
_______________
8

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
A/67/275.
10
Resolution 34/169, annex.
11
See Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Havana, 27 August-7 September 1990: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.91.IV.2), chap. I, sect. B.
9

3/6

A/RES/69/182

Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions

enforcement agents, paramilitary groups or private forces, are neither condoned nor
sanctioned by State officials or personnel;
7.
Affirms the obligation of States, in order to prevent extrajudicial,
summary or arbitrary executions, to protect the lives of all persons deprived of their
liberty in all circumstances and to investigate and respond to deaths in custody;
8.
Encourages States, taking into account the relevant recommendations of
the United Nations and of regional human rights systems, to review, where
necessary, their domestic laws and practices with regard to the use of force in law
enforcement in order to ensure that these laws and practices are in conformity with
their international obligations and commitments;
9.
Urges all States to ensure that all persons deprived of their liberty are
treated humanely and with full respect for international law and that their treatment,
including judicial guarantees and conditions, conform to the Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners 12 and, where applicable, to the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 19494 and the Additional Protocols thereto of 8 June
1977,13 as well as to other pertinent international instruments;
10. Welcomes the International Criminal Court as an important contribution
to ending impunity concerning extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and
noting the growing awareness of the Court worldwide, calls upon those States that
are under an obligation to cooperate with the Court to provide such cooperation and
assistance in the future, in particular with regard to arrest and surrender, the
provision of evidence, the protection and relocation of victims and witnesses and the
enforcement of sentences, further welcomes the fact that 122 States have already
ratified or acceded to and 139 States have signed the Rome Statute of the Court, and
calls upon all those States that have not ratified or acceded to the Rome Statute and
the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal
Court14 to give serious consideration to doing so;
11. Acknowledges the importance of ensuring the protection of witnesses for
the prosecution of those suspected of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions,
urges States to intensify efforts to establish and implement effective witness
protection programmes or other measures, and in this regard encourages the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to develop practical tools
designed to encourage and facilitate greater attention to the protection of witnesses;
12. Encourages Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to organize training programmes and to support projects with a view
to training or educating military forces, law enforcement officers and government
officials in international humanitarian and human rights law connected with their
work and to include a gender and child rights perspective in such training, and
appeals to the international community and requests the Office of the High
Commissioner to support endeavours to that end;

_______________
12
Human Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments, Volume I (First Part), Universal Instruments
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.XIV.4 (Vol. I, Part 1)), sect. J, No. 34.
13
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
14
Ibid., vol. 2271, No. 40446.

4/6

Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions

A/RES/69/182

13. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the Special Rapporteur to
the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council,15 and invites States to take
due consideration of the recommendations contained therein;
14. Commends the important role that the Special Rapporteur plays towards
the elimination of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and encourages
the Special Rapporteur to continue, within his mandate, to collect information from
all concerned, to respond effectively to reliable information that comes before him,
to follow up on communications and country visits and to seek the views and
comments of Governments and to reflect them, as appropriate, in his reports;
15. Acknowledges the important role of the Special Rapporteur in identifying
cases where extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions could amount to genocide
and crimes against humanity or war crimes, and urges the Special Rapporteur to
collaborate with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and, as
appropriate, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, in addressing situations of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
that are of particularly serious concern or in which early action might prevent
further deterioration;
16. Welcomes the cooperation established between the Special Rapporteur
and other United Nations mechanisms and procedures in the field of human rights,
and encourages the Special Rapporteur to continue his efforts in that regard;
17. Urges all States, in particular those that have not done so, to cooperate
with the Special Rapporteur so that his mandate can be carried out effectively,
including by favourably and rapidly responding to requests for visits, mindful that
country visits are one of the essential tools for the fulfilment of his mandate, and by
responding in a timely manner to communications and other requests transmitted to
them by the Special Rapporteur;
18. Expresses its appreciation to those States that have received the Special
Rapporteur, asks them to examine his recommendations carefully, invites them to
inform him of the actions taken on those recommendations, and requests other
States to cooperate in a similar way;
19. Once again requests the Secretary-General to continue to use his best
endeavours in cases where the minimum standards of legal safeguards provided for
in articles 6, 9, 14 and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
appear not to have been respected;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with
adequate human, financial and material resources to enable him to carry out his
mandate effectively, including through country visits;
21. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue, in close collaboration
with the High Commissioner and in conformity with the mandate of the High
Commissioner, established by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/141 of
20 December 1993, to ensure that personnel specialized in international humanitarian
and human rights law form part of United Nations missions, where appropriate, in
order to deal with serious violations of human rights, such as extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions;

_______________
15

See A/68/382 and Corr.1 and A/69/265.

5/6

A/RES/69/182

Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions

22. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit to the General Assembly, at its
seventieth and seventy-first sessions, a report on the situation worldwide in regard
to extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and his recommendations for more
effective action to combat this phenomenon;
23.
session.

Decides to continue its consideration of the question at its seventy-first

73rd plenary meeting
18 December 2014

6/6
