VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

co-operate with the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights;
15. Decides to keep under consideration, during its fortieth session, the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in El Salvador, in order to examine this situation anew in the light of additional elements provided by
the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and
Social Council.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/120. Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Guatemala
The General Assembly,
Reiterating that the Governments of all Member States
have an obligation to promote and protect human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling its resolutions 37/184 of 17 December 1982
and 38/100 of 16 December 1983,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1984/53 of 14 March 1984, 129 in which the Commission expressed its profound concern at the continuing massive violations of human rights in Guatemala,
Mindful of resolution 1984/23 of 29 August 1984 of the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities, 132 in which the Sub-Commission
recognized, inter a/ia, that in Guatemala there existed an
armed conflict of a non-international character, which
stemmed from economic, social and political factors of a
structural nature,
Noting the elections to the Constituent Assembly held in
July 1984, which fulfilled the first stage of the electoral
process for the institution of a new constitutional Government according to the timetable proposed by the Government of Guatemala, and affirming the importance of creating conditions in which the electoral process can be pursued in a climate free from intimidation and terror,
Alarmed at the continuation of politically motivated
violence in the form of killings and kidnappings,
Alarmed also at the large number of persons who have
continued to disappear and the unclear fate of those
reported to have been tried by the special tribunals, now
abolished,
Welcoming the co-operation of the Government of Guatemala with the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights in the fulfilment of his mandate and noting
with satisfaction that a list of cases dealt with by the special tribunals has now been handed over to the Special
Rapporteur,
l. Takes note of the interim report by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Guatemala, 133
prepared in accordance with Commission on Human
Rights resolution 1984/53;
2. Reiterates its deep concern at the continuing grave
and widespread violations of human rights in Guatemala,
particularly the violence against non-combatants, the disappearances and killings and the widespread repression,
including the practice of torture, the displacement of rural
and indigenous people, their confinement in development
centres and their forced participation in civilian patrols,
organized and controlled by the armed forces;
132 See E/CN.4/ 1985/3-E/CN.4/Sub.211984/43, chap. XVIII. sect. A.

213

3. Once again urges the Government of Guatemala to
take effective measures to ensure that all its authorities and
agencies, including its security forces, fully respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms;
4. Renews its call upon the Government of Guatemala
to refrain from the forceful displacement of people belonging to rural and indigenous populations and from the practice of coercing them into participation in civilian patrols,
leading to human rights violations;
5. Welcomes the fact that many of the persons who
were tried by the special tribunals have now been released
and invites the Government of Guatemala to publish the
list of cases dealt with by the special tribunals;

6. Requests the Government of Guatemala to investigate and clarify the fate of all persons who have been subjected to involuntary or forced disappearances and are still
unaccounted for and to put an end to arbitrary detention
and imprisonment in secret places;
7. Urges the Government of Guatemala to establish
the necessary conditions to ensure the independence of the
judicial system and to enable the judiciary to uphold the
rule of law, including the right of habeas corpus, and to
prosecute and punish speedily and effectively those found
responsible for violations of human rights, including
members of the military and security forces;
8. Calls upon the Government of Guatemala to allow
an independent and impartial body to function in the
country to monitor and investigate alleged human rights
violations;
9. Reiterates its appeal to all parties concerned in Guatemala to ensure the application of the relevant norms of
international humanitarian law applicable in armed conflicts of a non-international character to protect the civilian population and to seek an end to all acts of violence;
10. Appeals to the Government of Guatemala to allow
international humanitarian organizations to render their
assistance in investigating the fate of persons who have
disappeared, with a view to informing their relatives of
their whereabouts, to visit detainees or prisoners and to
bring assistance to the civilian population in areas of
conflict;
11. Calls upon Governments to refrain from supplying
arms and other military assistance to Guatemala as long as
serious human rights violations in that country continue;
12. Urges the Government of Guatemala to ensure a
climate free from intimidation and terror which would
allow the free participation of all in the political process;
13. Invites the Government of Guatemala and other
parties concerned to continue co-operating with the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights;
14. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
study carefully the report of its Special Rapporteur, as well
as other information pertaining to the human rights situation in Guatemala, and to consider further steps for securing effective respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all in that country;
15. Decides to continue its examination of the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Guatemala at its fortieth session.

JO 1st plenary meeting
14 December 1984
DJ A/391635. annex.
