S/PV.7090

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7090th meeting

Wednesday, 18 December 2013, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Carrera
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Combating drug trafficking in the Sahel and in West Africa
Letter dated 5 December 2013 from the Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/728)

13-62503 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1362503*

S/PV.7090

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

In a growing number of countries, organized criminal
networks also fuel the activities of terrorist and
extremist groups. Corruption, porous borders and the
lack of resources and cooperation only compound the
problem.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Combating drug trafficking in the Sahel and in
West Africa
Letter dated 5 December 2013 from the
Permanent Representative of France
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/728)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Côte d’Ivoire
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Yuri Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Said Djinnit,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Téte
António, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/728, which contains the text of
a letter dated 5 December 2013 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, containing a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I recognize the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I give him the
floor.
The Secretary-General: I welcome this initiative to
focus on drug trafficking in West Africa and the Sahel.
Around the world, drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime threaten security, undermine respect
for the rule of law and jeopardize peace and stability.

2/26

18/12/2013

Given the reach of drug-trafficking networks and
their rapidly evolving methods, we must constantly
refine our understanding to formulate the most effective
response.
We face a particular challenge in West Africa and the
Sahel. Our latest estimates have identified $1.25 billion
of cocaine transiting through West Africa each year. A
rising portion of the drugs reaching West African coasts
use the Sahel route on the way to the Mediterranean.
In a particularly disturbing development, West Africa
is no longer just a transit route for drug traffickers,
but a growing destination, with more than 1 million
users of illicit drugs. Rising consumption aggravates
an already-challenging public health environment and
threatens socioeconomic development.
Our work is guided by the Conventions against
organized crime, drug trafficking and corruption, as
well as the international instruments on terrorism,
which must be implemented in full compliance with
human rights standards and norms. I urge all Member
States to ratify and fully implement those conventions
and instruments without delay.
We also need to generate partnerships to support
victims. Engagement with civil society and community
groups is critical. There is also a need for a strong
transatlantic approach that combines efforts from Latin
America, West Africa and Europe. In too many places,
however, weak intergovernmental cooperation stands
in marked contrast to the closely networked structure of
transnational criminal groups. We must help countries
of the region strengthen their capacities to ensure public
safety and security. At the same time, we must act
against money-laundering and the use of illicit wealth
to commit additional crimes such as human trafficking
and arms smuggling.
The United Nations is taking action in all these areas
and supporting projects that offer technical advice and
build national capacities. These include initiatives to
analyse containers in ports, as well as the movement of
goods at airports. We are working with Member States to
stop the movement of precursor chemicals used to make
illegal drugs, while also boosting efforts to dismantle
criminal networks. We are also helping with drug

13-62503

18/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

treatment, prevention and rehabilitation programmes.
Above all, we need a coordinated approach, and action
in this area is an important part of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel. In the same vein, our
law enforcement and health efforts should fully support
the Economic Community of West African States
Regional Action Plan to Address the Growing Problem
of Illicit Drug Trafficking, Organized Crime, and Drug
Abuse in West Africa.
Drug trafficking presents an enormous challenge to
peace, stability and economic and social development
in West Africa and the Sahel. We must promote a
coherent, integrated and pragmatic international
response, rooted in sustainable development and full
respect for human rights. I encourage Member States to
actively engage in a broad and open discussion leading
up to the September 2016 General Assembly special
session on the world drug problem.
As we work to advance the post-2015 development
agenda, the challenges of organized crime must be a
fundamental part of the discussion. Our aim must be
not only to relieve citizens of the burden of crime,
but also to lift them out of the conditions that enable
crime to grow. That means addressing corruption,
poverty and the lack of essential services. It means
providing better education, promoting the rule of law
and expanding opportunities for women, young people
and marginalized groups.
Solutions are not easy and will take time. Let us
commit ourselves to working together for dignity and
a better sustainable future for all of the people of West
Africa and the Sahel.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov (spoke in French): I should like at the
outset to thank the French presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this important meeting on
drug trafficking in the Sahel and West Africa. I also
wish to thank the Security Council for integrating the
fight against drug trafficking and organized crime
into the mandates of special political missions and
peacekeeping operations in West Africa. I further
congratulate the countries of West Africa and Sahel
that have demonstrated their firm resolve to meeting
the challenges posed by drugs and crime in the region,
as well as the international community for its important
contribution in this regard.

S/PV.7090

Today, illicit drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime threaten peace, security, the rule of
law and development in many parts of the world. West
Africa and the Sahel are particularly vulnerable because
of complex and interrelated problems relating in
particular to political instability, porous borders and the
vastness of the region. An assessment of threats posed
by transnational organized crime in West Africa was
presented by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) at the forty-second ordinary session
of the Authority of Heads of State and Government
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) early this year.
The assessment confirmed the ongoing threat
posed by cocaine trafficking from Latin America to
European markets. Nearly 33 tons of cocaine transited
through West Africa in 2010, including 18 tons transited
to Europe with a market value of approximately
$1.25 billion. This profit has provided criminals with
revenue far exceeding the national security budgets of
many countries of the region. Traffickers have been able
to defeat law enforcement detection and suppression
measures by adapting their operational procedures,
including by using including shipping and containers,
as well as commercial flights and private aircraft.
The UNODC World Drug Report 2013 confirms
that the global phenomenon of drugs is a source of
concern in West Africa. Heroin also passes through
the area en route to lucrative markets. It has also been
found that some of the methamphetamine seized in East
Asia comes from West Africa. It is further noted that
the prevalence in the region of fraudulent medicine,
which poses a serious threat to public health and safety,
remains a concern. Other scourges involved include
the smuggling of migrants, trafficking in persons, the
smuggling of firearms, cigarettes and gasoline, and
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
These threats and the enormous profits generated
have a detrimental impact on efforts to achieve security
and development in the region. They compromise good
governance, undermine legitimate economies and
fuel corruption. The funds generated allow criminal
organizations to support their operations and to support
terrorist activities in the region. Local drug use and the
resulting health problems are intensified, as evidenced
by the growing number of HIV infections attributable
to injecting drug use.
The countries of the region are fully aware of the
threats posed by these scourges, especially to national

13-625033/26

S/PV.7090

Peace and security in Africa

security and stability and the credibility of institutions.
The international community has acknowledged the
urgency of the situation, particularly because of the
proliferation of arms in the Sahel and the ever-more
evident links between criminal organizations and
extremist and terrorist groups in the region.
The Secretary-General has called on several
occasions for greater support to West Africa so as to
meet the threats to its security. The Security Council
has also expressed its concern at the growing impact of
drug trafficking and organized crime on humanitarian
aid and peacebuilding efforts in the region, and has
repeatedly recalled the need for greater international
cooperation.
These concerns are presented in the report of
the Secretary-General to the Security Council on
transnational organized crime and illicit drug trafficking
in West Africa and the Sahel region (S/2013/359). As
noted in the report, a number of initiative to fight drug
trafficking, organized crime and drug abuse in West
Africa — such as the African Union Plan of Action
on Drug Control and Crime Prevention 2007-2012,
the ECOWAS Political Declaration and the ECOWAS
Regional Action Plan to Address the Growing Problem
of Illicit Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime in
West Africa — have been launched in recent years to
address these threats in all their forms. It is on that
basis that ONUDC developed its Regional Programme
Regional Programme for West Africa 2012-2014, which
constitutes the main part of our technical assistance to
the countries of the region.
UNODC provides this support through a wide
range of regional, subregional and national projects,
including the West Africa Coast Initiative, the
Airport Communication Project, the Global Container
Control Programme, the Judicial Regional Platform
of the Sahel, the network of central authorities and
prosecutors in West Africa, and the initiative to
strengthen criminal justice systems in the Sahel. All our
initiatives are implemented in close consultation with
the Governments of the region and in cooperation with
our regional and international partners, including the
United Nations Office for West Africa, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of
Political Affairs, the World Customs Organization and
INTERPOL.
Together with ECOWAS and the United Nations
Office for West Africa, UNODC organized a regional

4/26

18/12/2013

donors conference, held in Abidjan in October. The
conference made an urgent appeal for strengthening
regional cooperation and national capacities for
controlling land, sea and air borders, and for
strengthening criminal justice systems and promoting
judicial cooperation. Those who fund and commit acts
related to drug trafficking and other serious crimes must
be brought to justice in accordance with international
rules and standards. First and foremost, that requires
greater commitment and more resources, given the size
of the challenges facing the region and the difficulty of
intervening in unstable and post-conflict environments.
I would like to thank our partners and donors for their
support for UNODC activities, including our Regional
Programme for West Africa and the West Africa
Coast Initiative. Nonetheless, it is clear that additional
funding is needed to address those pressing threats.
As the Secretary-General’s report emphasizes, the
fight against drug trafficking and crime in West Africa
and the Sahel should be integrated with larger-scale
efforts to address challenges such as governance and the
rule of law, poverty and youth unemployment. Today’s
meeting is an excellent opportunity to assess priorities
and challenges, enhance synergies and decide on the
best strategies for responding to the situation. Even
considering the budgetary discipline prevailing in the
majority of countries around the world, I would like to
urge everyone here to reflect on our common and shared
responsibility to tackle the challenges posed by drug
trafficking, transnational organized crime, corruption,
money-laundering and terrorism in the region. For its
part, UNODC is ready to give its continued support to
the States of West Africa and the Sahel.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Djinnit.
Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I would like to join
the Secretary-General and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
in welcoming the initiative of the French presidency
to hold this meeting devoted to the fight against drug
trafficking in the Sahel and West Africa.
West Africa, which has made remarkable progress
on the road to stabilization since the fratricidal
conflicts of the 1990s and the crises that followed, is
now dealing with a combination of growing security
threats. The various types of transnational organized
crime, particularly drug trafficking, maritime piracy
and terrorism, are scourges that reinforce one another

13-62503

18/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

in an environment of fragile State institutions and
splintered societies. In the Sahel, and Mali in particular,
the consequences have already been felt. For several
years now, thanks to its technical expertise, UNODC
has tabulated the continued gains that drug trafficking
has made in West Africa and the Sahel.
When I started my job, in 2008, I discovered the
extent of the problem and at the same time realized how
poor the level of awareness of it was at the levels both
of Government and civil society. At the time, we were
concerned about the fact that West Africa was one of
the principal transit routes for cocaine travelling from
Latin America to Europe. But UNODC was already
worried about the risk of increased drug consumption
in West Africa. That prediction has unfortunately come
true, since, as the Secretary-General just emphasized,
drug consumption is now a genuine threat in West
Africa.
(spoke in English)
Against that background, I am pleased to note that
in recent years, mobilization against the threat posed
by drug trafficking and organized crime has increased,
thanks to the combined efforts of all stakeholders. The
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA),
together with UNODC, has supported the efforts of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) leading to the adoption by ECOWAS
in 2008 of a regional plan of action on organized
crime and illicit drug rrafficking and abuse, recently
extended to the end of 2014. In 2009, in order to support
the plan of action’s swift implementation, and jointly
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
INTERPOL, we also launched the West Africa Coast
Initiative (WACI), which so far is responsible for
establishing three transnational crime units in Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Guinea-Bissau, with concrete results
at various levels. The most recent meeting of the WACI
policy committee, which I co-chaired with ECOWAS in
Abidjan on 29 October, with the participation of UnderSecretary-General Fedotov, showed renewed resolve on
the part of Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea to establish their
own transnational crime units.
In addition, and in line with its mandate, UNOWA
has worked closely with other United Nations entities
to provide support to the development of subregional
strategies to combat cross-border security threats,
including illicit drug trafficking. One example is the
mobilization of the Gulf of Guinea countries to work

S/PV.7090

towards a regional strategy on piracy and crime at sea,
leading in June to the Yaoundé Summit of Central and
West African Heads of State and Government.
Drug trafficking, as was stressed earlier today, is
also the focus of the second goal, that of security, of
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
In that regard, I would like to commend the ECOWAS
leadership, especially President Alassane Ouattara
and Ambassador Kadré Ouédraogo, President of the
ECOWAS Commission, for their commitment to
enhancing the regional organization’s contribution
to efforts aimed at preventing and fighting drug
trafficking and organized crime, including through the
activation of the ECOWAS plan of action on organized
crime and illicit drug trafficking and abuse. I also want
to commend the European Union and other bilateral
donor partners for their support for the implementation
process of the plan of action.
I would like to take this opportunity to encourage
West African civil society to take an active part
in efforts aimed at preventing and combating drug
trafficking and organized crime, taking a cue from
the West African Drugs Commission, established by
the Kofi Annan Foundation in January. UNOWA will
continue to work closely with UNODC and ECOWAS
to advocate for effective regional initiatives and focus
the attention of West African leaders and civil society
on the threat posed by drug trafficking and organized
crime. In that regard, I want to encourage efforts
aimed at promoting effective cooperation among the
countries of West Africa and the Sahel and between
them and international partners, as well as at improving
coordination among donors supporting those efforts,
and I would like to acknowledge the work of the Group
of Eight Plus Group of Experts in that area.
(spoke in French)
I would like to reiterate the commitment of the
United Nations Office for West Africa to contributing
to the collective efforts to prevent and combat organized
crime and drug trafficking.
The President (spoke in French): The Council
has before it a statement by the President on behalf
of the Council on the subject of today’s meeting. In
accordance with the understanding reached among the
members of the Council, I shall take it that the members
of the Security Council agree to the statement, which
will be issued as a document of the Security Council
under the symbol S/PRST/2013/22.

13-625035/26

S/PV.7090

Peace and security in Africa

I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Carrera (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to be participating once again in a meeting of
the Security Council when Guatemala is 12 days from
concluding its tenure as an elected member for the
biennium 2011-2012.
Let me begin by thanking Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Executive Director Yury Fedotov of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa
Said Djinnit for their respective briefings. We also
thank Ambassador Gérard Araud of France, President
of the Security Council for the month of December, for
his lucid concept note (S/2013/728, annex).
The concept note draws attention to the important
similarities shared by West Africa and Central America
as regions that are gravely affected as countries
of transit between the main markets of production
and consumption of illicit drugs. In the case of the
Mesoamerican territory, that involves 90 per cent of
the drugs that move from the South to the North of the
American continent. That situation of transit countries
has led to the proliferation of narco-trafficking
organizations, accompanied by much criminal violence
and especially violent homicides in our territory.
Fortunately, however, in the past three years Guatemala
has a chieved a significant reduction in homicides,
thanks to the strengthening of our security and justice
institutions.
Undoubtedly, the engine that drives the drug
trade is the same one at the global level, whether in
producing, consuming or transit countries, that is,
the immense profits generated by the trafficking in
narcotics. It must be said that the corrosive power of
major financial flows originates mainly in consuming
countries. Equally important is the flow of weapons
from consuming countries that pours into transit and
producing countries. That is why it is no exaggeration
to say that arms trafficking and the illegal financial
flows from the North to the South are undermining the
foundations of democratic institutions, not only in West
Africa and the Sahel but, with to varying degrees, also
in our region.
To date, the response framework at the global
level has been based on a prohibitionist approach in
regard to the market for drugs. The principal strategy
of that framework entails repression and interdiction

6/26

18/12/2013

through the criminal justice system. From Guatemala’s
perspective, with the support of other countries in the
Latin American region and the rest of the world that
share the same view, we are seeking a new model to
address the global drug problem, one that is centred on
regulation, public health, reducing harm and seeking
the well-being of citizens, all based on respect for
human rights.
We need to move from partial and inefficient
responses towards an integrated response that provides
us with better results. To that end, we need to have
a broad discussion at the global level that aims to
find alternatives to the existing framework, which
unfortunately has failed to provide more and better
results. It was with that goal in mind that, in our western
hemisphere, the Declaration of Antigua, Guatemala, of
the General Assembly of the Organization of American
States, signed in June 2013, marked a milestone that
has served to officially establish an intergovernmental
debate on the drug problem in the Americas. That effort
continues to take root in regional forums such as the
Inter-American Drug Abuse Commission (CICAD) and
the Pan American Health Organization.
It is clear that cooperation is necessary to confront
the world drug problem — just as today’s concept note
suggests and as stated in the presidential statement
issued by the Council on 21 February 2012 under
the presidency of Togo (S/PRST/2013/2). We note
that there is broad interregional cooperaiton in West
Africa and the Sahel region, promoted especially by
the Economic Community of West African States. In
the Americas as well, we have numerous mechanisms
of intraregional cooperation under the aegis CICAD
and the Organization of American States. However, in
spite of the enormous commonalities between the two
regions in that matter, there is little or no cooperation
among different regions of the world. In our view, that
situation should be addressed because, for example,
West Africa and the Americas have much to learn from
each others’ accumulated experiences through an open
dialogue. I should point out that such South-South
cooperation should be complemented by a healthy dose
of cooperation from the principal consuming countries.
In order to advance the interregional dialogue,
Guatemala has already expressed its readiness to support
the establishment of forums for dialogue between the
Americas and the countries of West Africa, with a view
to jointly identifying and developing new policies and
strategies to address the global drug problem.

13-62503

18/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7090

We all agree that combating illicit drug trafficking
is a major challenge for all of humakind and one that
we must decisively address. The special session of
the General Assembly on the global drug problem,
mandated by the Assembly to be held in 2016, will
provide us an exceptional opportunity to hold such a
broad and open debate at the global level.

in 2013 to recognize the presence of the Foreign
Minister of Guatemala and to warmly acknowledge
the very valuable contribution that his country, as well
as the other four outgoing members of the Security
Council — Azerbaijan, Morocco, Pakistan and
Togo — have made to maintaining international peace
and security over the past two years.

As I said at the beginning of my statement,
Guatemala will conclude its term as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council in a few days. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to bid farewell
to members and to say that it has been a privilege to be
able to contribute to the noble and irreplaceable work
of the Council to maintain international peace and
security.

Organized crime across the Sahel and West Africa
is a multimillion dollar business that damages the social
fabric, not just in the Sahel and West Africa as a region
of transit but also in the destination countries — in
Europe, the Middle East and North America. Drug
trafficking is one of the most serious aspects of that
organized crime activity in the region. In February, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime estimated
that some 18 tons of cocaine transited West Africa
every year. While down from its peak of 47 tons in
2007, evidence shows that the trend is again upwards.

The Council has been criticized for its obvious
shortcomings, its inequitable composition and its
insufficiently transparent working methods. Many of
those criticisms are merited, and there is little doubt
that this organ needs to adapt to the new global realities.
We ourselves have formulated specific ideas on the
matter and expressed them in other instances. For now,
however, the Security Council is the only thing we have
in the multilateral setting to maintain international
order that. With all its imperfections, the Council has
succeeded in avoiding major global conflagrations and,
at the same time, has managed to mitigate and often
overcome conflicts of limited geographical scope.
It has been a source of profound satisfaction for my
country to be part of this organ for the very first time.
We trust that, in the not too distant future, we shall
return. We believe in all due modesty that we have made
a contribution to the collective work of the Council. We
leave enriched for the experience we have gained.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank the President for convening this important
discussion. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his personal engagement and his presence at
today’s debate. I also thank Executive Director Fedotov
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Djinnit for their statements this morning. Today’s
briefings highlight one of the core challenges facing the
Sahel and are relevant to the wider discussion on the
region held earlier this month (see S/PV.7081).
We welcome the adoption of today’s presidential
statement (S/PRST/2013/22).
Permit me to take the opportunity of what might
be the last formal meeting of the Security Council

The United Kingdom’s National Crime Agency
estimates that between 13 and 15 per cent of
Europe-bound cocaine, worth over $1 billion on arrival
in the European Union, transits West Africa. But it is
no longer just cocaine; we are also seeing an increase
in heroin transiting through West Africa, mainly by
couriers from South-West Asia, including Iran and
Turkey. Much of it is destined for Europe and some
for North America. Meanwhile, cannabis smuggling
through the Sahel remains a serious concern, with its
destination markets as far afield as Egypt, Israel and
even further east.
In addition to revenue raised from drug trafficking,
cigarette smuggling and kidnapping for ransom provide
terrorists with funding to continue their activities.
Yesterday, the United Kingdom became the fortieth
country to sign the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in
Tobacco Products, and we encourage all Member States
to sign that important Protocol. The United Kingdom
has also proposed a Security Council resolution
reminding Member States of their obligation not to pay
ransoms to kidnappers that could be used for terrorist
purposes. We hope that the Council will agree on that
draft resolution shortly.
To tackle the scourge of organized crime, we
must take a regional and holistic approach. We must
disrupt crime by all available means, not just through
law enforcement and prosecution, but by addressing
the enablers of crime. Of course, we face important
challenges. Widespread corruption continues to hinder

13-625037/26

S/PV.7090

Peace and security in Africa

effective State action and attracts organized criminals
who exploit the distinctions between jurisdictions and
corruption within them. Organized crime groups exploit
instability and weak governance. Their activity further
undermines fragile States and Governments. Lack of
capacity and funding in law enforcement agencies and
limited intelligence-gathering capability across the
region create gaps that organized criminals can exploit.
Tackling the aforementioned challenges head on
will give regional Governments a better chance at
dealing with organized crime. Strengthening State
institutions will enable them to deliver basic services,
reducing the attraction of crime. That activity must be
matched by deeper regional cooperation to sustainably
disrupt transnational criminal networks. We need to
focus our actions, first, on building good governance
to set the preconditions for a successful response.
Secondly, the regional ability to share information
and conduct investigations needs to be strengthened.
Thirdly, criminal justice capacity needs to be built.
Fourthly, joint action on borders and cross-border
traffic needs to be improved.
During 2013, the United Kingdom’s presidency of
the Group of Eight (G8) has built on the work of previous
presidencies by coordinating the action of the Group of
Eight Plus Friends of the Gulf of Guinea on organized
crime in West Africa. We have established a network
of criminal justice advisers that will help to strengthen
the rule of law and improve prosecutions by local
authorities. We have also proposed a donor coordination
mechanism that will improve strategic coordination,
particular with the Economic Community of West
African States. Let us commit today to redoubling our
efforts to combat organized crime to enable the region
to rid itself of the scourge.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by congratulating the French
presidency on having scheduled today’s debate on drug
trafficking in the Sahel and West Africa, an issue that
intersects with several crises besetting the region.
We welcome the sustained attention that the
Security Council has given to the problem in our part of
the continent throughout this year. I would like to take
this opportunity to extend my thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for his personal participation in our debate
today and for his commitment to bringing stability,
peace and development to our continent. I would also
like to thank Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director of the

8/26

18/12/2013

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
and Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa, for their briefings.
Since 2004, the reports of several institutions, in
particular the UNODC, confirm that the Sahel and
West Africa regions have become crossroads and hubs
for trafficking in various drugs. February’s report
of the UNODC, “Transnational organized crime in
West Africa: A threat assessment”, states that cocaine
traffickers have found in West Africa and the Sahel a
springboard for transferring their illegal activities to
the other side of the Atlantic. The statistics provided by
Mr. Fedotov this morning on the quantities in transit in
that region of Africa are alarming and leave no doubt as
to the entrenched position of drug cartels in that part of
the continent. One explanation for that is that the region
is less risky than traditional routes leading to the main
consumer markets of the world due to the vast size of
the territory and the lack of resources made available
by countries in the region to combat trafficking.
While they are hubs for this type of trafficking,
the Sahel and West Africa have in recent years
become places of destination, with illicit amphetamine
laboratories being set up and negative psychological,
social and economic consequences affecting the local
population. It is now undeniable that drug trafficking
feeds and is fed by other illicit trafficking, such
as trafficking in arms and human beings, illegal
immigration, piracy, transnational crime, terrorism,
rebellion and separatism, and is therefore a factor for
destabilization and insecurity in West Africa.
The extent of its effects of the phenomenon go
beyond West Africa, the Sahel and the Maghreb to other
parts of our continent. In order to tackle the cross-border
threat, several initiatives have emerged, including
the Regional Response Action Plan of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
West Africa Coast Initiative. My country, aware of the
challenge caused by transatlantic drug trafficking and
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, took the initiative in 2009,
to implement a framework of cooperation amongst
the 22 African States on the Atlantic shore in order
to respond to the challenges arising from the Atlantic
Ocean.
In November, my country hosted the Second
Regional Ministerial Conference on border security
between Sahel, West African and Maghreb States. The

13-62503

18/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

outcome of the Conference (S/2013/707, annex) was a
significant contribution to a coordinated and unified
response to the scourge of drug trafficking, terrorism
and organized crime in the region. We expect that the
forthcoming summit of the States of the Sahel and the
Sahara in Rabat will further contribute to the fight we
share.
It is not possible to combat drug trafficking and its
by-products — organized crime and terrorism — without
addressing its underlying causes, namely, poverty,
illiteracy and a lack of future prospects, particularly
for young people. The States of the Sahel region and
West Africa have fully understood that the fight cannot
prove successful without cooperation and unlimited,
inclusive regional cooperation. The establishment
of the Maritime Analysis and Operations Centre Narcotics by the European Union and the United States
has made it possible to stop the transfer of enormous
quantities of cocaine to Africa. Similarly, initiatives
such as the adoption of the ECOWAS Regional Action
Plan, the West Africa Coast Initiative, the Container
Control Programme launched by UNODC and the
World Customs Organization (WCO) in Ghana and
Senegal, and the Airport Communication Programme
organized by the UNODC, INTERPOL and the WCO
have largely stanched the scourge of drugs. The effort
must be pursued and intensified, and the UNODC, as
the leader in the fight, is called upon to play a central
role.
Combating drug trafficking in the Sahel and West
Africa is part and parcel of the strategy established by
the United Nations to meet the challenges the States in
the region are facing. To implement the strategy, the
States in the region have displayed their commitment
and determination to meet the challenges, individually
by taking an ownership stake in the aims of the
strategy, and collectively by means of subregional and
regional organizations to which they belong. We trust
that the international community will provide full
support to bringing about the success of the strategy in
the interests of peace, stability, enhanced democracy
and the rule of law in Africa. I assure the Council of
Morocco’s commitment to making its contribution to
the effort at all levels and every step of the way.
I am pleased to be able almost to end Morocco’s
term on the Security Council with a debate on Africa.
Africa, our continent, needs the United Nations to
support its efforts to bring about peace, stability and
development. Every day, Africa shows its ability to

S/PV.7090

make progress in all areas, be it the peaceful settlement
of disputes, development, strengthening democracy
or national reconciliation. Africa must continue to
enjoy the support and assistance of the international
community in order to address those challenges and to
fully play its international role.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the French presidency for having
convened this Council meeting on the relevant topic of
combating illegal drug trafficking in West Africa and
the Sahel. We are grateful to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
Mr. Fedotov, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Said Djinnit, for participating
in this meeting and for their thorough briefings.
We were interested to read the report of the
Secretary-General on transnational organized crime
and illegal drug trafficking in West Africa and the
Sahel (S/2013/359). We welcome its inclusion of a wide
range of proposals of the Russian delegation made at the
Council’s open debate in February 2012 on the impact
of transnational organized crime on peace, security
and stability in West Africa and the Sahel region (see
S/PV.6717). We support the recommendations of the
report on the importance of universalizing the three
main anti-narcotics agreements on strengthening the
current international narcotics control system and on
providing assistance in that area to the International
Narcotics Control Board. We would also like to note
the key role of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in
combating narcotics.
We see that the report notes an improving trend in
the narcotics situation in the region given the decrease
in the volume of drug trafficking from Latin America to
Europe through the countries of Africa. However, in our
opinion, the overall situation of illegal drug trafficking
on the African continent is far from satisfactory. That is
an area for the transit of heroin and cocaine, which has
become a new route for drug trafficking. The region
is increasingly becoming a centre for the producton of
synthetic narcotics. Drug trafficking in the region is
becoming actively linked to terrorism and transnational
organized crime being fuelled by the spread of weapons
in the region from Libya. The threat of drugs in the
region of West Africa and the Sahel can be effectively
countered only through the coordinated actions of
the entire international community, led by the United
Nations.

13-625039/26

S/PV.7090

Peace and security in Africa

In that regard, we support the regime of targeted
sanctions established on the basis of resolutions 1735
(2006), 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009), against Al-Qaida
individuals and entities financed by extremist groups
in the region through funds received from the illegal
narcotics trade. We understand, however, that limited
measures alone will not solve the problem. We are
therefore placing our hopes in the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel, which is expected to
be a significant factor in stabilizing the situation in the
region through comprehensive technical assistance to
its States.
In providing such assistance, we must duly consider
the national priorities of State recipients. Our pursuit of
alternative ways to combat such criminal activities is a
priority in fighting drug trafficking. We need realistic
and effective programmes to create jobs in the region
that will narrow the social basis for trafficking. In that
regard, effective assistance could be provided by the
business community. A significant role in developing
a comprehensive socioeconomic strategy for the
States of the Sahel could also be played by making
use of the capabilities of agencies such as the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Increased attention should of course be paid to
the marginalization and radicalization of the young.
The focus of working with the youth in West Africa
and the Sahel must be not only on resolving the
employment issue but also on education, including the
implementation of relevant projects under the aegis of
the United Nations and UNESCO.
The capacities of the security and law-enforcement
forces of the States of West Africa and the Sahel must be
significantly strengthened. In that regard, it is important
to improve border security, step up information
exchange and train law-enforcement personnel. We
support the United Nations and UNODC in their work
with the African Union and the Economic Community
of West African States, as well as other African regional
agencies, in the joint effort to fight crime. For our part,
we are also undertaking efforts to provide assistance to
African States to prepare professional staff for careers
in health care and law enforcement. We are interested
in further developing such cooperation.
We support the presidential statement adopted
today on the issue of combating illegal drug trafficking

10/26

18/12/2013

in West Africa and the Sahel (S/PRST/2013/22). We are
ready to continue constructive dialogue and effective
cooperation on countering narcotics with all United
Nations Member States. In particular, we are planning
important events on the issues of anti-drug cooperation
as part of the upcoming Russian presidency of the
Group of Eight.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting on the issue of drug trafficking in West
Africa and the Sahel, a topic to which my country
attaches great importance. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa for their statements.
Drug trafficking, like all transnational criminal
organization, is a thorny issue, whose effect on the
sociopolitical situation and the economies of States is
halting their ability to develop, grow and prosper. In
addition to institutional destabilization, drug trafficking
also brings with it devastating consequences for the
health and cohesion of local communities.
For more than two decades, West Africa and the
Sahel region have been known to be a preferred area
for drug traffickers. Given their geographical location
near the sea and with Atlantic air connections, those
two regions attract international groups and networks
involved in transnational crime, drug trafficking and
other criminal activities. The particular situations of a
number of countries in the region have even shown that
no trade activity can generate as much income as drug
trafficking. The money made from that trafficking
often and unfortunately becomes part of the financing
of armed activism and terrorism in the Sahel region and
West Africa. The violence and political crises that some
countries in the region are facing, at times fuelled by
the desire of some drug traffickers to control the State,
demonstrate the potential destabilizing effect of that
scourge on countries.
The renewed interest of drug traffickers in West
Africa and the Sahel following a change in the strategic
orientation of Latin American drug cartels is explained
by clear evidence of vulnerability linked to the lack of
the rule of law, corruption and insufficient resources
to deal with it, as well as poverty, all of which hamper
the successful fight against drug traffickers. Drug
trafficking networks in the two regions, apart from the

13-62503

18/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

experience of practices gained in other countries, have
acquired the ability to modify their modus operandi
to circumvent the actions of States to track those
networks. They are also prone to vary the transit and
distribution routes on account of changes taking place
on the ground.
Moreover, the environments in West Africa and the
Sahel region are characterized by a number of structural
issues, such as porous borders and informal networks
of activities that promote drug trafficking and thwart
national development efforts. The combination of those
factors has therefore encouraged the proliferation
of local criminal groups and transnational criminal
organizations. In the light of that situation, we welcome
and encourage the priority that the States of both
regions have given to the fight against drug trafficking,
as reflected in their political commitment.
The extension of the regional action plan of the
Economic Community of Western African States
(ECOWAS) for the period 2013-2018 illustrates the
commitment of States to respond in a comprehensive
manner to the growing problem of illicit drug
trafficking, organized crime and drug use in West
Africa. We are pleased that that plan is supported
by several projects of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for strengthening existing
systems to combat money laundering and the financing
of terrorism and that it is receiving specialized technical
assistance available to member States of ECOWAS
as part of the criminal justice component of the fight
against terrorism.
In addition, within the context for implementing
the Bamako Declaration and Strategic Framework on
Impunity, Justice and Human Rights of 2011, which
details practical recommendations for the fight against
organized crime, terrorism and piracy, we also welcome
the development and implementation, with the support
of UNODC and other international organizations, of the
inter-institutional West Africa Coast Initiative, which
provides equipment and specialized training for law
enforcement agencies of the countries concerned. We
likewise welcome the airport communication project
and the Global Container Control Programme.
Moreover, there remains a continuing need for
cooperation among the States of the subregion to
ensure that, despite financial constraints, criminals are
identified, investigated, tried and convicted, especially
in view of the need to enhance the credibility of national

S/PV.7090

institutions and Governments with their populations
and external actors.
Togo undertook early on to wage a determined
struggle against organized crime in all its forms.
Concerned about the negative impact of illicit trafficking
and drug use on health, public safety and the national
economy, the Government of Togo adopted numerous
legislative and institutional measures to combat the
scourge and to stem its financial consequences.
The adoption of those measures has led in
particular to the establishment of a central anti-drug
and anti-money laundering office and the creation of the
national Financial Intelligence Unit. In 2010, Togo also
established a comprehensive national plan to combat
drugs and crime, whose development has benefited from
the expertise of several partners, including France, the
United States of America, the European Union and the
ECOWAS Commission.
In addition, in recent years, increased monitoring
by Togolese customs authorities enabled us to seize
several kilograms of drugs at the borders, most of them
arriving by air from South America, and to dismantle
trafficking networks. Those results are partly due to
the support and cooperation of partners, to whom we
express our renewed gratitude.
Far from representing a challenge only to the
States of the West African subregion and the Sahel,
drug trafficking and organized crime easily travel from
regions where they are repressed to areas with less strict
controls. That is why today the most threatened areas
need support from the entire international community
to act decisively to eradicate the niches that continue to
encourage insecurity and the emergence of trafficking.
The resolution of those problems therefore calls
for stronger cooperation at the State level, both in
the subregion and internationally. It also implies the
demand for the full implementation by all States of
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocols.
Moreover, the international community must
protect less equipped areas by providing technology, by
strengthening the capacity of national services involved
in the fight against the phenomenon of transnational
organized crime and by promoting cooperation among
States.
International support should not be limited,
however, to the issue of security. It should play a part

13-6250311/26

S/PV.7090

Peace and security in Africa

in conflict prevention, governance and development
in order to take into account the aspirations of local
populations and to ensure that the affected populations
are identified and that they support various interventions
in the fight against trafficking drugs.
Finally, the fact that the Security Council has had
to take into account the need to incorporate the fight
against organized crime and drug trafficking into the
mandates of the various United Nations missions in
Africa also helps to curb the problem at its source; in
other words, in the countries where drugs originate.
Barring unforeseen circumstances, this is Togo’s
last statement in an open meeting of the Security
Council before the approaching end of its term of
office. I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our sincere thanks and deep gratitude to the Member
States that placed their trust in my country, on the one
hand, by supporting its candidacy, and on the other, by
supporting us throughout our term.
I wish in particular to reiterate our deep gratitude to
all the members of the Council, in particular to France,
the United States and the United Kingdom, for their
assistance to Togo at the start of its term. We also thank
the staff of the Secretariat and the Security Council as
well as the interpreters assigned to the various meetings
of the Council.
Togo’s election to the Security Council on 21 October
2011, as members will recall, was not an easy matter.
While hailing from a region accustomed by tradition to
clean-slate elections, my country was elected only after
three separate ballots, with a tally of 131 votes. Perhaps
there were some who underestimated Togo’s ability to
serve on the Council. However, looking back over the
course of our mandate, now in its wane, we have the
sense of a task well done.
According to a popular adage in Togo, the person
who is dancing is incapable of appreciating himself;
however, we can say without exaggeration that the
Togolese delegation has dispelled the most pessimistic
predictions about its ability to fulfil its responsibilities
as a member of the Council.
Although the role of a non-permanent member of the
Security Council remains generally more limited, at the
initiative of Togo, the Council adopted 10 resolutions,
presidential statements and press statements. We led the
Council early in our term, beginning in February 2012,
to consider the question of the impact of transnational

12/26

18/12/2013

organized crime in West Africa and the Sahel region.
That debate may have been prescient with respect to the
adoption of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel. My country also brought before the Council
the issue of terrorism in Africa. Moreover, we await
a report from the Secretary-General that should allow
for more coordinated attention to that issue, which is of
grave concern to the African continent.
With particular regard to the situation in GuineaBissau, our delegation was in the forefront of the
pragmatic approach rightly pursued by Mr. José
Ramos-Horta since he assumed his post as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
that country.
On matters related to international criminal
justice, the views expressed by the Togolese delegation
may well have resulted in some progress. However,
we must not give way to self-congratulation when so
many crises and bloody conflicts continue to demand
the Council’s attention, particularly in Africa and the
Middle East. In spite of the Council’s accomplishments
over the past two years, we believe it could have risen
higher to meet expectations. However commendable
the progress made in 2012 and 2013, we must not lose
sight of the failures, especially the paralysis that this
body has often shown.
If that has been the case, it is largely because
the Member States of the Council, in particular its
permanent members, are often unable to agree on the
appropriate decisions that the Council should take
according to the Charter of the United Nations in order
to end the suffering and humanitarian tragedies faced
by populations in areas of conflict — for example, in
Syria.
The propensity of certain members of the Council
all too often to promote their own national interests, as
well as the consequences of certain decisions previously
taken, such as the intervention in Libya pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), whose implementation has not
borne out the hopes of certain States, justify in large
measure the harsh criticism that has rightly been
directed towards the Council.
We deeply believe that the world can be liberated
from the scourge of war, provided that more efforts
are made in the prevention and peaceful resolution of
conflict.

13-62503

18/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

We know, of course, that we can rely on the members
that will sit on the Security Council beginning in 2014,
especially those that have just been elected, namely,
Chad, Chile, Lithuania, Jordan and Nigeria, to whom
we send our renewed congratulations.
Ms. King (Australia): I wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Fedotov and Mr. Djinnit for their briefings
and for their commitment to tackling this challenge.
Traditional trading routes across the Sahel and
West Africa have been vital to livelihoods in the
region for centuries. However, those same routes,
now exploited by drug traffickers, are also a serious
source of instability. The stakes are high. We heard
the statistics this morning from the Secretary-General.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa,
Mr. Djinnit, told us clearly yesterday that transnational
crime posed the gravest threat to that region. Former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan said at the launch of the
West Africa Commission on Drugs that
“left unchecked, illegal drug trafficking could
compromise the encouraging progress West African
nations have made in strengthening democracy and
promoting human and economic development.”
Illegal drug trafficking is a transnational problem
that impacts source, transit and destination countries.
It is therefore our shared responsibility, and only truly
regional solutions can work to address it. Solving the
problem in one country might simply push it next door.
I would like to focus very briefly on each of the four
areas identified in the concept note (S/2013/728, annex).
First, on border management, Australia’s
experience in the Asia-Pacific region has demonstrated
the importance of regional cooperation and of managing
threats before they actually reach the border. That has
been achieved through reciprocal officer placements
and regional capacity-building programmes. Australia
also established a South-East Asia border security
programme, which improved drug detection capability
through shared technology, closer communication and
specialized training programmes.
The second Regional Ministerial Meeting on Border
Security in the Sahel and the Maghreb, held in Rabat,
identified the need in many States for customs training,
technology to track goods and people, and stronger
networks to enable better coordination nationally and
across borders. The international community should

S/PV.7090

support that framework. We welcome the recent
decision to establish a joint border security training
centre.
Secondly, with regard to strengthening law
enforcement and judicial systems, the problem will
not be contained until the costs and risks outweigh the
potential gains. Actual prosecutions and convictions
are one of the most important tools in that fight. The
West Africa Coast Initiative is playing an important
role in building regional and national capacities. The
establishment of transnational crime units, for example
in Sierra Leone and Liberia, has strengthened the ability
of law enforcement agencies to share critical criminal
intelligence, enabling coordinated and effective law
enforcement operations. We know at first hand that such
a model actually works: over the past decade, 18 such
units have operated successfully in the framework of the
Pacific Transnational Crime Network. To be effective
in West Africa and the Sahel, we must learn from such
lessons. Transnational crime units can succeed only
with the necessary investigative skills, supported by
appropriate technology and complemented by effective
legislation and robust judicial systems. They must have
the necessary political support.
Thirdly, on anti-money laundering and financial
issues, we have learned that drug trafficking can help
fund armed groups and destabilize Governments, and
that it has increasingly been linked to financing terrorists
in the Sahel and West Africa. We know terrorist groups
and drug traffickers operate in the same areas and
routes. But we do not know enough about the linkages.
That needs closer analysis. The fact is, however, that a
State that has developed a strong anti-money laundering
framework is better placed to tackle the financing of
both terrorism and drug trafficking. The Financial
Action Task Force’s guidance on combating money
laundering must be leveraged by the region, including
through a revitalized West African intergovernmental
action group.
Finally, with regard to improved United Nations
synergies, a recent International Peace Institute report
claimed that transnational organized crime was the
elephant in the room for United Nations missions,
impossible to overlook but too big to deal with. It
has become a serious threat for almost every United
Nations peace operation, in many cases hindering
the development, security and justice that the United
Nations is trying to build. It is vital to consider
opportunities for improved United Nations synergies.

13-6250313/26

S/PV.7090

Peace and security in Africa

The United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel is
an important step, providing an overarching framework
for the United Nations, the region and international
partners. The Council must consider whether United
Nations missions have the necessary mandates, means
and expertise to combat transnational crime.
In response to an increasingly complex criminal
environment, the United Nations Police Division has
developed serious-crime support units, where United
Nations police collect and analyse criminal intelligence
and mentor and advise host nations on developing
investigative capabilities. That model is being used by
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti with
some success. We should consider whether such units
could be effective elsewhere.
Many of the necessary tools used to tackle drug
trafficking, border control, criminal justice cooperation,
anti-money laundering and information exchange
have the same capacities as are needed to manage
arms trafficking and to enforce sanctions. The United
Nations, Member States and regional organizations
could be better coordinated in all of those fields. Given
the stakes, it is in all of our interests to do so.
Finally, since this is the last official meeting of
the year, I would like to say, on record, that Australia
considers it a privilege to have had the opportunity, over
the past year, to work so closely with the five outgoing
members of the Security Council — Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo — and we
would like to formally acknowledge their contribution
to international peace and security.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank the French presidency for convening today’s
debate. I would also like to take this opportunity to
express my thanks to Azerbaijan, Guatemala, Morocco,
Pakistan and Togo, the five outgoing members. I thank
them for their contributions to the Council over the past
two years. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, Executive Director for Drugs and Crime
Yuri Fedotov and Special Representative Said Djinnit
for their briefings.
At present, the international community is faced
with the serious task of preventing and combating drug
trafficking and other organized transnational crimes.
Drug production and trafficking, money laundering
and other criminal activities have become increasingly
rampant. They are interwoven and seriously jeopardize
social stability and economic development. Given

14/26

18/12/2013

the fragile security situation and the difficulties in
controlling borders, West Africa and the Sahel have
been key target areas for international drug trafficking
activities. Drug trafficking activities using transit
countries in West Africa and the Sahel region have
severely affected the economic and social development
of the countries of the region, threatening regional
peace and stability. In that regard, China has expressed
its deep concern.
In order to tackle the root cause of drug trafficking,
China believes that the international community should
work hard in the following areas: first, ensuring that the
primary responsibility for combating drug trafficking
and other organized transnational crimes lies with
Governments. China welcomes the unremitting efforts
by countries in the region. Meanwhile, it must be
noted that the countries in West Africa and the Sahel
region, in their efforts to address drug trafficking and
other organized transnational crimes, are faced with
bottlenecks in resources, technology and capacity, and
urgently need the strong support of the international
community. The international community, while fully
respecting the ownership of countries in the region,
should help them formulate strategies in that field,
improve their law enforcement work and strengthen
their capacity to counter money-laundering, so that
those countries can address drug trafficking and
other organized transnational crimes more effectively.
Meanwhile, under the principles of broad participation
and responsibility-sharing, international cooperation
must be strengthened, in particular efforts must be
made to crack down on the drug consumption market,
so as to reduce demand and suppress the root cause of
drug production and trafficking.
Secondly, China appreciates the efforts made
by the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States, the Mano River Union and other
African regional and subregional organizations, as well
as the efforts by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNDOC) and the United Nations Office for
West Africa (UNOWA). They have worked closely with
one another and have coordinated and proposed many
programmes and initiatives regarding West Africa’s
land border security, maritime security, criminal justice
and law enforcement. Thus, UNODC and UNOWA have
played a positive role in helping countries in the region
to combat drug trafficking. We hope that the United
Nations will continue to play a coordinating role and
promote resource consolidation and allocation so as to

13-62503

18/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

provide strong support to the efforts of countries and
organizations in the region.
Thirdly, the fight against drug trafficking and other
organized transnational crimes is linked to social and
development issues and requires the joint efforts of all
Governments, regional and subregional organizations,
and/or United Nations agencies, which should work
within their own mandate and make use of their
own advantages and expertise in ensuring effective
international cooperation. The Security Council
can proceed from the perspective of maintaining
international peace and security, preventing conflict and
promoting post-conflict peacebuilding. The Council
should remain seized of the issue of combating drug
trafficking and other organized transnational crimes in
order to promote the international community’s greater
attention to that issue.
Fourthly, in the long run poverty and
underdevelopment constitute the root causes and catalyst
of drug trafficking and other organized transnational
crimes in West Africa and the Sahel region. We hope that
United Nations agencies in the Sahel will work together
closely and strengthen the implementation of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel region.
Meanwhile, we call upon the international community
to honour, as soon as possible, its commitments in
assistance and investment, and to make special efforts
to assist the countries of the region in capacity- and
infrastructure -building so as to improve their capacity
for autonomous development and eliminate the potential
causes of conflicts.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Sir, for convening this important debate
on peace and security in Africa, and in particular on
drug trafficking in the Sahel region and West Africa.
As your presidency comes to an end, Rwanda thanks
France for the attention it has paid this month, in Paris
and New York, to the issue of peace and security on our
continent.
We welcome the statement made by Mr. Fernando
Carrera, Minister for Foreign Affairs Minister of
Guatemala, including on the Council’s working
methods. We take the opportunity of this last official
meeting of the Council for December to congratulate
Guatemala, Azerbaijan, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo
for their dedication and achievements over the past two
years in support of peace and security in Africa and
throughout the world. Rwanda has been privileged to
cooperate with them during the past year.

S/PV.7090

I would like to thank Secretary-General Mr. Ban
Ki-moon for his introductory statement, as well as
Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crimes (UNODC),
and Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa, for their respective
briefings. Our delegation endorses the statement to be
delivered by Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.
As previous speakers have noted, drug trafficking
and consumption pose an ongoing threat to peace and
security in Africa. The 33 tons of cocaine that transited
through West Africa in 2010, with a market value of
about $1.25 billion, represent a terrifying quantity. That
disturbing growth in drug trafficking on the continent
has created new challenges for a security situation that is
already fragile, especially in West Africa and the Sahel
region. In that regard, the link between drug cartels and
corrupt politicians and military personnel, as well as
terrorist organizations, is in and of itself an explosive
cocktail for the continent. Although today’s discussion
is focused on the Sahel region and West Africa, it has
been emphasized that the countries of those region
serve principally as transit points for drugs coming
from South America and Asia on their way to Europe or
even North America, where they are mainly consumed.
Some of these transitting drugs remain on the continent
as payments to mediators or for local consumption,
with a primary impact on unemployed youth.
Combating drug trafficking should therefore be a
global war involving all continents — unfortunately,
with Africa as the axis. Moreover, at present a number
of West African and Sahel countries are encountering
problems with governance and security that create an
ideal situation for drug traffickers and all types of
criminals. Indeed, a vulnerable political environment
involving civil wars, insurrections and military
coups has destabilized an entire region and led to the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons, armed
groups, smugglers, crime syndicates and terrorist
organizations, all operating in a geographical region
that hampers the effective fight against drug trafficking.
With regard to drug trafficking, Guinea-Bissau
is the example that comes immediately to mind and
may be deemed symptomatic of what could happen
in many countries of the subregion — namely, a
power grab by those criminal networks — if nothing
is done to eradicate that plague. Sustained efforts
must be undertaken, especially by adressing the root

13-6250315/26

S/PV.7090

Peace and security in Africa

causes of instability in the region, first and foremost
governance, security sector reform, development and
youth unemployment. The countries of the region,
together with their international partners, must come
up with specific development solutions, especially
quick-impact projects, while laying solid foundations
for long-term development.
Rwanda acknowledges the considerable efforts
of the subregional organizations in combating drug
trafficking. We welcome the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) strategy to comply
with international drug control norms, especially
the 2008 Political Declaration on drug trafficking
and other organized crimes, as well as the Regional
Action Plan to Address the Growing Problem of
Illicit Drug Trafficking, Organized Crime and Drug
Abuse in West Africa. We also welcome the work of
the Inter-Governmental Action Group against Money
Laundering in West Africa, which is involved in
actions to fight money-laundering through training and
capacity-building programmes. In that regard, we call
on the international community to support ECOWAS in
reinvigorating the activities of the Group.
Mindful of the challenges linked to drug
trafficking on the continent, especially in West Africa
and the Sahel, the African Union also adopted a Plan
of Action on Drug Control 2013-2017. The Plan takes
a comprehensive approach to drugs by linking them
to organized crime, political corruption and terrorism,
which are all obstacles to development. Synergy and
the strengthening of continental and international
cooperation are the key to fighting drug trafficking.
All of those regional and subregional initiatives
demonstrate that the African Union, ECOWAS, other
subregional organizations and their Member States
are awarte of the scope of drug trafficking in West
Africa and in the Sahel. Therefore they deserve the
international community’s sustained support because
the transnational and even transcontinental nature of
the threat indicates that no country and no region can
deal with the problem alone.
To conclude, we emphasize the need to combat
impunity and to launch operations against drug cartels
and corrupt politicians and soldiers, especially in
Guinea-Bissau. We are convinced that such operations
can send a strong message to drug traffickers and
politicians who use the region as a transit zone for
drugs. The international community cannot accept

16/26

18/12/2013

that the Sahel and West Africa, or even Africa as a
whole, should remain an international platform for drug
trafficking.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting. As this is the last official Council meeting for
December, I should like to pay tribute to your leadership
and congratulate you and your delegation on the way
you have carried out your tasks this month. I should like
to thank the Secretary-General, the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa for their statements. I should also like to
acknowledge the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guatemala at this important debate.
Just a few days ago, we met to address the situation
in the Sahel (see S/PV.7081). On that occasion I
underscored — and it is good to recall it again as we
address the issue today — how important it was to
maintain our full attention on the regional issue of
the Sahel while emphasizing the need and urgency to
implement the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel, which covers security, good governance,
development, human rights and humanitarian issues.
Regrettably, the Sahel and West Africa share
difficult challenges. Much of what was said last week
could be repeated today, as the two subregions have
among the lowest indices of human development in
the world, suffer from major shortages and have to
address the many illegal networks and various terrorist
and extremist groups operating in the countries in the
area. As we know, and as set out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2013/354), the two subregions must
address the threat and scourge of drug trafficking and
associated crimes, which in certain instances are clearly
responsible for the destabilization of some countries
by preventing effective State control of borders and
territories and by striking at the very heart of States
through corruption. We also know that, in specific
contexts and places, it has been possible to establish a
causal link between transnational organized crime and
the funding of terrorist groups and non-State armed
groups.
Taking all of that into account, I wish to emphasize
the fact that, although drug trafficking can be linked
with other threats, such as those posed by international
terrorism, that relationship is not always a linear one.
It is also not always possible to establish connections

13-62503

18/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

between transnational organized crime and international
peace and security in all contexts and circumstances.
I would also like to put on record the fact that
Argentina supports the principle of joint and shared
responsibility among producer, consumer and transit
countries. We give pride of place to a balanced focus
between combating drug trafficking and its connected
crimes and the adoption of measures to prevent drug
consumption and ensure assistance to drug-dependant
persons.
With that said, I first want to emphasize the primary
responsibility of States with regard to relevant actions
when it comes to combating drug trafficking. We also
acknowledge the value of, and the need for, regional
and international cooperation to effectively address the
phenomenon. With regard to the various areas where
cooperation is important, capacity-building in the
implementation of laws is of particular importance,
especially in the judicial and security sectors. Robust
State bodies and properly trained staff are essential in
combating drug trafficking. We must cooperate with
States to help them to develop their own capacities so
that they can rebuild and strengthen their institutions,
mete out justice, ensure the rule of law and provide
security. In that regard, I would like to commend the
important work carried out by United Nations police, as
well as the participation of officers from Argentina in
the missions in place in various countries of the region.
Secondly, I would like to say once again that many
of the problems that arise are the result of deep-rooted
causes and must be addressed through substantive
changes, not palliative measures. I therefore want to
point out that combating drug trafficking has to take
into account the need for development, for there can
be no doubt that, under certain conditions, a low level
of overall development provides a breeding ground for
criminal activities. As a result, any satisfactory plan to
combat drug trafficking must include measures aimed
at providing alternative means of subsistence — legal
ones — especially for young people, as well as decent
work for young men and women. We emphasize that we
must concentrate our efforts on achieving sustainable
human development based on the principle of shared but
differentiated responsibilities, with a focus on human
rights and on economic, social and environmental
dimensions.
Thirdly, I wish to underscore and commend the
many advances achieved by a large number of the

S/PV.7090

countries of the region with the assistance of the
regional and subregional organizations represented at
this debate.
Fourthly, I would like to underscore that it is
important for the Council to respect the purviews and
responsibilities of other bodies of the system, such
as the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and various agencies.
Lastly, I think it is important to emphasize that a
comprehensive approach to the problem must respect
the particularity of local and regional situations where
drug trafficking exists, since the problems caused by
drugs are different from place to place, on account of the
specific local, subregional and regional characteristics.
In conclusion, Argentina supports presidential
statement S/PRST/2013/22 and thanks the French
delegation for its work. Only by working together can
the international community prevail in the fight against
drug trafficking and other forms of organized crime,
such as human trafficking, arms trafficking, migrant
servitude and slavery, and money laundering.
Argentina extends its thanks to Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo. We assure
them that we will continue to work together on the
priorities and challenges facing the Organization. Our
countries share the same principles and are working
towards the same ideals.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Let me, first of all, welcome the presence of Foreign
Minister Carrera at the Council’s meeting this morning.
We thank the Secretary-General, Executive Director
Fedotov and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Djinnit for their instructive and helpful
presentations this morning. The statistics and patterns
they highlighted demonstrate the urgency of the issue.
The Sahel and West Africas region is emerging as a hub
and corridor for trafficking in hard drugs, as well as
a transit and production point for synthetic drugs. We
join the international community in expressing alarm
over this troubling development.
Drug trafficking in the region has tended to target
countries with porous borders, fragile institutions, weak
justice and security apparatuses and limited resources.
It has, in turn, contributed to the violent unrest and
instability the region has seen over the past year. When
left unchecked, drug traffickers may link up with other
illicit networks and, in the most extreme cases, share

13-6250317/26

S/PV.7090

Peace and security in Africa

trade routes, and possibly profits, with rebel groups and
violent extremists.
Not only do drug trafficking networks undermine
development and security, they also erode confidence
in justice and Government institutions. When corrupt
leaders profit and traffickers act with impunity,
populations lose confidence in the rule of law, illicit
economies flourish and accountable and responsive
governance is further eroded. We have seen that in
Guinea-Bissau, where drug trafficking has been both a
cause and consequence of poor governance.
The destabilizing effects of illicit flows are
compounded as Governments must now also grapple
with the social and policy challenges presented by
increased domestic drug use. Illicit trafficking is
correlated with higher school dropout rates, increased
violence and criminal behaviour, lost workforce
productivity and diminished human capital.
In spite of those growing challenges, we strongly
encourage regional institutions to face those issues
head-on and we welcome the extension of the Economic
Community of West African States in 2013 of its
regional action plan to support the work of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the
United Nations Office for West Africa and committed
Governments. We join the international community
in emphasizing the importance of regional solutions,
which, like the problems themselves, must cross
borders, cultures, languages and economic systems.
Over the past year, we have seen an increase
in regional conferences, commissions, agreements
and policies aimed at tackling narcotics trafficking
and consumption. Now is the time to translate the
agreements and policies into action. The United
Nations has a crucial role to play, particularly on border
security, as the international community partners with
regional Governments to develop the tools to combat
drug trafficking and its negative impacts in the Sahel
and West Africa.
The United States has committed significant
resources to address drug trafficking and its effects in
the region, and will launch new programmes in Mali
and in Chad in the coming year. Our programmes
support current efforts to counter drug trafficking,
respond to drug use, increase public awareness and
strengthen the rule of law. For example, the United
States has helped to develop the training curriculum
and the investigative capacity of the Nigerian national

18/26

18/12/2013

drug and law enforcement agency. In October, the
agency burned over 7,249 kilogrammes of illicit drugs
that it had seized.
The United States has also been working with the
Governments of Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and Nigeria to
develop a professional substance-abuse system that
includes a certification board and licensing process
and implements evidence-based treatment programmes
that respect human rights. In Benin, the United States
will soon launch programmes to address corruption,
strengthen the rule of law and raise awareness of issues
related to transnational organized crime. We have
also provided approximately $2.5 million to UNODC
in support of the West Africa Coast Initiative, which
addresses border and corruption issues throughout the
region.
Since the Security Council first considered the
threat that drug trafficking poses to international peace
and security, in 2009 (see S/PV.6233), much progress
has been made in the global fight against drugs. We
look forward to continuing and extending that global
work in the Council and to continuing our focus on the
Sahel and West Africa regions to bolster the capacity
of Governments and institutions to disrupt transit
corridors and deny traffickers the space to operate.
Finally, as this is the last scheduled formal Council
meeting in 2013, let me say, on behalf of the United
States, that it has been an honour and privilege to work
with the delegations of the five departing members of
the Council, over the past two years.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
the French presidency of the Security Council for
having convened this meeting to reiterate the Council’s
commitment to addressing the destabilizing effect of
drug trafficking in West Africa and the Sahel. We are
also grateful to the Secretary-General for his briefing
and for presenting his report on transnational organized
crime and illicit drug trafficking in West Africa and
the Sahel region (S/2013/359). I also thank Mr. Yuri
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, and Mr. Said Djinnit,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa, for
their contributions to the discussion.
Azerbaijan welcomes presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/22, adopted earlier today, in which
the Council expresses growing concern about the
serious threats posed by drug trafficking and related

13-62503

18/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

transnational organized crime to peace, stability,
governance, social and economic development and the
rule of law in the countries of West Africa and the Sahel
region.
Over the past years, there has been significant
international mobilization against the growing
impact of illicit drug trafficking and related criminal
activity in West Africa and the Sahel. The report
of the Secretary-General provides both a detailed
update on the progress made thus far in the region
and important recommendations for further actions.
Indeed, more should be done at the national, regional
and international levels to effectively address drug
trafficking and organized crime. The need for an urgent
response is compounded by growing political, security
and humanitarian vulnerabilities affecting the region,
including political instability, weapons proliferation
and increasing linkages between criminal networks and
terrorist and armed groups.
It is commendable that the States and leaders
of West Africa and the Sahel region have adopted
a number of important initiatives and measures at
national, regional and subregional levels, to tackle
the threats of organized crime and drug trafficking,
enhance national capacities and strengthen border
and maritime security. However, it is clear that most
of the countries of West Africa and the Sahel cannot
overcome existing and emerging transnational threats
in isolation. Even successful national and regional
initiatives cannot ensure a comprehensive solution if
they are not supported by the United Nations system
and the broader international community. It is critical
that bilateral and multilateral actors continue to
contribute to the ongoing regional and national efforts
aimed at combating drug trafficking in West Africa and
the Sahel.
It is important to ensure effective coordination and
mutual accountability for results, which can be provided
through integrated and multidisciplinary responses and
the enhanced collaboration of all relevant actors, based
on the principle of common and shared responsibility.
Obviously, the centre of all assistance efforts must be
a beneficiary State, which identifies its vulnerabilities
and national security concerns, considers ways to
tackle them and sets priorities. Therefore, it is an
absolute necessity for international and regional actors
to tailor their initiatives to address the individual needs
of States, taking full account of their national security
concerns and international obligations.

S/PV.7090

Serious attention should be given to the appeals of
the respective countries and regional and subregional
organizations for capacity-building assistance and
funds to counter the threats and address the challenges
affecting the region. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral that additional resources are needed to sustain
the fight against drugs and crime in West Africa and in
the Sahel.
Since this the last scheduled meeting of the Security
Council which Azerbaijan is addressing as a member
of the Council, I would like to take the opportunity
to once again thank the States Members of the United
Nations for having given my country an opportunity
to contribute to promoting international peace and
security through our presence in the Council. We thank
all Council members and other delegations and partners
for their excellent cooperation and support over the past
two years. I also wish to thank the Secretariat for its
assistance and the interpreters for their professionalism.
It has been two years’ unique experience of handling
peace and security issues and of great collective work.
We wish the incoming members all the best during
their terms.
I would also like to express our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, and to your delegation for your excellent
leadership of the Council’s work in December. We also
wish the delegation of Jordan a successful presidency
in January.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the French presidency of the Security Council
for convening this meeting on the fight against drug
trafficking and its consequences for peace and security
in West Africa and the Sahel — a topic that clearly
deserves the full attention of the Council. I also thank
the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa.
I will not dwell on an analysis. The scourge
of drug trafficking includes such a high level of
violence, so many types of transnational organized
crime and such weak rule-of-law structures — often
due to corruption — that it truly represents a threat to
international peace and security. The enormous profits
generated by drug trafficking enable traffickers not only
to weaken States, but also to manipulate the institutions
of the weakened States to their own benefit. Attempting
to combat the scourge through a strategy of repression

13-6250319/26

S/PV.7090

Peace and security in Africa

alone is doomed to fail. It will require a global approach
that addresses the root causes, especially the fragility
of States.
We welcome and support the efforts of the States
of West Africa and the Sahel to fight drug trafficking,
particularly within the Economic Community of
West African States and the Mano River Union,
whose members adopted a border security strategy
on 25 October, with the support of the United Nations
Office for West Africa. African civil society is also
mobilizing, as demonstrated by the meeting of 30 and
31 October in Accra, Ghana, at the initiative of the West
Africa Commission on Drugs. It is our hope that the
Commission, established at the initiative of Kofi Annan
and comprised of eminent persons and experts, will
contribute to finding durable solutions to the growing
problems of drug trafficking and drug use in the region.
The countries of West Africa and the Sahel and
the regional organizations of which they are members
must be able to count on the steadfast support of the
international community. The European Union and its
member States are working alongside their African
partners, in particular from West Africa, within the
framework of the Union’s anti-drug strategy and the
action plan for the period 2013 to 2020 and 2013 to
2016, respectively.
With regard to the United Nations system, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
clearly has a central role to play. It is a welcome fact that
the UNODC cooperates intensively with other players
across the United Nations system. A good example is
the Task Force on Transnational Organized Crime and
Drug Trafficking, which is co-chaired by UNODC
and the Department of Political Affairs and which
brings together United Nations agencies and relevant
organizations. We support the recommendation in
presidential statement S/PRST/2013/22, which we have
just adopted, that the Security Council be informed on
a more regular basis about the activities of the Task
Force. In general terms, it is important that there be
determined follow-up to today’s debate.
To better respond to the threat, we encourage the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the missions
authorized by the Council in the countries of the region
to strengthen their cooperation and coordination, as well
as their analytical capacities concerning the political,
economic and social impact of drug trafficking.

20/26

18/12/2013

The Peacebuilding Commission also has a role
to play in advocating for the strengthening of the
institutional capacities of the four countries it supports
in West Africa — Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and
Sierra Leone — and in supporting the coordination of
international efforts.
Only increased coordination involving the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of the Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Institutions, as well as UNODC, the United Nations
Development Programme and Interpol, will it be
possible to appropriately support the ongoing efforts
in West Africa and Sahel to strengthen regional
cooperation. The West Africa Coast Initiative is a
good example of what can be done. The Initiative has
produced encouraging initial results in Sierra Leone.
We should now strengthen units to combat transnational
crime, all the while strengthening judicial and penal
systems, in order to combat impunity. The best police
measures are doomed to failure if the penal system
breaks down at the level of justice or prisons. Where
capacity is insufficient or where the cross-border nature
of the crimes committed gives rise to difficulties, legal
solutions could be explored at the regional level, notably
with the Economic Community of West African States.
The fight against drug trafficking must be a
collective effort involving countries of origin, transit
and destination, for we know that those categories
overlap more and more, including in West Africa and
Sahel. As a partner of many countries of the region,
Luxembourg is committed to assist in this struggle,
in the interest of peace and security, development and
respect for human rights and the rule of law in West
Africa and the Sahel.
Lastly, as my colleagues have done, I too would
like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation
to the five outgoing members of the Security
Council — Azerbaijan, Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan
and Togo. It has been a privilege to serve with them in
the Council.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate on combating drug trafficking in the Sahel and
West Africa. We appreciate Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon’s personal engagement on this issue. We
also thank Executive Director Fedotov and Special

13-62503

18/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

Representative of the Secretary-General Djinnit for
their briefings today.
Drug trafficking continues to be a threat to
international peace and stability. The illicit drug trade
undermines the authority and effectiveness of State
institutions, hampers socioeconomic development
and erodes the rule of law. The region most seriously
affected by this scourge today is West Africa, which
is fast emerging as a major transit point and as an area
of consumption and production. We are particularly
concerned about the potential threat to peacebuilding
efforts and the hard-won advances in the economic
development of the region.
Drug trafficking cannot be tackled by any one
country alone. That is all the more true when the States
faced with such challenges lack the capacity to respond
effectively to them, as we see in the Sahel and West
Africa. A comprehensive and integrated response is
urgently required. Cooperation and coordination among
the affected countries, as well as among international
and regional organizations, are vital. In that context, I
would like to make a few observations.
First, the effective implementation of the relevant
regional and international strategies depends upon the
capacities of Governments. Therefore, emphasis should
be placed on strengthening legal and institutional
capacities, especially in the area of border and customs
control. Establishing national criminal justice systems
that are accessible and aligned with international norms
is also important. We commend the role of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in providing
valuable support to that end, especially through the
West Africa Coast Initiative. Continued assistance by
international donors remains crucial.
Secondly, given the nature of the challenges, the
central role of regional organizations should be fully
brought into play. We support the efforts made by
regional Governments to better coordinate their actions
to combat drug trafficking. The Economic Community
of West African States regional plan of action and
the African Union plan of action are instrumental
frameworks to that end. The international community
should continue to support such regional initiatives.
Thirdly, it is important to address the underlying
structural causes of vulnerability. The United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel rightly recognizes the
mutually reinforcing linkage between development and
security in the Sahel. It also places strong emphasis

S/PV.7090

on strengthening national and regional capacities for
development. In our efforts to tackle drug trafficking
and organized crime, it is important that the integrated
strategy be fully implemented.
Fourthly, establishing early-warning and prevention
mechanisms should be a matter of priority for the
Council. We need to take drug trafficking issues into
account in conflict-prevention strategies and in the
mandates of peacekeeping missions. The Council should
also explore ways to further strengthen intermission
cooperation among the relevant United Nations
missions. The Republic of Korea welcomes today’s
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2013/22 and
will remain committed to helping West Africa in its
fight against drug trafficking and organized crime.
Lastly, as this is probably the last meeting of
the Security Council this year, I would like to thank
the outgoing members of the Council — Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo — for their
valuable contributions and cooperation with us in the
Council.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank you,
Mr. President, for your initiative to hold a public
briefing on combating drug trafficking in the Sahel
and West Africa. We also thank the Secretary-General,
Executive Director Yury Fedotov of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Said Djinnit
for their very comprehensive and insightful briefings.
We are all acutely aware of the enormity and gravity
of the problem of drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime in West Africa and their impact on
regional and international security and stability. What
is more, illicit narcotics ruin the lives and security of
millions of people across the globe. The drug industry
is strong, and its estimated worth is hundreds of billions
of dollars. Countries and regions of origin, transit
and consumption are all suffering from the harmful
consequences of the cultivation, manufacturing,
distribution and sale of drugs.
Facing numerous capacity and governance
challenges, the West African and Sahel regions are
particularly vulnerable to the destabilizing impact of
the entire cycle of drug production, trafficking and
consumption. For instance, as the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) told us today, in 2010 alone 18 tons of
cocaine, amounting to $1.25 billion, transited through

13-6250321/26

S/PV.7090

Peace and security in Africa

18/12/2013

West Africa. This is staggering. The region is a transit
route for drugs headed to the Mediterranean coasts, the
Middle East, Europe, Latin America and East Asia. In
addition to being a major transit hub, the region, which
is also a major producer of synthetic drugs, has seen an
increase in drug consumption.

harmonization of legal and judicial responses to drug
trafficking and to the problems created by its illicit
proceeds. Cooperation and coordination among all
United Nations entities and peacekeeping missions
in the Sahel and West Africa should also be further
strengthened and streamlined.

Drug trafficking breeds corruption and undermines
State institutions and authority. In some instances, it
has undermined the constitutional order. The strong
nexus of drug trafficking with terrorism fuels and
finances conflicts and asymmetric warfare. It also
undermines or reverses the tentative gains made in
ongoing peacebuilding efforts in several countries. In
short, drug trafficking poses a direct threat to peace
and security in West Africa and the Sahel.

Pakistan recognizes and welcomes the many steps
taken by regional countries and organizations to fight
drug trafficking. We also recognize the crucial role
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
in this regard. Thankfully, we are not starting from
scratch. Strategic thinking and planning have already
done, culminating in the finalization of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. We support
the strategy’s objective of assisting the Sahelian
countries and regional mechanisms to enhance national
capacities for effective border management and
economic governance. In that regard, the roles of the
African Union, the Economic Commission for Africa,
the Economic Community of West African States,
UNODC, the United Nations Development Programme,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Peacebuilding Commission are extremely important.

Against that backdrop, the enhanced focus of
the Council on this issue is important and timely.
Discussions of this problem, however, should continue
to move forward from the normative aspects to practical
and tangible initiatives to address both the problem
and its root causes. The frameworks to respond to this
threat must be based on a comprehensive and integrated
approach that gives due weight to development,
governance and capacity-building. Measures to
respond to drug trafficking should be integrated into
the national, regional and United Nations development
agendas.
Dealing with the fallout of the drug problem in
the Sahel and West Africa is a shared responsibility.
National actions should be buttressed by increased
cooperation, coordination support and resource
mobilization at the regional and international levels.
To combat illicit drug trafficking, the countries of the
region need to especially focus on institution-building
in order to strengthen judicial systems, security sectors
and police institutions. Steps must also be taken to
fight impunity and corruption and promote respect for
human rights and the rule of law.
That all boils down to addressing capacity deficits,
and they are huge. In this area, the international
community’s assistance is essential. Cooperation among
regions and subregions, in line with the principle of
common and shared responsibility for the simultaneous
reduction of supply and demand will guarantee the
success of strategies to root out the illicit drug trade.
More effective and results-oriented coordination is
therefore required amongst the countries in the Sahel
and West Africa for effective border management and

22/26

Pakistan has chaired the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 985 (1995) concerning Liberia
for the past two years. The United Nations Office
for West Africa is developing a regional strategy, in
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and regional organizations, such as the Mano
River Union, to curtail transnational organized crime,
including arms and drug trafficking. In this context,
I want to bring to the Council’s attention the Panel of
Experts’ recommendation that Member States reinforce
the capacity of UNODC in Liberia.
We express our full support for the presidential
statement on this subject (S/PRST/2013/22).
Finally, I would like to say very briefly that the past
two years have been very productive and rewarding for
Pakistan as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council. We thank other Council members, the general
membership and the Secretariat for their cooperation
and for their guidance.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Fedotov and Mr. Djinnit for their statements.

13-62503

18/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

This meeting is being held just after the Elysée
Summit for Peace and Security in Africa, organized
by France, and enables us to send a strong message to
the States in the region. Drug trafficking in the Sahel
and West Africa is a threat to peace and stability.
The Security Council has taken stock of this issue.
The initiatives taken by the States of the region must
therefore be supported by the United Nations.
I would emphasize three points: the threat, France’s
commitments and the role of the Security Council.
First, let us assess the situation. Without repeating
the statistics provided to us this morning, it is clear that
drug trafficking is a threat to the Sahel and West African
countries and their security, stability and development
and, beyond that, to international peace and stability.
West Africa and the Sahel, as we have heard, have
become hubs for the transit of cocaine, while cannabis is
perennial and heroin and synthetic drugs are emerging.
The drug trade’s links with various criminal groups
and, on occasion, the funding of terrorist activities fuel
rebellions and destabilize existing Governments, as we
have seen in several countries in the region, in particular
Mali and Guinea-Bissau. As a zone for the transit — and
now for production and consumption — of drugs, the
States of the region face disastrous consequences in
terms of corruption, illicit economic activity and public
health. Faced with this emerging threat, the States of
West Africa and the Sahel have alerted the international
community and seek support for their initiatives. The
Secretary-General, in several of his reports, has relayed
those concerns.
Secondly, France has committed itself to
responding to that request. At the Elysée Summit,
held in Paris on 6 and 7 September, Heads of States
and Government expressed their shared determination
to curb the production, processing, consumption and
trafficking of drugs on the two continents, combat
illegal financial flows, and enhance legal and security
cooperation. France will continue to lend its support
to the security and safety of African maritime waters
and border areas, following the Yaoundé summit and
Rabat conference. France has also committed itself
to bringing these issues to the heart of the European
Union, in particular by calling for the adoption of a
European Union maritime safety strategy in the Gulf
of Guinea to deal with the cross-cutting challenges
affecting those waters.
Finally, on the role of the Security Council,
Council members have shown, through this debate,

S/PV.7090

their commitment to fighting drug trafficking and
transnational crime. In the presidential statement
adopted today (S/PRST/2013/22), the members of
the Council support the initiatives undertaken by the
States of the region and ask the United Nations to help
with their implementation, particularly within the
framework of the Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, in
cooperation with other relevant organizations, such as
the European Union. They call in particular for concrete
measures to be taken to facilitate maritime interception
operations, surveillance of border areas, prosecutions,
trials and sentencing of traffickers, fighting corruption
and money-laundering, and, lastly, for the adoption
of health-related measures aimed at combating the
demand for drugs.
Beyond that, the Security Council should have a
better understanding of the impact of drug trafficking
and organized crime on the situations on its agenda.
That is why in the presidential statement the Council
asks that it be kept better informed about such threats
by UNODC, particularly when it is considering the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and political
missions. It also urges UNODC and the Department of
Political Affairs to include, in their regular briefings
to the Council, information on the work of the United
Nations system task force on transnational organized
crime and drug trafficking as threats to security and
stability. France will continue to provide support, in
its national capacity, within the European framework
and through the Security Council, to the initiatives
of its friends in the countries of West Africa aimed at
combating the scourge of drug trafficking.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Mr. António.
Mr. António: I would first like to thank the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Said Djinnit and
Mr. Yuri Fedotov for their briefings, and to welcome
the presence here today of Ambassador Bamba,
representing the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS).
The African Union (AU) fully shares the concerns
raised by most of the speakers today about the challenges
facing West Africa and the Sahel region, especially
taking into account the fact that those challenges
have been shown to have much bearing on the issues
of terrorism, human trafficking, mercenarism, armed
rebellion and unconstitutional changes of Government.

13-6250323/26

S/PV.7090

Peace and security in Africa

18/12/2013

The problem of the scourge of drug trafficking
and drug use in West Africa and the Sahel, as well as
the attempts to find adequate solutions to it, should be
viewed against the background of the current general
economic, political and social context of the region.
As is well known, many of the States in the region
are dealing with factors such as poverty, political
instability, unconstitutional changes of Government,
sporadic or frequent acts of extremist violence and,
in a number of countries, drug trafficking, as well as
an increasing threat of spreading terrorist activities,
especially in the vast Sahel and Sahara desert.

that today’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/22)
addresses the issue of coordination, one of the main
reasons why a concerted effort is needed to address the
issues of drug trafficking at the local, national, regional
and continental levels is that drug traffickers and
their agents constantly develop their trade networks
by infiltrating law-enforcement agencies and relevant
State security authorities at transit and entry points
in the target countries. In order to do that, they count
on factors cited by many of today’s speakers, such as
poverty, endemic unemployment, corrupt practices and
porous borders.

Such threats to regional peace and security are partly
born of and sustained by conditions that, as credible
sources have noted, produce an average life expectancy
for the region of 48 and an adult literacy rate of 25 per
cent, with 40 per cent, or 65 million, of its young and
adult population unable to read or write. Again, West
Africa has a scholarization deficit, with 14 million
children between the ages of seven and 12 currently
not in school. These groups represent uninformed
and generally unskilled populations vulnerable to the
schemes of peddlers of terrorism, drug traffickers and
political, social and religious agitators.

As the representative of Rwanda mentioned, the
AU is in the process of developing measures aimed at
supporting the efforts of its member States to address
drug trafficking and its associated challenges in various
regions, including West Africa and the Sahel. The
Commission has accordingly developed a framework,
the African Union Plan of Action on Drug Control
(2013-2017), which provides a strategy for targeting the
sources and destinations of illicit drugs. It also addresses
the health and socioeconomic consequences of drug
trafficking through measures that include strengthening
the law-enforcement capacity of relevant actors at local,
national, regional and international levels. The Plan
of Action is holistic and includes capacity-building
for information-gathering, research, analysis and the
monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of a
results-based matrix. It also emphasizes the importance
of strengthening collaboration with regional and
international stakeholders and, above all, of a collective
approach to addressing the scourge of drug trafficking
and its attendant threats to regional stability, peace and
security on the continent.

It is, however, important to underline that those
conditions are partly caused by external factors as
well as internal ones, including unjust international
trade practices and structures that help to stifle
African economic profitability through the dumping
of subsidized foreign products and the imposition
on Africa of high export taxes and forced economic
liberalization. Their effects have been to institutionalize
disguised unemployment, provoke reckless attempts to
travel to Europe for greener pastures, foster hunger
and destroy local production — which leads to rising
prices for food and other items — and limit African
goods’ access to external markets for foreign exchange
earnings. Primary individual productive activity is
therefore frequently unprofitable and hunger, in its
various forms, endemic.
In view of the interconnected nature of the causes
and effects of the problem of drug trafficking in West
Africa and the Sahel, the AU has always advocated
that the best way to address the problem is by devising
and implementing holistic ways of coordinating efforts
to deal with challenges such as drug addiction and
corruption in agencies entrusted with control at ports
and entry points, and the resulting instability and
armed conflict. While we fully appreciate the fact

24/26

It is in the spirit of strengthening the international
dimensions of the fight to prevent drug trafficking
and its attendant stability and security risks that the
AU would like to propose strengthening a coordinated
continental strategy with entities that include ECOWAS
and the United Nations Office for West Africa. The
strategy should involve mainstreaming measures for
combating drug trafficking into activities aimed at
preventing conflict in the West African and the Sahel
region, in a range of areas that would include efforts
to combat piracy, terrorism, mercenarism and other
challenges that the AU has developed instruments to
address. It is also our opinion that holding a summit for
the various stakeholders to explore ways of addressing
the issues could contribute to the ongoing coordinated
efforts to address these challenges.
13-62503

18/12/2013

Peace and security in Africa

We would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the delegations of outgoing members of the Council,
namely, Azerbaijan, Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan
and Togo.
(spoke in French)
We would like to say to the representative of our
brother country Togo that we heartily agree with his
assertion that he feels he has done a good job. That
is not vain triumphalism, as it might seem. Togo has
fully carried out its duty as a member of the Security
Council.
At the same time, we commend the second African
delegation leaving the Security Council, that of
Morocco. We are convinced that they will successfully
pass the baton to the delegations of Nigeria and Chad,
who are joining the Security Council, and that they
will work together in the Council for the defence and
joint development of our continent, with the undoubted
support of all Council members. We thank them today,
at what is hopefully the last official meeting for the
month.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): As
I am speaking for the first time during the French
presidency of the Security Council this month, it is
my pleasant duty to congratulate you warmly, Sir,
on assuming the prestigious responsibility assigned
to you. I also wish to extend our thanks for allowing
us to discuss the multidimensional aspects of peace
and security in Africa, in particular the issue of drug
trafficking and organized crime, the importance
of which is clear to all. That has been shown by the
weighty statements been made today, including by the
Secretary-General; Mr. Fedotov, the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC); Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa; the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Guatemala; and all the members of the Security
Council, including your very important statement, Sir.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of 15 States
members of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), which associates itself with the
statement made by Ambassador Téte António on behalf
of the African Union.

S/PV.7090

ECOWAS also welcomes the presidential statement
adopted earlier (S/PRST/2013/22).
The representatives who have spoken before me, as
well as the reports of the UNODC and the International
Narcotics Control Board, all agree on three points with
respect to West Africa. The first is that West Africa has
become a favoured transit zone for drug trafficking.
Secondly, the drug problem has been internalized in
West Africa, in particular via the spread of local drug
use through the consumption of cocaine and other
stimulants such as amphetamines. The third and most
alarming point is the exploitation of the West African
region as a transit zone by drug cartels, which benefit
from its chronic instability, weak rule of law and porous
borders to undertake their illegal activities in its vast
spaces in all impunity.
The most glaring manifestations of this state of
affairs are clearly the coups d’état in Guinea-Bissau
and in Mali in early 2012. Those two countries were
targeted by international drug traffickers for specific
reasons. Guinea-Bissau has become a hub for the traffic
in cocaine, and Mali has become a transit country for
cocaine and cannabis resin, as reflected in the report
of the International Narcotics Control Board. That is
why ECOWAS, with the backing of the African Union
and its international partners, including France, has
launched parallel initiatives that have made a significant
contribution to restoring some degree of stability in
those countries. They deserve to be supported.
In that situation, West Africa had established an
action plan to combat drugs for the period 2008-2012.
The ECOWAS Heads of State and Government, at their
forty-first ordinary session, held in Yamoussoukro,
reiterated their political commitment to the fight against
drugs and instructed the ECOWAS Commission to
reactivate the action plan on an urgent basis. I also note
the firm resolve of our Heads of State, as reaffirmed at the
regional maritime security conference held in Yaoundé
on 24 and 25 June, to do their utmost to eliminate that
scourge. With respect to the action plan, I note that in
February the ECOWAS Heads of State endorsed the
Commission memorandum to extend the plan by two
years so as to finalize the drafting and official adoption
of the documents for the tenth European Development
Fund Regional Indicative Programme.
I will conclude by indicating that for January 2014,
the ECOWAS Commission has organized in Cotonou
the tenth meeting of the Inter-Ministerial Coordinating

13-6250325/26

S/PV.7090

Peace and security in Africa

Committee of ECOWAS member States concerning
the issue of drugs. Given the persistent and emerging
problems of trafficking in cocaine, methamphetamines,
firearms and fraudulent medications and clandestine
migration in our subregion, the objective of this meeting
will be to identify new challenges and to propose ways
and means of accelerating the implementation of the
Regional Action Plan. We will try to identify, without
complacency, existing limitations and emerging
challenges with a view to laying the foundations for
formulating an action plan for 2015-2020 to combat
drugs in West Africa.
In conclusion, like previous speakers, I would like
to express our congratulations to Togo and Morocco,
from Africa, and all other departing members of
the Security Council. We have appreciated their
contributions to strengthening multilateralism, and we
particularly appreciate the way in which they dealt with
the questions of peace and security for our country.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
In what is probably the final public meeting for
December 2013, I would like to express the sincere
thanks of my delegation to members of the Council,
as well as to the Council’s secretariat for its help. I
would like to thank the interpreters, the translators,
the conference officers and the sound engineers. I

26/26

18/12/2013

also know that all Council members would join with
me in wishing good luck to Jordan, which will become
President of the Council in January.
Further, on behalf of the Council, I would like
to express the sincere appreciation of the Council
to the five outgoing members, namely, Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo. I commend
their hard work during their 2012-2013 term and the
contributions they brought to the Council’s work.
What I just said is official. What I would like to
add on a more personal note is the expression of my
deepest gratitude. For two years, we have had friendly
relations, which will continue after 1 January 2014. We
have appreciated their competence, their dedication and
their contributions. We will continue to work together.
We thank them from the bottom of our hearts for having
been with us, alongside us, in the activities of the
Security Council. As the Permanent Representative of
Togo has rightly said, those actions, while not perfect,
seek to defend peace, security and the values of the
United Nations.
Finally, I wish one and all around the table and
present in the Chamber my best wishes for the upcoming
year-end holidays.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

13-62503
