resolve the crisis. It invites the Govemment of Tajikistan
and ail other parties to the contlict to cooperate actively
with ail these efforts.

quences for peace and security in the region that this crisis
might entail.
"The Council calls on ail parties to the contlict to end
the fighting. lt urges the Govemment of Tajikistan, local
authorities, party leaders and other groups concemed to
enter into a political dialogue with a view to reaching an
overall settlement of the contlict by peaceful means. lt
calls on parties in neighbouring countries to refrain from
any action whicb might contribute to increasing tension
and to impeding a settlement.

"The Council welcomes the Secretaiy-General's
decision to send a goodwill mission, including a humanitarian assistance mission, to Tajikistan and Central Asia, in
response to the requests of the Govemments of the region,
witbin the ne:xt few days as a contribution by the United
Nations to resolving the contlict"

"The Council welcomes the efforts made by the
member countries of the Commonwealth oflndependent
States, on the initiative of the Republic ofKyrgyzstan, and
those undertaken by other States to help Tajikistan to

"The Council calls on ail parties to the contlict and
the neighbouring countries to facilitate the work of the
Secretaiy-General's mission and to ensure the safety of its
personnel."

Part II.

Other ma#ers considend by the Security Council

ADMISSION OF NEW MEMBERS TO THE UNITED NATIONS 368

A.

Application of the Republic of Kamkhstan

Decision

Decisions

At the same meeting, following the adoption of Security
Council resolution 732 (1992), the President of the Council
made the following statement on behalf of the members:371

At its 3032nd meeting, on 16 January 1992, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda, decided to refer the
application of the Republic of Kazakhstan- for membership in
the United Nations to the Committee on the Admission ofNew
Members for examination and report, as provided in rule 59 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

"It is a great honour for me to express, on behalf of
the members of the Council, our congratulations to the
Republic of Kazakhstan on the decision which the Council
bas just taken to recommend to the General Assembly the
admission of Kazakhstan to membership in the United
Nations.

At its 3034th meeting, on 23 January 1992, the Council
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members3;o conceming the application of the Republic of
Kazakhstan for admission to membership in the United
Nations.

"This is indeed an historie occasion. The admission of
Kazakhstan to the United Nations, and its fulfilment of ail
relevant obligations, will help to consolidate the positive
developments that the world bas witnessed in the last few
months. The significance ofKazakhstan's admission to this
Organization is clear to ail. I have no doubt that it will
have an important contribution to make in every area of
United Nations work.

Resolution 732 (1992)
ot 23 January 1992

The Security Council,
Having examined the application of the Republic of
Kazakhstan for admission to the United Nations,:tell

"The members of the Council are confident that
Kazakhstan, as a peace-loving State that is able and willing
to carry out the obligations contained in the Charter of the
United Nations, will contribute actively and constructively
in upholding the Purposes and Principles of the Charter.

Recommends to the General Assembly that the Republic
of Kazakhstan be admitted to membership in the United
Nations.
Adopted withoUI a vote at the 3034th
m«tin&

"We look fo1Ward to welcoming Kazakhstan among us
at the United Nations."

110
