S/PV.8261

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8261st meeting

Wednesday, 16 May 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lewicki/Ms. Wronecka. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Woldegerima
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Vaverka
Mr. Allen
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-15030 (E)
*1815030*

S/PV.8261

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

of the President and the Executive Secretariat of the
National Electoral Commission and extended the term
of the legislature until November.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisionalrules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Guinea-Bissau to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs; Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
and His Excellency Mr. Mauro Vieira, Permanent
Representative of Brazil to the United Nations, in his
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Mr. Fedotov is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Vienna.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: I am grateful for this opportunity
to provide an oral update on the political and security
situations in Guinea-Bissau and on the country’s
preparations for elections.
Since the adoption of resolution 2404 (2018), on
28 February, encouraging progress has been made
in the efforts to break the political and institutional
deadlock that has persisted in Guinea-Bissau for almost
three years. As the Security Council is aware, during
the extraordinary session of the Authority of Heads of
State and Government of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) on 14 April, President
José Mário Vaz of Guinea-Bissau made several key
commitments, which have since been fulfilled. Those
include the swearing-in of Mr. Aristides Gomes as the
consensual Prime Minister, on 16 April, the issuance of
a decree on the same day that confirms 18 November as
the date for the legislative elections, and the convening
of the plenary session of the National Assembly on
19 April, for the first time in more than two years. At
its meeting, the Assembly approved the appointment
2/18

16/05/2018

Since then, with the facilitation of an ECOWAS
ministerial delegation, which visited Bissau on 24 April,
a new inclusive Government has been sworn in. The
new Cabinet, which will be in office until the legislative
elections in November, comprises 26 ministers, four of
whom are women.
The significant breakthrough was achieved
following an agreement reached between the two main
political parties, the African Party for the Independence
of Guinea and Cape Verde and the Party for Social
Renewal, with the facilitation of the Catholic Bishop of
Bissau. It also owes much to the consistent pressure put
by ECOWAS on Bissau-Guinean political stakeholders,
which culminated in the imposition of targeted sanctions
on individuals deemed to be obstructing efforts to end the
impasse, as well as the encouragement and facilitation
of United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and the other members
of the group of five international partners in Bissau,
namely, ECOWAS, the African Union, the European
Union and the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries (CPLP). Those encouraging developments
pave the way for launching the electoral process and
creating openings for other peacebuilding initiatives
that have been long stalled because of the impasse.
Nonetheless, several key provisions of the
ECOWAS-brokered Conakry Agreement of October
2016 have yet to be implemented. As a crucial next
step, the political stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau have
initiated discussions that will culminate in the holding
of a national round-table dialogue, as provided for
in the Conakry Agreement. Both the Government
programme and a stability pact, which outline the
principles for key reforms until the end of the current
term of the legislature, are expected to be endorsed
by the political stakeholders following the national
round-table dialogue. The primary focus of the first
meeting of the new Council of Ministers, on 10 May,
was on preparations for the elections. UNIOGBIS will
continue efforts, including within the framework of
the Guinea-Bissau group of five international partners,
to encourage the Government to move forward the
convening of the round table and, more broadly, the
implementation of the remaining priorities outlined in
the Conakry Agreement.
18-15030

16/05/2018

S/PV. 8261

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

With respect to the legislative elections, a United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) project
document on electoral support to the Government, in the
amount of $7.7 million, has been finalized. The project
will support technical preparations for cartography
activities, an update of the voter register, voter education
and electoral administration. The Government of
Guinea-Bissau has made an unprecedented contribution
of $1.8 million to the UNDP basket fund. UNDP has
also contributed $200,000 to the fund, which, among
other priorities, will allow the UNDP to procure
biometric equipment for the electoral technical wing of
the Ministry of the Interior. The tender and procurement
process for the purchase of the biometric equipment and
software will be launched on 21 May, and the National
Electoral Commission, which supervises the process, is
expected to begin voter registration on 1 June.
Additional resources are urgently needed to fill
a funding gap of approximately $5.7 million to cover
voter registration and operational costs for the elections.
In order to avoid yet another delay in the elections, it
will be important for the international community to
provide the requisite support to bridge the funding gap.
However, we remain concerned about the
drug-trafficking situation and associated forms of
transnational organized crime. Since the adoption of
resolution 2404 (2018), there have been at least five
reported seizures of drugs at the international airport
in Bissau, which many fear might be just the tip of the
iceberg. It is our hope that ongoing efforts to enhance
UNIOGBIS monitoring and reporting capabilities, in
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) and other partners, will, in due
course, expose the true extent of the problem and
contribute to combating impunity.
Also since the adoption of resolution 2404 (2018),
steps have been taken by UNIOGBIS, with the
support of the Department of Political Affairs (DPA),
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support, to reorient the resources
and interventions of the mission towards the effective
implementation of the new priorities articulated by
the Security Council. To that end, a DPA-led technical
assessment mission — comprised of the relevant
United Nations departments and offices — was sent
to Bissau for the period from 24 to 31 March. The
team met with national, regional and international
stakeholders, and worked closely with UNIOGBIS
to help realign the mission’s resources, and internal

work on the reorientation is well under way. It was
agreed that resources would be temporarily redeployed
from the former rule-of-law and security institutions
component to support the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in conducting good offices
and providing support for the elections, as well as for
the newly established component on drug trafficking
and organized crime. UNODC will be integrated into
that component.
In addition, future United Nations police
deployments are expected to focus on criminal detection
and investigation, and the promotion of human rights
and gender equality will be mainstreamed in all mission
activities. The report and recommendations of the
technical assessment mission to Bissau will also inform
the strategic review mission, which will take place in
late August or early September. The strategic review
will encompass the Secretary- General’s assessment
of UNIOGBIS, including options for a possible
reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in the
country and a reprioritization of tasks, as requested by
the Council in resolution 2404 (2018).
The latest successful efforts to assist BissauGuinean stakeholders to end the political and
institutional impasse and launch the country on the
path of sustainable peace and development provide
cause for optimism. The period leading up to the
legislative elections, and particularly leading up to the
next presidential elections, in 2019, will be critical and
fraught with uncertainties.
Before concluding, I would like to recognize the
commendable contribution of Mr. Modibo Touré, who
completed his assignment as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on 6 May, particularly his
laudable efforts in forging close and constructive
relations with ECOWAS and the region. I would also
like to welcome his successor, Mr. José Viegas Filho,
who will assume his responsibilities later this month
and continue to build on progress made in GuineaBissau. I would also like to express our appreciation
to our partners — ECOWAS, the African Union, the
European Union and the CPLP for their contributions,
cooperation and efforts, which have helped open the way
for a better future for Guinea Bissau — an opportunity
that the people of Guinea-Bissau should be encouraged,
assisted and influenced to grasp.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Zerihoun

for

18-150303/18

S/PV.8261

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: I would like to thank the Security
Council for its continued attention to the threats posed
by drug trafficking and other forms of transnational
organized crime to peace and stability in GuineaBissau.
As the Council recognized in resolution 2404
(2018), the Government of Guinea-Bissau, the Economic
Community of West African States, the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
and other partners are working together to address
those urgent challenges. That includes support to the
transnational crime unit established under the West
Africa Coast Initiative, the joint airport interdiction
task force under the Airport Communication Project
(AIRCOP) and the trafficking in persons brigade
of the judicial police. Since its establishment, the
transnational crimes unit has investigated 70 cases
of drug trafficking, with 113 persons prosecuted and
71 kilogrammes of cocaine and 1,353 kilogrammes of
cannabis seized. Thanks to mentoring under UNODC’s
AIRCOP at Bissau airport, five passengers attempting
to smuggle cocaine were arrested in April. Those are
just two examples of the positive impact that capacitybuilding can have as part of integrated support to
strengthen criminal justice responses and promote
peace and security. UNODC has developed a technical
assistance package for Guinea-Bissau, with clearly
identifies areas of intervention.
First, we need to do more to build capacities.
We will continue supporting the judicial police and
nationally owned inter-service elite units that have been
established and proven to be successful, namely, the
transnational crime unit and the joint airport interdiction
task force. That support for detection and investigative
skills should encompass intelligence-gathering and
analysis, profiling techniques and the sharing of
operational information at national, regional and
international levels.
Secondly, we need to help counter-illicit financial
flows. UNODC is ready to respond to the request received
from Guinea-Bissau’s financial intelligence unit to
provide technical assistance to fight money laundering
and prevent and counter illicit financial flows.
Thirdly, we need to strengthen law enforcement
responses to maritime crime. The Bijagós archipelago
of 88 islands further exposes Guinea-Bissau to criminal
4/18

16/05/2018

activities due to the difficulties of controlling vast
territorial waters.
Transnational organized crime, coupled with a
challenging political and security environment, law
enforcement capacity gaps and resource constraints,
represents a clear threat to Guinea-Bissau, the
region and beyond. Combating drug trafficking
and dismantling criminal networks clearly requires
specialized assistance, and it also requires funds.
Despite our intense efforts to mobilize resources,
funding for UNODC activities in Guinea-Bissau was
drastically reduced in 2017. Our Office must rely solely
on project funding, even to carry out urgently needed
technical assistance. However, donors remain reluctant
to engage in Guinea-Bissau in view of the current
political situation.
I would therefore like to take this opportunity
to urge the international community to enable
UNODC and other international agencies to provide
the comprehensive support Guinea-Bissau needs to
address drug and crime threats, in line with resolution
2404 (2018), to help re-establish momentum towards
progress. UNODC remains at the Council’s disposal.
The President: I thank Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Vieira.
Mr. Vieira: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for the invitation to address the Security
Council in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
Before starting, I would also like to welcome the
appointment of Mr. José Viegas Filho of Brazil as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Guinea-Bissau and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Viegas has more than four decades of experience
in public service and diplomacy, and the PBC looks
forward to closely working with him. I would also
like to thank the former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Modibo Touré, for his close
collaboration with the PBC and the Peacebuilding
Support Office (PBSO) during his tenure in GuineaBissau.
Since my previous briefing to the Security Council,
on 14 February (see S/PV.8182), there have been positive
developments in Guinea-Bissau. I will not dwell long on
those points, especially after the excellent briefing we
received today from the Assistant Secretary-General
18-15030

16/05/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

for Political Affairs, Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun. As
we have heard, President José Mário Vaz appointed
Aristides Gomes as the new consensual Prime Minister
and confirmed that legislative elections would be held
on 18 November. Members of the new Government
were sworn in on 26 April.
After almost three years of political impasse, an
extraordinary plenary session of the Parliament was
convened on 19 April, when the National People’s
Assembly elected new leadership for the National
Electoral Commission (NEC) and extended its ninth
legislature until November. The appointment of a new
Chair of the NEC is indeed an important step, since that
was a factor blocking the preparations for the upcoming
elections in November. As I informed the Council
during my statement in February, that was stressed by
many of my interlocutors in Guinea-Bissau last July,
when I visited the country.
Let me also add that, on 3 May, the Chair of the
organizing committee of the National Conference
for Guinea-Bissau on Peace Consolidation and
Development, Father Domingos da Fonseca, delivered
a report to President José Mario Vaz entitled “In the
name of peace”. That document was drafted after a
long process of national consultations involving more
than 3,000 people in the Guinean diaspora and in the
country. The paper examines a series of issues related
to peacebuilding and aims to contribute to national
reconciliation. Preparations for that report began in
2009, and the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) provided
support to it.

S/PV. 8261

Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012), concerning GuineaBissau; Ambassador Fernando Delfim da Silva of
Guinea-Bissau, and Ms. Barrie Freeman, who updated
us on the most recent work of the PBSO.
During that very positive meeting, participants
expressed support for developments in the country,
including the fact that the constitutional framework for
free and fair elections would be respected. Members
also underlined the engagement of ECOWAS and
recognized the effective, preventive and deterrent role
of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau, as well
as the importance of ensuring its continuity until the
necessary conditions for its withdrawal were fully
met, at least until the 2019 presidential elections.
The PBC therefore would like to congratulate the
Government of Guinea-Bissau and the political actors
for the constructive spirit that allowed for the consensus
appointment of Prime Minister Aristides Gomes and
his Cabinet and the establishment of a date for the
legislative elections this year.
I would like to stress, however, the importance of
continued support for that positive momentum and to
underline the need to move forward on other provisions
of the Conakry Agreement, including the adoption
of a stability pact. I am sure that the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau and key political actors will continue
to demonstrate leadership and determination in
that direction.

With regard to the PBF, it is worth mentioning that
the implementation of its new portfolio for GuineaBissau started this year. As I mentioned during my
previous briefing, it consists of six projects, totalling
$7.3 million, running from January 2018 to June 2019.
It aims to contribute through bottom-up peacebuilding
approaches, supporting inclusive processes and
strengthening the participation of women and youth.

I would also like to recognize the efforts of the
region to solve the political impasse in the country.
That was made possible due to an exemplary showing
of international coordination, which includes the
group of five international organizations involved
in the peacebuilding process in Guinea-Bissau,
that is, ECOWAS, the African Union, the European
Union, the United Nations and the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP). The PBC
actively participated in these efforts.

On Monday, 14 May, I convened a meeting of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the PBC to discuss the
situation in the country. On that occasion, we received
briefings from Mr. David McLachlan-Karr, Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Guinea-Bissau; Mr. Tanou Koné, Permanent Observer
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS); Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba,
Permanent Representative of Equatorial Guinea and

All of what I have mentioned speaks to the
sustaining peace approach in peacebuilding and the
importance of ensuring the coherence of international
efforts in support of building and sustaining peace
in a country-specific context, with a strong emphasis
on inclusiveness and partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, as well as other relevant
stakeholders, including civil society. This is also where
the added value of the PBC comes into play.

18-150305/18

S/PV.8261

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

With regard to the electoral process, important
challenges ahead include, inter alia, the financing of the
elections and the update of the voter registration list.
The existing financial challenges must be surmounted
in order to allow for the timely preparations for
the elections. A project document in support of the
elections has been signed between the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the Government
of Guinea-Bissau. The total budget of $7.7 million
covers technical preparations for mapping, an update
of voter registrations and the practical administration
of the elections. It is important to underline that the
Government of Guinea-Bissau has already made an
unprecedented contribution to this basket fund. UNDP
has also made contributions. In addition to the ongoing
technical assistance the European Union is providing to
the Technical Office for Electoral Processes Support, it
is also preparing its contribution to the elections support
project. However, additional financial resources are
still needed. I would therefore once again like to call for
the support of the international community for bridging
the existing financial gap associated with the process.
I would also like to reiterate to the Council my
intention to visit Guinea-Bissau in the coming months,
probably in July, to consult with a broad range of
stakeholders on how the PBC can further support
peacebuilding efforts in the country, especially the
upcoming elections. The exact date of the visit will be
scheduled in consultations with the local authorities.
The visit will allow me to witness at first hand the
ongoing preparations for the legislative elections.
On my return, I intend to convene a PBC meeting to
discuss the process. I would also like to reiterate my
disposition to share the findings with the members of
the Security Council.
The Guinea-Bissau configuration will continue
to be actively engaged in following the situation
in Guinea-Bissau and in providing support for the
country through different initiatives. All efforts must
be made to encourage the international community to
demonstrate renewed confidence in Guinea-Bissau now
that the political impasse has been addressed.
Finally, I would like to remind the Security Council
that Brazil is currently the Chair of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries. As was done when
I previously briefed the Council, the members of the
CPLP have endorsed my remarks and recommendations.
The President: I thank Mr. Vieira for his briefing.
6/18

16/05/2018

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, and Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), for their excellent briefings. I would
also like to welcome the participation in this meeting
of Mr. Mauro Vieira, Permanent Representative of
Brazil and Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission. I also take this
opportunity to congratulate Mr. José Viegas Filho on
his appointment as Special Representative for GuineaBissau and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
as well as to pay tribute to his predecessor, Mr. Modibo
Touré, for his outstanding work as head of the Office.
Since the adoption of resolution 2404 (2018), on
28 February 2018, on the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau, encouraging information from the
country marks a real break with the previous situation,
which was characterized in particular by an institutional
and political deadlock. Indeed, on the basis of frank
dialogue and quiet consultations, political actors in
Guinea-Bissau, including President José Mário Vaz,
the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and
Cape Verde and the Party for Social Renewal, seem
resolutely committed to work together to lead their
country on the road to lasting peace.
At this point, I would like to congratulate all
stakeholders, including civil society and religious
leaders, and encourage them to continue those efforts,
with a view to a better future for Guinea-Bissau. In
that regard, the appointment of a consensus Prime
Minister, Mr. Aristides Gomes, the setting of the date
for the parliamentary elections, on 18 November 2018,
the reopening and functioning of the Parliament, as
well as the formation of an inclusive Government, on
25 April 2018, are proof of this new impetus, which
is certainly fragile, but which brings hope. These
various acts, which lay the foundations for a peaceful
end to the crisis, are the result of the progress made
in the implementation of the Conakry Agreement of
14 October 2016, which remains the only consensual
framework that should make it possible to find a lasting
solution to the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
18-15030

16/05/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

However, despite theose positive signs, the
enormous challenges ahead require the continued
support and assistance of the international community,
in order to overcome the obstacles to a definitive
peace in Guinea-Bissau. These are the next stages of
the Conakry Agreement, namely, the organization of
a round table for national dialogue, the signing of a
stability pact and the preparations for parliamentary
elections. In that regard, the clear priority objectives
assigned to UNIOGBIS by resolution 2404 (2018),
particularly with regard to elections, should be taken
into account. My country would therefore like to appeal
to donors and the international community to create
the technical conditions necessary for the organization
of open, fair and credible legislative elections. In
addition, cooperation between UNIOGBIS and regional
organizations, including the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), and international
partners, should continue to help stabilize the country.
One of the major challenges facing Guinea-Bissau
relates to security issues, both within the country and at
its borders. Meeting this challenge requires the updating
of relevant legislation and national mechanisms to
combat transnational organized crime more effectively,
including drug trafficking and money-laundering, which
threaten the security and stability of Guinea-Bissau and
the subregion. With this in mind, the Security Council,
through its resolution 2404 (2018), encourages greater
involvement by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in order to vigorously combat these scourges.
In that regard, my country would like to recall,
particularly in the framework of UNODC-ECOWAS
cooperation, the existence of the ECOWAS Regional
Action Plan for West Africa for the period 2016-2020,
the implementation of which aims to contribute, inter
alia, to the reduction of drug addiction, drug trafficking
and crime in the subregion. It is important to bear in
mind that poor management of the security issue could
have a negative impact on the ongoing political process.
In that perspective, we believe it is essential to
provide UNODC with the necessary means to fulfil its
mission, in order to contribute to a successful way out
of the crisis. Ultimately, only the ownership by GuineaBissau’s political stakeholders of their own destiny and
the continued support of international partners will
enable Guinea-Bissau to recover peace, a guarantee of
its economic and social development.

S/PV. 8261

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the convening of today’s briefing and thanks Mr. TayéBrook Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General, for the
very important information he has provided. We also
thank Ambassador Mauro Vieira for his significant and
strenuous efforts to carry out the duties entrusted to
him last year. We welcome the appointment of Mr. José
Viegas Filho as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS). We would also like to again congratulate
former Special Representative Mr. Modibo Touré on his
initiatives and constant cooperation with the Security
Council during his two-year tenure.
After nearly three years of a political and
institutional crisis in Guinea-Bissau, the Security
Council and the international community have a
reason to be optimistic. Recent positive developments
in the country provide a logical explanation for the
encouraging environment. On 16 April, President José
Mário Vaz conveyed hope to his people, the friends
of Guinea-Bissau and the international community by
appointing Mr. Aristide Gomes as consensus Prime
Minister. The appointment of Mr. Gomes to that
important State post was the result of long negotiations
supported primarily by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union,
which enabled the main political parties to reach a firm
consensus. A few days later, UNIOGBIS endorsed
the overwhelming approval of civil society and of the
people in general with regard to the appointment of
such an experienced politician.
With regard to the recently formed inclusive
Government, although it is indeed true that the African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde
and the Party for Social Renewal control the majority
of Government portfolios, the real surprise in the
Government’s composition is the fact that the leaders
of three other parties — the President of the Union for
Change, the President of the Democratic Convergence
Party and the President of the New Democracy
Party — were allocated seats in Parliament, which
demonstrates the Government’s inclusive nature. The
main goal of the new Government team, which should
achieve tangible results in a relatively short time, is to
guarantee smooth, transparent and inclusive legislative
elections on 18 November. To that end, it is vital that
the necessary $7.7 million be made available to the

18-150307/18

S/PV.8261

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

electoral fund as soon as possible. The Government and
the United Nations Development Programme agreed to
that fund to be able to proceed with the electoral census
update and to establish a new mapping division so that
the Government and the new management team of the
National Electoral Commission can have the technical
means to hold successful elections in a peaceful and
calm environment.
Peacebuilding and the consolidation of political
and institutional progress require much more than
organizing elections. The Conakry Agreement also
demands other kinds of conclusive reforms, such as a
review of the Constitution, the signing of a stability
pact, electoral law reform, political party law reform,
including public financing, and defence, security
and justice sector reform and the drafting of the
fresh start development plan according to the Terra
Ranca vision. Prospects for development are vital to
enable the country to return to the path of economic
development. We acknowledge and are grateful for the
donations already being made, and we congratulate the
Government of Guinea-Bissau for making an initial
contribution of $1.8 million. We call upon donors, the
main international financial institutions and GuineaBissau’s traditional and non-traditional donors to make
their contributions in order to move the process forward.
It is important that such development occurs within
the context of regional development. As expressed by
the African Union Commission in its communiqué of
2 May, we would like to encourage the new authorities
and all interested parties in Guinea-Bissau to work
closely within the framework of the country’s democratic
institutions and take urgent and sustainable steps to
address current challenges as soon as possible in order
to ensure lasting stability in the country. The examples
of Liberia and Sierra Leone clearly demonstrate that,
with effort, political will, solidarity, coordination and
international assistance, a peaceful and lasting solution
can be found to the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
In conclusion, we congratulate and pay tribute
to regional institutions — the ECOWAS and the
African Union — on the tremendous efforts and
considerable progress they have made to resolve
the political and institutional impasse. It is also
important to acknowledge the involvement and efforts
of the European Union, the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries. It is
essential that group of international actors remain
committed to providing assistance to Guinea-Bissau
8/18

16/05/2018

in the post-election period and helping it to develop
a budget to achieve its economic goals. I would like
especially to thank and congratulate Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, for his support to the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to curb drug trafficking.
In our capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012),
concerning Guinea-Bissau, we are considering a trip to
the country at the end of June to begin to take stock
of the progress made and of the status of the current
sanctions imposed on military leaders who carried out
the coup d’état on 12 April 2012.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I also thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun and Ambassador
Vieira for their briefings. Although he has left us
because of technical difficulties, I would also like to
thank the Executive Director Fedotov for his briefing.
It was important to hear from him given the specific
threat of organized crime in Guinea-Bissau.
Like others who have spoken so far, the United
Kingdom welcomes the recent progress seen in
Guinea-Bissau. That progress has been considerable.
A consensus Prime Minister after some months of
difficulty, a date for legislative elections and the
formation of an inclusive Government are all signs
that good sense and consideration for Guinea-Bissau’s
stability have trumped narrow political interests.
However, I think that we must all witness continued
progress before we are convinced that the current reality
is really a new reality. We need Guinea-Bissau’s leaders
to stick to their political agreement. It is an agreement
for their country’s future and for their people’s future,
and it must not be held hostage to personal disputes.
We need unity behind preparations for elections,
which are now only six months away. We also need
unified steps towards political and constitutional
reform in line with the concrete commitments made
in Conakry. We have already seen how civil society,
whether religious leaders or women mediators, have
acted in the country’s long-term interests. We would
urge Guinea-Bissau’s leaders to create opportunities
for their meaningful participation in the political
processes. We in the Council know that inclusive
political settlements are those that last.
It is clear we would not be discussing progress
in Guinea-Bissau without the patient leadership
shown by the Economic Community of West African
18-15030

16/05/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

States (ECOWAS). We urge ECOWAS to continue its
engagement to see the political crisis through and, in
return, we in the Council must remain united in our
support for ECOWAS and all of the impressive things
it has been doing.
In February, the Security Council renewed the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), with a narrower
focus on good offices. While the situation on the
ground has changed, the mandate remains just as, if not
more, relevant. In the short term, the priorities must
be consolidating the political settlement and delivering
the elections. Continued good-offices support will be
required in the medium term to see through political
reforms. We also welcome the deepening focus on
transnational organized crime and illicit drugs, which
are security threats not only for the country but for the
region and the international community at large.
We welcome warmly Ambassador Vieira’s briefing
and agree with him on the importance of the sustaining
peace approach. Given a changed political environment
on the ground and a refreshed mandate, the appointment
of the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. José Viegas Filho, is timely and welcome.
He has an opportunity to bring renewed direction and
drive to refocusing and slimming down UNIOGBIS as
per the February mandate and delivering on the priority
tasks at hand.
But let me in the same vein offer the sincere thanks
of the United Kingdom to former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Modibo Touré. Despite the
obstacles that UNIOGBIS has faced, he demonstrated
genuine commitment to Guinea-Bissau through to the
end of his term and helped deliver the positive progress
that we are discussing today.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I, too,
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Zerihoun and Ambassador Vieira for their briefings
today, and, although Executive Director Fedotov has
left us, we want to express appreciation for the renewed
vigour that he has to counter narcotics trafficking and
transnational organized crime in Guinea-Bissau. I also
join others in welcoming the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Filho, as he acquaints
himself with his new portfolio. We very much look
forward to working with him and wish to express
appreciation to his predecessor, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Modibo Touré, for his service

S/PV. 8261

and passion to bring about positive change in the lives
of the people of Guinea-Bissau.
The United States is encouraged by the consensus
appointment and swearing in of Prime Minister
Aristides Gomes as well as President Vaz’s renewed
commitment to implementing the Conakry Agreement.
While we are hopeful that these latest political
developments signal a positive turn for GuineaBissau, past experience reminds us to remain cautious.
Vigilance is still needed from all stakeholders to ensure
fulfilment of the commitments made by the country’s
leadership. The people of Guinea-Bissau deserve as
much, and the Council demands as much. We urge
President Vaz, Prime Minister Gomes, African Party
for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde leader
Pereira and others to follow through on fostering unity,
implementing the Conakry Agreement and preparing
the nation for the long-overdue parliamentary elections
this November.
Following the swift installation of an inclusive
Government, we call on its members to focus on
creating a programme of work and achieving service
delivery to show that they are serious about serving the
people who put them in power. In all these endeavours,
we encourage the inclusion of civil-society and women’s
groups. We applaud the influential engagement of the
Women’s Forum for Peace and the national women’s
council and look forward to the national forum of
women and girls for peace, scheduled in Bissau for later
this month.
As Guinea-Bissau finally sets out towards
newly scheduled November legislative elections, we
look forward to a free, fair and transparent poll. We
encourage all of Guinea-Bissau’s partners in the region
and the international community to find ways to support
the Government’s efforts to prepare for and execute the
elections, including through financial support.
Narcotics trafficking and transnational organized
crime destroy lives at all ends of the geographic
spectrum. We genuinely appreciate the work that the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
has done in Guinea-Bissau, work that we perceive as
having had a positive impact, reducing drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime. The establishment
of the Transnational Crime Unit in Bissau, under the
auspices of the West Africa Coast Initiative, served as
a powerful tool integrating efforts across the region to
combat trafficking.

18-150309/18

S/PV.8261

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

We were glad to learn that the 20 suspended
members of the Unit had been reinstated and were
heartened by the recent string of drug seizures at Bissau
airport in April. We hope to see more such concrete
results, with full investigations and accountability
supported by the Government and the security services,
no matter where the trail leads. However, in order to
continue to see impact, we wish to see the return of
UNODC staff to Bissau. We will work with our Council
colleagues, the Secretariat and UNODC to find a way
to make that happen.
We once again salute the activism of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
including its February imposition of sanctions on
spoilers of the Conakry Agreement and all its forwardleaning efforts to foster enduring solutions to GuineaBissau’s crisis and the implementation of the remaining
provisions of the Conakry Agreement.
As I stated in February (see S/PV.8194), we
believe that the adoption of resolution 2404 (2018),
renewing the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), will bring
real improvement to the mission, allowing it to focus
on putting an end to the stalemate. Only two months
later, we have seen a concrete political process,
and we expect to see a mission focused on political
solutions and employing its good offices working in
concert with ECOWAS. We appreciate the continued
implementation of resolution 2404 (2018) as it was
adopted in determining the mission’s mandated tasks,
size and budget.
We are also encouraged by the positive events of
the last month but acknowledge that Guinea-Bissau
has a long road left to travel. Its people will encounter
many challenges on that road, but obstructionist,
intransigent and selfish leaders should not be one of
them. Leaders have now shown willingness to take
some steps in seemingly good faith. We will anxiously
track their progress in the weeks and months to come as
they implement the Conakry Agreement, foster unity,
deliver services to the people of Guinea-Bissau, fight
corruption and transnational organized crime, and
prepare the nation for elections in November.
Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): I join others in thanking
Assistant-Secretary-General Zerihoun and United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Executive Director
Fedotov for their useful briefings today. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Mauro Vieira, Chair of the
10/18

16/05/2018

Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for his important contribution to
today’s discussion.
Since we last met in this Chamber to discuss
Guinea-Bissau, there have been a number of positive
developments. We welcome the appointment of Aristides
Gomes as Prime Minister on 16 April as well as the
formation of an inclusive Government on 25 April.
These are both important steps in the implementation of
the Conakry Agreement and preconditions for holding
free, fair and democratic elections. We are optimistic
that these new developments can help pave the way for
a lasting resolution to the political crisis in the country.
We commend the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
regional mediation in Guinea-Bissau, which has once
again shown how regional efforts can resolve political
deadlock and disputes and prevent conflict.
In this context, let me pay particular tribute to
the President of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of
State and Government, President Faure Gnassingbé of
Togo, and the ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau,
President Alpha Condé of the Republic of Guinea, for
their role.
All stakeholders must now work towards conducting
timely and credible elections on 18 November and the
further implementation of the Conakry Agreement.
Regarding elections, it is essential that the funding
gap for voter registration and the organization of the
elections be addressed. The ECOWAS Mission in
Guinea-Bissau will also have an important role in the
run-up to the forthcoming elections.
We welcome the reconfiguration of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS) and the appointment of the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, José
Viegas Filho. We congratulate him on his appointment
and look forward to working closely with him.
Despite the recent progress made, real challenges
remain that will need to be addressed, and the goodoffices function of the Special Representative will
be crucial going forward. In addition, we welcome
strategic and results-oriented reporting from
UNIOGBIS, so that the Security Council can fully play
its role by making decisions based on a comprehensive
understanding of the situation on the ground and how
it can best support the country. This is all the more
18-15030

16/05/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

important as the situation within the country remains
fragile. The current fragility could be exacerbated by
the economic situation. We note that this year’s cashew
harvest seems to be lower than last year’s. For that
reason, we believe it would be important that a risk
assessment and/or conflict analysis be carried out. The
Peacebuilding Commission has an important role to
play in convening actors and contributing to an analysis
of threats and challenges. We welcome the Chair’s
upcoming visit in July and look forward to him briefing
the Council again at the appropriate time. The six-point
road map and the Conakry Agreement remain relevant
and represent the only legitimate way forward. They
must be implemented in full.
Looking forward, in order to target the root causes
of the conflict in Guinea-Bissau, it would be important
to focus on reconciliation and political dialogue and
on strengthening the rule of law through strong and
inclusive institutions, which are important drivers of
peace. We encourage greater support for the active
participation of women in the peace and political
processes, especially in the context of the elections.
Ensuring women’s full involvement in building GuineaBissau’s future will be an important prerequisite for
lasting peace and stability in the country.
Recent months have seen important progress
in Guinea-Bissau. The momentum must be seized,
and all parties must work together towards the full
implementation of the Conakry Agreement and the
preparation of inclusive elections. We stand ready to
support them and their efforts.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this meeting and
appreciates the important briefings of the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. TayéBrook Zerihoun; the Ambassador of Brazil, Mr. Mauro
Vieira, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission; and Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.
I would like to start by highlighting the recent
progress made in Guinea-Bissau following the
adoption of resolution 2404 (2018). Peru welcomes
the appointment of Mr. Aristides Gomes as Prime
Minister, which was the result of consensus among
all parties in accordance with the provisions of the
Conakry Agreement. We look forward to the legislative
elections scheduled for 18 November, and we note that

S/PV. 8261

the National Assembly was able to meet for the first
time since 2016. Those developments should allow
for progress in the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement, the fundamental framework for resolving
the country’s political crisis. In that respect, we would
like to refer to three specific aspects that we believe
require urgent work in order to achieve sustainable
peace in Guinea-Bissau.
The first aspect concerns free and fair elections.
We believe that successful legislative elections this
year will favour the normal development of the 2019
presidential elections. That implies promoting citizen
participation on a large scale, particularly women and
young people, in an inclusive and transparent process.
We welcome the fact that the National Assembly has
appointed the four members of the National Electoral
Commission, including its Chair. However, we
underline the need to adequately finance the process
and have the necessary equipment and logistical
capabilities. We therefore support the work that the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) has been doing in terms
of mediation, providing good offices and supporting
the organization of elections. We welcome the support
of the United Nations Development Programme, and
we note the need for the international community to
continue cooperating.
Secondly, it is necessary to improve security and
access to justice. We are especially concerned about
the vulnerability of Guinea-Bissau to threats such as
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime,
which undermine institutions and the social fabric. It is
important to prevent terrorist groups in the region from
establishing links with those scourges. We therefore
consider it important to strengthen institutional
capacities, particularly in the area of security and
justice, and to promote greater cooperation by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime with UNIOGBIS in
order to support national efforts in those areas.
The third point concerns the construction of
a prosperous, peaceful and inclusive society. It is
necessary to address the root causes of conflict,
especially when the majority of the population lives in
a situation of poverty and vulnerability. That situation
could be aggravated by a decrease in cashew production,
the main export. In that regard, we emphasize the need
to guarantee predictability and stability in the financing
that the Peacebuilding Fund devotes to support the
efforts of Guinea-Bissau to allow its population access

18-1503011/18

S/PV.8261

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

to basic education, health and justice services, among
others. We encourage that the projects promoted by the
Peacebuilding Commission prioritize the sustainable
development of the country and that they empower
women and youth. We highlight the importance of that
work being appropriately coordinated with UNIOGBIS,
the United Nations country team and civil society.
In conclusion, we would like to highlight the
important mediation role played by the Economic
Community of West African States, as well as that of the
African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries and the European Union, among other
international actors committed to peace in GuineaBissau. We also recognize the work of Mr. Modibo
Touré as Head of UNIOGBIS and welcome the
appointment of Mr. José Viegas Filho, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary General for GuineaBissau and Head of said Office, whose professional
qualities are widely recognized.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank Mr. Mauro Vieira, Ambassador of
Brazil; Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs; and Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), for their insightful briefings on
the political and security situation in Guinea-Bissau.
France is very grateful for their respective activities,
which occurred alongside the resumption of dialogue
between the Guinea-Bissau parties following the
October 2016 Conakry Agreement. I would like to touch
on three points that have already been highlighted by
previous speakers.
First, I wish to reiterate France’s full support for the
appointment by President José Mario Vaz of Aristides
Gomes as consensual Prime Minister. A year and a half
after the Conakry Agreement, this appointment attests
to the will of the parties to break out of the political
impasse. France also welcomes the formation by Prime
Minister Gomes of an inclusive Government, whose
main undertaking will be to create the political and
institutional conditions necessary for the holding of
parliamentary elections in November.
Secondly, those recent political developments,
which we had hoped for, reflect the coordinated
actions of the international community and regional
organizations to resolve the Guinea-Bissau crisis.
In that respect, I reiterate France’s full support for
the initiatives of regional organizations, particularly
12/18

16/05/2018

the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), whose role has been crucial. It was in the
aftermath of the extraordinary session of the Heads
of State and Government of ECOWAS on GuineaBissau that President Vaz appointed Aristides Gomes
as Prime Minister. We are convinced that the solution
to the conflict will be given pride of place through
consultation and engagement with local actors. In
that respect, the group of five partners of GuineaBissau, mentioned by Ambassador Vieira, constitutes
a propitious coordination platform that should be
maintained and supported.
Thirdly, it is crucial that the commitment of the
Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and
international donors support the efforts of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS), as well as those of UNODC,
whose role is essential in creating a healthy environment
that is conducive to lasting political stabilization. The
recent history of the country calls for subdued optimism
in the face of recent progress. It is therefore particularly
important that we collectively send the right message,
one of vigilance and continued commitment, following
the appointment of a consensus Prime Minister.
The new UNIOGBIS mandate in resolution 2404
(2018) should help support the priority areas for the
resolution of the crisis in Guinea-Bissau, namely, the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement, adherence
to the expected time frame for the electoral cycle and
carrying out the process of reviewing the Constitution.
In that regard, I wish to express our best wishes to the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and express our appreciation for his predecessor.
Finally, the inclusion of women in the crisisresolution process, specifically through the Network
of Women Mediators that has been set up, is also an
important element that will promote ongoing dialogue
among local parties. To find a lasting solution in
Guinea-Bissau, we need an inclusive process supported
by all. Failure would be destabilizing, and we cannot
permit that.
Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank Assistant
Secretary-General Tayé-Brook Zerihoun for his
briefing on the latest developments in Guinea-Bissau.
We are also grateful to Executive Director Fedotov
for his remarks via video-teleconference, and we
commend the work that the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime is doing in the fight against
18-15030

16/05/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

drug trafficking and transnational organized crime.
We also appreciate the briefing by the Chair of the
configuration for Guinea-Bissau of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), including on the outcome of its
latest meeting. We commend the configuration’s active
and continued engagement in support of peacebuilding
and sustaining peace in Guinea-Bissau. We note the
Chair’s intention to visit the country and look forward
to hearing his impressions when he returns. We also
join others in welcoming the appointment of Mr. José
Vegas Filho of Brazil as the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), and we thank
former Special Representative Modibo Touré for his
dedicated service.
As indicated in the briefings we have just heard,
there have been positive developments in GuineaBissau, and we would like to echo the words of our
African colleagues from Côte d’Ivoire and Equatorial
Guinea. After the institutional paralysis of the past
three years, President José Mário Vaz’s appointment
of Aristide Gomes as a consensus Prime Minister,
following consultations with political stakeholders and
civil society, is indeed a step in the right direction.
The decision regarding the holding of parliamentary
elections, the reopening of Parliament and the
swearing-in of the new Cabinet are also encouraging.
Those and other positive developments have certainly
rekindled a sense of hope and optimism, and we very
much welcome them. We would like to congratulate the
Government of Guinea-Bissau and the political actors
for their constructive engagement, which has led to
this breakthrough.
The role played by the Economic Commission
of West African States (ECOWAS) in resolving the
institutional paralysis is indeed commendable, and it is
testament to the significant contribution that regional
and subregional organizations can make in resolving
conflict and crisis situations in their immediate
neighbourhood, in close coordination with other
international stakeholders. Of course, we cannot lose
sight of the challenges that remain, and we hope that the
positive momentum we are seeing will be maintained.
The centrality of the Conakry Agreement to
sustaining peace, security and development in GuineaBissau cannot be overemphasized, and we hope all
stakeholders in the country will respect and comply
with the Agreement in addressing their differences

S/PV. 8261

and the challenges facing their country. The sustained
engagement of the international community will
unquestionably be vital to creating an environment
conducive to holding peaceful and credible elections,
as well as filling in the country’s financial gaps.
The continued support of UNIOGBIS and the PBC
configuration will also be very important in that regard.
Finally, we believe that concerted efforts on the part
of ECOWAS, the African Union, the United Nations,
the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries and
other relevant partners will continue to be essential to
realizing a lasting solution in Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to sincerely thank Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun, Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
and Mr. Mauro Vieira, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their valuable briefings.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Guinea-Bissau, Mr. José Vegas Filho, on
assuming his new position. We wish him success in
that role and assure him of our full support. I should
also like to thank the outgoing Special Representative,
Mr. Modibo Touré, for his achievements. We wish him
every success in his future endeavours.
A year and a half has passed since the signing of
the Conakry Agreement, and we are pleased to see
practical, positive steps being taken by all parties
towards establishing an environment conducive to
the implementation of the remaining provisions of the
Agreement. In that regard, we welcome the decision
by President José Mário Vaz to select a consensus
Prime Minister, form an inclusive Government and
set November as the date for legislative elections. We
urge all the parties concerned to continue with that
constructive approach and pursue implementation of
the outstanding provisions of the Agreement.
With regard to the parliamentary elections, we urge
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau to provide the necessary support for
holding the elections pursuant to its mandate under
resolution 2404 (2018), ensure that all sectors of
society participate in the election process and monitor
the situation closely to prevent any incidents that could
undermine the process. We welcome the continued

18-1503013/18

S/PV.8261

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

efforts by the Peacebuilding Commission to mobilize
funding in support of the election process, which now
amounts to $7.7 million.
It would be remiss of me not to commend the efforts
of regional and international organizations working in
Guinea-Bissau to facilitate the implementation of the
Agreement. The Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the African Union, the United
Nations, the European Union and the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries have made great
efforts with all stakeholders to implement a number of
the provisions in the Agreement, especially in the light
of regional conflict-resolution initiatives.
We welcome the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission to support the roles of women and civil
society. We also commend UNODC’s role in fighting
drug-trafficking and organized crime.
The recent positive developments in Guinea-Bissau
have been made possible by the work done by regional
organizations to enhance progress on the ground. That
requires the Security Council’s support. We call on
ECOWAS to continue its efforts in this area. We are
now looking forward to seeing the national conference
on constitutional reform provided for in the Conakry
Agreement held at the end of the year.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to express
sincere thanks to Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun,
Mr. Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission configuration,
Ambassador Vieira, for their briefings on the situation
in Guinea-Bissau.

16/05/2018

developments on the ground in Guinea-Bissau; the
importance of supporting regional efforts, particularly
by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS); and the importance of the continued
engagement of the Security Council.
First, we would like once again to welcome the
developments on the ground in Guinea-Bissau. The
appointment of a consensus Prime Minister, the
formation of an inclusive Government and the setting
of a concrete date for legislative elections are positive
steps. Those steps show the goodwill of the key
political actors in Guinea-Bissau and create space for
UNIOGBIS to work on its mandate, with a Government
and Parliament that are functioning.
We would like to highlight the critical role played
by women’s organizations in breaking the political
impasse in Guinea-Bissau, and to reiterate that their
full and equal participation in Guinea-Bissau is key. We
encourage the Guinea-Bissau Government to continue
to engage with women in all steps and at all levels of
the political process.
It is important that the Government, the President
and the other political actors continue to work
towards organizing free and fair legislative elections
on 18 November and presidential elections next year.
Moving forward, it is essential to restore faith in
democratic institutions and work towards national
reconciliation in Guinea-Bissau.

We would like to take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative Touré for his hard work in
Guinea-Bissau and warmly welcome the incoming
Special Representative, Mr. Filho, to the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) team. We also commend the important
work of UNODC on the ground, particularly in the
light of the new mandate stipulated in resolution 2404
(2018), and we look forward to working closely with
UNIOGBIS as the situation in Guinea-Bissau continues
to improve.

That brings me to my second point, namely,
support for the region. Five key political
organizations — UNIOGBIS, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, the European Union,
the African Union and particularly ECOWAS, also
known as the P-5 — play an important role in GuineaBissau. It is important that the Security Council
continue to support the active engagement of ECOWAS
and the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau, as well as
the strong collaboration among ECOWAS, UNIOGBIS
and the rest of the P-5 in moving forward. We cannot
underestimate the role that ECOWAS played in
breaking through the political impasse. It will be vital
that the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral continue to support ECOWAS and to stimulate
that collaboration in the coming months, particularly in
the light of the organization of the elections.

Regarding the situation in Guinea-Bissau and
the implementation of resolution 2404 (2018), I
would like to focus on three aspects: the positive

I come to my third point. There is no room for
complacency on the issue of Guinea-Bissau. The
Security Council must remain engaged. While the

14/18

18-15030

16/05/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

recent developments in Guinea-Bissau are positive,
we must not lose sight of the importance of the full
implementation of the Bissau six-point road map and
the Conakry Agreement. While welcoming the positive
developments, we must also shed light, when necessary,
on the issues that concern us, such as the appointment
of the new Minister of State Botché Candé by President
Vaz. Botché Candé is on the ECOWAS sanctions list,
and his appointment serves as a reminder that, while
the political situation has improved, the situation in
Guinea-Bissau is still fragile.
Those political improvements may be short-lived if
the underlying structural issues are not addressed. The
new Government is tasked with building a Government
programme that supports national unity. It is key that
the stakeholders of Guinea-Bissau be able to move past
the political impasse.
In conclusion, we urge the political actors and
the P-5 on the ground to continue to work towards
supporting the inclusive Government in GuineaBissau, the organization of free and fair presidential
elections and the full implementation of the Conakry
Agreement and the Bissau six-point road map. The
continued engagement of the Security Council will
remain essential in moving forward.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General
Mr.
Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun,
Mr. Fedotov and Ambassador Vieira for their briefings.
China commends the recent progress in the
political process in Guinea-Bissau and the start of
the implementation of the Conakry Agreement by the
various parties in the country. Regional and subregional
organizations, such as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the European Union
and the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), played an important role in mediation and good
offices in resolving the political crisis in Guinea-Bissau,
which China appreciates. China calls on international
donors and partners to provide bilateral and multilateral
cooperation so as to continue to support the country in
its efforts to strengthen State capacity and to improve
the lives of its people.
We hope that the United Nations country team,
the Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs

S/PV. 8261

and Crime will provide targeted assistance to the
country, given its needs.
China supports African countries in providing
African solutions to African problems. They should
work alongside the international community, including
ECOWAS, together with UNIOGBIS and the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Filho, in order to promote dialogue
and communication among the various stakeholders
in Guinea-Bissua, to preserve stability and lasting
development in Guinea-Bissau and West Africa and to
play a constructive role in that regard.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun, Mr. Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), and Ambassador Vieira for their
insightful briefings on the latest developments in
Guinea-Bissau.
Kazakhstan welcomes the recent encouraging steps
by all parties to end the protracted political stalemate in
Guinea-Bissau. It is heartening to note the appointment
of Prime Minister Gomes by consensus, the formation
of an inclusive Government and the agreement to hold
legislative elections on 18 November.
We would like to congratulate the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. José
Viegas Filho, on his appointment, and we wish him every
success. We extend our full support for his commitment
to facilitating a political solution to the crisis. We join
others in expressing our deep appreciation to the former
Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), Mr. Modibo
Touré, for his dedicated service.
We also commend the mediation efforts undertaken
by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) under the leadership of Presidents Faure
Gnassingbé of Togo and Alpha Condé of Guinea. We
acknowledge the efforts of the members of the GuineaBissau group of five international organizations. We
believe that all of those measures have significantly
contributed to the recent positive developments and are
steps in the right direction. We welcome the decision to
extend the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission in GuineaBissau until 30 June, given that the Mission plays a
crucial role in contributing to stability in GuineaBissau. We therefore hope for the further extension of
the Mission’s mandate.

18-1503015/18

S/PV.8261

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Expeditious preparations for the elections are now
necessary. It is clear that international partners must
come together to provide the necessary technical,
logistical and financial support for the electoral process.
Using that constructive momentum, we call on
all parties to promptly take the necessary steps to
implement the other outstanding provisions of the
Conakry Agreement, including the constitutional
review and the adoption of a stability pact. Other matters
of concern that must be given urgent attention by all
of us are drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime. National engagement is critical to implementing
the various international programmes and projects
aimed at strengthening the security, judicial and law
enforcement sectors. We therefore support the technical
assistance package for Guinea-Bissau developed by
UNODC. We call on the authorities of Guinea-Bissau
to continue to strengthen cooperation with UNIOGBIS,
UNODC and INTERPOL in those areas.
In addition to such steps, the most effective
measures must be sought to ensure the country’s
stability and resilience by increased support for the
existing development plans and the United Nations
peacebuilding strategy, with a special focus on
education and health care. Ensuring the participation of
women and youth in the political process at every stage
and at all levels is equally important. We call on all
donors to provide the necessary funds for implementing
all such measures.
We welcome the plans of Ambassador Mauro Vieira
and of Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba, as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2048
(2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau, to visit the country.
That will further contribute to improved dialogue among
the parties. We reaffirm our readiness to work closely
with all the relevant parties to support peacebuilding
and consolidation efforts in Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State
of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the
information provided by the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun,
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, and Ambassador
Mauro Vieira in his capacity as Chair of the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
It is almost three years since the beginning of
the crisis in Guinea-Bissau, which had to do with
the adverse political context. Today we have great
16/18

16/05/2018

expectations as we see the country’s difficulties being
overcome, thanks to the appointment of a consensus
Prime Minister through a compromise deal that
has revitalized the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement, which remains the basic framework for a
peaceful settlement of the crisis and the quest for lasting
and sustainable peace. We are also closely watching the
development and adoption of a Government programme
that will help to establish the Government’s parameters
and structure.
We once again call for consolidating those accords,
which will enable all stakeholders to continue to
advance the implementation of a lasting political and
social settlement based solely on the best interests of
the people of Guinea-Bissau in strict respect for their
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. In
that regard, we believe that within the framework of the
road map of 10 September 2016, inclusive dialogue must
continue to be one of the main tools for enabling the
holding of elections to the legislature during the current
Administration and presidential elections in 2019.
Despite the far-reaching implications of the
political progress that has been made, Guinea-Bissau
is facing various challenges that must be dealt with as
effectively as possible. First, in the short term, both the
Government and the Parliament are in need of technical
and financial support so that they can begin registering
voters and consolidating the mechanisms needed for
holding the parliamentary elections. Cooperation among
the relevant regional and subregional organizations is
essential to that, and we therefore acknowledge the major
efforts of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and its Mission in Guinea-Bissau, as
well as the contributions of the European Union and the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, and
the important work of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
aimed at bringing together the parties to the conflict
and encouraging dialogue.
We welcome the efforts and outstanding work
of former Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Modibo Touré, whom we wish every success
in his future assignments. We also welcome the
appointment of the new Special Representative and
Head of UNIOGBIS, Mr. José Viegas Filho, who
we are confident will perform his duties with the
utmost professionalism. We believe that the work of
UNIOGBIS must be strengthened and focused on
initiatives that will continue to provide opportunities
18-15030

16/05/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

for dialogue. We are sure that such factors will help
to form an inclusive Government and consolidate the
upcoming electoral processes.
With regard to the work of UNIOGBIS, we are
eagerly awaiting the strategic review of the mission
and its proposed reconfiguration. We also commend
the work of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, ably chaired by Brazil,
and we emphasize the importance of strengthening
links related to cooperation and information-sharing
between the mission and the Security Council. We also
encourage the initiative of the Women’s Leadership
Forum on Peace. In Guinea-Bissau, the work that
women are doing in the quest for a political solution
shows how essential a gender perspective and female
participation in mediation and dialogue are.
With regard to the stabilization of the country
and security matters, combating drug trafficking and
transnational crime must continue to be a priority. The
role of the United Nations through the country team and
the United Nations Development Programme must be an
integral part of fostering development and reinforcing
the rule of law, with the goal of decreasing exposure
to drugs and crime by strengthening the various
components of the justice system. The international
community must also provide Guinea-Bissau with the
assistance needed to improve its control of its coasts and
airspace and to train the police to investigate organized
crime and drug-trafficking activities.
In conclusion, we want to emphasize the progress
that has been made so far through synergies between
all the parties. We reiterate once again that in times
of political, institutional and social crisis, ensuring
the well-being of the population, especially the most
vulnerable sectors, must be the overriding interest
guiding our efforts to achieve definitive stabilization
in Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Tayé-Brook Zerihoun; Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime; and Mr. Mauro Vieira,
Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United
Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for their informative briefings. We also welcome
the appointment of Mr. José Viegas Filho as Special

S/PV. 8261

Representative of the Secretary-General for GuineaBissau and wish him success in his work.
We note the significant progress that has been
made in resolving the political crisis in Guinea-Bissau
since the appointment of Prime Minister Aristides
Gomes by President José Mário Vaz in early April. We
welcome the formation of a consensus Government,
whose members, we understand, are acceptable to all
the main political forces in Guinea-Bissau. We support
the work of the country’s leadership in preparing for
the parliamentary elections scheduled for November.
We expect the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) to provide
effective support for the electoral processes, in line
with its mandate established pursuant to resolution
2404 (2018). We have taken note of the plans to convene
a national assembly on issues related to a review of
the Constitution in the near future. We believe that
will be extremely important from the point of view
of formulating proposals for reforming the country’s
founding laws and avoid any future repetition of the
current political turbulence. We note with satisfaction
UNIOGBIS’s efforts supporting the authorities in
preparing the assembly.
We would like to draw special attention to the
importance of combating transnational crime and drug
trafficking in the region. The efforts that Mr. Fedotov
spoke about deserve our full support.
We would like to thank the Economic Community of
West African States for promoting a political settlement
of the political crisis in Guinea-Bissau. At the same
time, we believe that any agreements concerning the
country’s future and its arrangements should be based
on the aspirations of its citizens themselves, without
any pressure or the imposition of ready-made solutions
from the outside. Responding to truly national interests
is the only way that they can play a positive role in the
country’s ability to emerge from a prolonged crisis.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Poland.
I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Tayé-Brook Zerihoun and Ambassador Mauro Vieira,
Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United
Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for their very informative briefings on the recent
developments in Guinea-Bissau. I would also like to
thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the

18-1503017/18

S/PV.8261

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

16/05/2018

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for his
comprehensive analysis.

Community of West African States and Ambassador
Mauro Vieira.

Poland welcomes the recent positive developments
in Guinea-Bissau following the Summit of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
held in Lomé on 14 April. The appointment of an
inclusive Government, headed by consensus Prime
Minister, Mr. Aristides Gomes, the reopening of the
National Assembly, the election of the President of the
National Electoral Commission and the announcement
of parliamentary elections to be held in November
constitute major steps to ending the political impasse
and successfully implementing the Conakry Agreement.

Our inclusive Government has the great challenge
of preparing the upcoming legislative elections,
scheduled for 18 November. The Conakry Agreement
also requires that a number of institutional reforms
be carried out. Why? It is not enough to just conduct
successful elections to automatically consolidate the
institutional stability of our democratic rule of law.

Against that backdrop, drug trafficking and
organized crime continue to represent grave threats
to peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau. In that
regard, we call on the political leaders and State
institutions to combat those crimes in cooperation with
UNODC, ECOWAS and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.
Finally, we commend the role played by the
President of the ECOWAS Authority, President Faure
Gnassingbé of Togo, and the ECOWAS Mediator for
Guinea-Bissau, President Alpha Condé of the Republic
of Guinea, as well as other regional and international
facilitators in resolving the political crisis. Last but
not least, let me express our full support to the newly
appointed Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. José Viegas Filho. Let me also express our
sincere gratitude to his predecessor, Mr. Modibo Touré,
for his efforts aimed at resolving the political crisis in
Guinea-Bissau.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of GuineaBissau.
Mr. Da Silva (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Madam President, for inviting me to the
Security Council and for giving me the floor.
Eighteen months after the signing of the Conakry
Agreement, my country finally has a consensual
Prime Minister. Since 25 April, Guinea-Bissau now
has an inclusive Government. I have the great pleasure
of thanking all of the Council members for their
patience, efforts and solidarity. I would like to express
my gratitude to the Security Council, the Economic
18/18

To give Council members a more accurate picture
of our lengthy institutional crisis, I wish to recall
here that over the past 24 years of our pluralistic
democracy, Guinea-Bissau has had five legislative
elections, suffered a civil war and was shaken by two
coups d’état. The current Prime Minister, Aristides
Gomes, is the twentieth person to occupy that post.
All that clearly demonstrates that it is not enough to
hold successful elections to consolidate democratic
institutions. To achieve all the goals enshrined in
the Conakry Agreement, the inclusive Government
and Parliament will need the participation of the
international community — for example, in the area of
technical assistance.
Guinea-Bissau needs the support of the Council
to conduct universal, participatory, transparent, free
and fair elections. In spite of our domestic financial
efforts, which have, and will continue, to come from
the State budget, the Government will need financial
assistance to cover the inherent costs, including sound
technical preparation of the elections. In that regard,
I would point to the urgency of updating the voter
registration rules, especially regarding the registration
of new voters, namely, the thousands of young people
who have reached voting age since the last elections,
in 2014.
In the new political framework, we will continue
to count on the patience and solidarity of the members
of the Council. Most important for us is that fact that
now we can build up our central public institutions and,
finally, move towards a recovered constitutional order
through the re-established political dialogue.
I would like to take this opportunity to wish every
success to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in my country, Mr. José Viegas Filho. The
appointment of a Brazilian national to that post is a
renewed source of hope for us. In conclusion, I can
assure those present that they have our gratitude.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.
18-15030
