V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting further the efforts made for the benefit of
the Sahel by the Office for Sahelian Relief Operations
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and by the United Nations Sahelian Office,
Recognizing the need for active measures to stimulate
new economic activities,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
of 21 September 19 77, 48
1. Urges Member States and the relevant international institutions-in particular the United Nations
Development Programme, the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, the International
Fund for Agricultural Development, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Food
Programme and the World Health Organization-to
continue to provide effective and continuous assistance
to the Government of Cape Verde so that it may deal
effectively with the catastrophic situation resulting from
the drought, and to ensure the supply of food, medical
and other products to that country;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to send a special
mission to Cape Verde with a view to determining, in
consultation with the Government, the nature and
extent of the development aid needed in order:
(a) To expand and strengthen the economic and
social base of the country;
(b) To initiate an accelerated development programme;
3. Decides to include Cape Verde in the list of the
least developed countries;
4. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary resources for an effective programme of financial,
technical and material assistance to Cape Verde;
(b) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the mobilization of
resources and to co-ordinate the international programme of assistance to Cape Verde;
(c) To keep the situation in Cape Verde under
constant review, to maintain close contact with Member States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financial institutions, and to report on the question to
the General Assembly at its thirty-third session.
101 st plenary meeting
13 December 1977
32/100.

Assistance to Guinea-Bissau

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the serious economic situation
in Guinea-Bissau as a result of more than eleven years
of a war of national liberation, the return of large
numbers of refugees and the total lack of infrastructure
for development,
Recalling that Guinea-Bissau is included in the list
of the most seriously affected countries, 4 n
Recalling its resolution 3421 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 on the implementation of the Declaration on
48 A/32/219.

49 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/31/21), annex IV.

85

the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, in which it urged the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations svstem to extend assistance to the newly independent ,1nd
emerging States,
Recu!ling recommendation 99 (IV) of 31 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Devclopment/'0 particularly paragraph 4 thereof, in which
the Conference recommended that measures of assistance should be undertaken by the appropriate org~1!S
of the United Nations system in favour of the n~wly
independent States in Africa,
Recalling further its resolution 3339 (XXIX) of 17
December l 974, in which it invited Member States,
particularly the developed countries, to provide economic assistance to the newly independent State of
Guinea-Bissau,
l. Urgently appeals to Member States and the international institutions concerned-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the international financial institutions, the United Nations Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and the World Food Programmeto assist the Government of Guinea-Bissau in an effective and continuous manner so as to enable it to deal
effectively with the difficult situation resulting from the
long liberation struggle and the return of large numbers
of refugees from neighbouring countries, and to meet
its economic development needs;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
financial, technical and economic assistance of the international community, in particular the developed
countries and the appropriate organizations of the
United Nations system, with a view to meeting the
short-term and long-term development needs of this
newly independent country;
3. Requests the Committee for Development Planning at its fourteenth session, as a matter of priority, to
give favourable consideration to the question of the
inclusion of Guinea-Bissau in the list of the least developed countries 51 and to submit its conclusions to
t~e Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fifth sess10n;
. 4. Invites in the meantime Member States, particularly the developed countries, and the organizations
of the United Nations system to grant Guinea-Bissau
the same benefits as those enjoyed by the least developed among the developing countries in the light of
prevailing conditions in Guinea-Bissau;
5. Requests _the Secretary-General to keep this
matter under review and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session on the implementation
of the present resolution.
I O1 sf plenary meeting
13 December 1977
32il01.

Assistance to Seychelles

The General Assembly,

Having heard the statement of the representative of
Seychelles 52 concerning the serious economic and social
00
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference 011
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (U111ted Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IT.D:10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
~ 1 See ~esolutions 2768 (XXVI) and 3487 (XXX).
" 2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtv-secontl.
Session. Second Committee, 41st meeting, paras. 27-31.

86

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

situation in Seychelles as a result of the lack of infrastructure for development,
Concerned by the adverse effects which the international economic situation has had upon the economy
of Seychelles,
Noting that Seychelles is faced with certain specific
tasks arising from its recent attainment of independence,
Recalling its resolution 3421 (XXX) of 8 December 1975 on the implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, in which it urged the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system to extend assistance to the newly independent and
emerging States,
Recalling further recommendation 99 (IV) of 31
May 1976 of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, 5 :i particularly paragraph 4 thereof,
in which the Conference recommended that measures
of assistance should be undertaken by the appropriate
organs of the United Nations system in favour of the
newly independent States in Africa,
l. Urgently appeals to Member States, especially
the developed countries, and the international institutions concerned-in particular the United Nations Development Programme, the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, the United Nations
Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Food Programme,
the World Health Organization, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and
the International Labour Organisation-to grant Seychelles, in the light of the prevailing conditions, technical and financial assistance in an effective and continuous manner so as to enable it to establish the
necessary social and economic infrastructure which is
essential for the well-being of its people;
2. Requests the Committee for Development Planning at its fourteenth session to consider the question
of the inclusion of Seychelles in the list of the least
developed countriesM and to submit its conclusions to
the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fourth
session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
financial, technical and economic assistance of the international community mentioned in paragraph 1
above, to keep this matter under review and to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
101 st plenary meeting
13 December 1977
32/107.

Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Fund for Agrit-ultural Development""

The General Assembly,
Having considered Economic and Social Council
resolution 2104 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977 and the
53 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
54 See resolutions 2768 (XXVI) and 3487 (XXX).
5 5 See also sect. V, resolution 32/53, sect. VIII, resolution
32/102, and sect. X.B.7, decision 32/428 A.

draft agreement annexed thereto, intended to bring
the International Fund for Agricultural Development
into relationship with the United Nations in accordance
with Articles 57 and 63 of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Approves the Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Fund for Agricultural Development set forth in the annex to the present resolution.
103rd plenary meeting
15 December 1977
ANNEX
Agreement between the United Nations and the
International Fund for Agricultural Development
PREAMBLE

In accordance with the provisions of Articles 57 and 63
of the Charter of the United Nations and of section 1 of
article 8 of the Agreement Establishing the International Fund
for Agricultural Development (he.reinafter called the "Agreement"), the United Nations and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development (hereinafter called the "Fund")
agree as follows:
Article I
RECOGNITION

The United Nations recognizes the Fund as a specialized
agency, operating in accordance with the Agreement concluded
among its member States with the objective of mobilizing additional resources to be made available on concessional terms
for agricultural development in developing member States.
Article II
RECIPROCAL REPRESENTATION

I.

Representatives of the United Nations shall be:

(a)
Entitled to attend, and to participate without vote in,
meetings of the Governing Council of the Fund;

(b l Invited to participate without vote in broad policymaking meetings of other organs and committees of the Fund.

2.

Representatives of the Fund shall be:

Entitled to attend meetings of the General Assembly
of the United Nations for purposes of consultations;
(a)

(b) Entitled to attend, and to participate without vote in,
meetings of the Main Committees and other organs of the
General Assembly, in particular the World Food Council, as
well as meetings of the Economic and Social Council and of
the Trusteeship Council and of their respective subsidiary
bodies dealing with matters in which the Fund has an interest.

3. Sufficient advance notice of these meetings and their
agendas shall be given so that, in consultation, arrangements
can be made for adequate representation.
4. Written statements presented by either organization to
the other shall be distributed by the secretariat of the latter
to the members of the appropriate bodies in accordance with
their rules of procedure.

Article Ill
PROPOSAL OF AGENDA ITEMS

Subject to such preliminary consultation as may be necessary, the Fund shall include in the provisional agenda of the
appropriate organ of the Fund items proposed by the United
Nations. Similarly, the Economic and Social Council and the
World Food Council and their subsidiary bodies, as appropriate, shall include in their provisional agendas items proposed
by the Fund.
Article JV
CO-ORDINATION AND CO-OPERATION

I. In view of the co-ordinating role and global responsibilities of the United Nations in promoting economic and
social development and the need for positive and effective co-
