UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICJ-AL
THIRTY-FOURTH

NEti

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2

15 1)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1

Letters dated 13 June 1979 and 15 June 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13394 and S/13397) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption

of the agenda

WPV.2151

,

NOTE

:

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capitai’letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to .a United Nations
document.
.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the O$Jkiai Record of the Security Council The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

i

2151st MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 20 June 1979, at 4.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Ethiopia, Guyana, Madagascar, Rwanda, Sao Tome and
Principe and the United Republic of Tanzania [S/13406-j,
which reads as follows:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Cxechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, ;Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

“We have the honour to inform you that we support
the letter addressed to you by Mr. Madjid Abdallah, a
member of the POLISARIO
Front, in which he
requests permission to make a statement in the Security Council, pursuant to rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, at the meetings which are to be held
at the request of the Permanent Representative of
Morocco.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2151)
1. Adoption

of the agenda
“We should be grateful if you would have this letter
and that of Mr. Abdallah circulated as a Council document.”

2. Letters dated 13 June 1979 and 15 June 1979 from the
Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/I3394 and S/13397)

3. Do any members of the Council wish to make any
observations in connexion with this request?

The meeting was called to order at 5.40 p.m.

4. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretationfrom’French):
The Gabonese delegation attaches great importance to
the valuable information that any qualified person may
place before the Council in pursuance of rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure. Nevertheless, with regard
to the case before us, I should like to say that my delegation, although not opposed to hearing the speaker, would
simply like to enter reservations with respect to the capacity in which he would speak.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letters dated 13 June 1979 and 15 June 1979 from the
Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l3394 and S/13397)
1. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretation from Russian): I
wish to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Algeria,
Benin, Madagascar and Morocco in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the question on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
remarks made by the representative of Gabon have been
noted.
6. I take it that the Council agrees to invite Mr. Madjid
Abdallah to make a statement under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.
It was so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Boucetta (Morocco) took a place at ihe Council table and Mr. BouayadAgha (Algeria), Mr. Houngavou (Benin) and Mr. Rabetajika (Madagascar) took thepiaces reservedfor them at the
side of the Council chamber.

7. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council is meeting today in response to the
request by the Permanent Representative of Morocco
which is contained in his letters dated 13 and 15 June to
the President of the Security Council, issued in documents S/13394 and S/13397 respectively.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
should like to inform the Council that I have today
received a letter from the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Benin, Burundi, the Congo, Equatorial Guinea,

8. Members of the Council also have before them a
letter dated 16 June from the Deputy Permanent Representative of Algeria to the President of the Council, which
is contained in document S/13399.
1

seriousness of the situation, without wishing to bring a
formal complaint to the Security Council. In thisregard I
would ask the members of the Council to refer to our
letter of 4 October 1978 to the Secretary General.* We
have, then, tried to exhaust other means before coming to
the Council, the United Nations organ entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security. But, in
‘view of the deterioration of the situation and the recent
developments, we have thought it indispensable to come
to the Council with’the problem.

9. The first speaker is the Minister ofState in charge of
Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of Morocco, His
Excellency Mr. M’Hamed Boucetta. I welcome him and
invite him to make his statement.
10. Mr. BOUCETTA
(Morocco) (tite@rerution from
French): Mr. President, the delegation of the Kingdom of
Morocco wishes frrst to express its satisfaction at seeing
you presiding over the deliberations of the Security
Council on a question’as vital and crucial as this one,
which concerns the safeguarding of the security of our
country. Your wisdom, your open-mindedness and your
acute sense of justice are for us a guarantee that there will
be a serious and thorough examination of the problem
that is today before the Council. It also happens that you
are the representative of a country with which Morocco
has the most cordial and fruitful relations based on trust,
friendship, mutual respect and close co-operation in various fields.

16. In truth,what country in the world could stand idly
by while another country violates its frontiers, destroys
its property and kills its citizens? Just imagine: the
number of deaths SDfar is 328. Just imagine: the number
of wounded is 251. Just imagine: the number of missing
persons is 122. That is the present situation. The Council
will surely agree with us that this situation has become
intolerable.

1 I. My delegation also wishes to express its appreciation and its gratitude to all members of the Council for
the diligence with which they have responded to the
Moroccan request. In so doing, they have recognized the
seriousness of the moment and have shown that they are
ready to face up to their responsibilities.

17. To cite just the most decent acts of aggression-and
that is the purpose of our complaint to the Council-on
the night of 31 May/l June 1979 a column of the Moroccan army was attacked while it was proceeding from the
town of Tantan to the town of Tarfaya. There were 23
deaths, eight persons reported missing and 42 wounded,
not to speak of considerable material damage. On the
night of 4 June, while His Majesty the King of Morocco,
Hassan II, was receiving Mr. Edem Kodjo, the Administrative Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity, in order to inform him about Algerian aggression
and the deliberate violation of Moroccan national territory, the town of Assa, in the province of Goulimine, was
attacked. There were 25 deaths, 9 persons reported missing and 13 wounded. Among the victims were civilians
who had been peacefully going about their business.

12. In appealing to the Security Council today,
Morocco, pursuant to Article 35 ofthe Charter of the
United Nations, is submitting a clear, precise request
concerning incidents at a specific time and place. In
effect, Morocco has for some time been the victim of
deliberate acts of aggression, acts known to all, against its
national territory committed by armed bands from Algeria that return to Algeria once they have committed their
crimes.
13. This is a particularly serious time and the situation
is very grave. We are sincerely concerned and feel compelled to say that we find ourselves, practically speaking,
on the eve of a bloody and tragic confrontation between
two neighbouring countries, a confrontation that may
degenerate into a widespread conflict the dimensions of
which cannot be foreseen.

18. I have distributed maps so that members of the
Council may find:she precise locations of these places,
some on the Algerian frontier and some inside our country, a fact which is characteristic of the question we have
brought to the Council today.
19. At the very time when we were bringing our request
to the Council, a third act of aggression was committed in
the same region, on the night of 13114 June. That is a real
act of defiance against the Council and to the United
.
Nations.
,
20. I should like to transmit to members a list of the
victims so that the Council may appreciate the seriousness of the problem. There have been deaths and woundings; children have been killed; women have been killed:
peaceful inhabitants of the region have been attacked and
killed. The list is lengthy. I should not like to impose upon
the Council a reading of that list, but I do wish to draw
attention to the persons who have been victims of these
acts of aggression. It will be seen that there are children
among them, and women, and elderly persons. Itwill also
be noted that there has been material damagei the property of civilians has been damaged or destroyed. From
the photographs that I shall submit to the Council

14. How is it that Morocco and Algeria-two countries
that should aim at co-operation and friendship, two
countries that are linked by their history and geography,
that share a common destiny and that belong to the same
civilization-are
today on the brink of a fratricidal unjustifiable war? The Algerian Government, contrary to all
expectations, has for some time been responsible for the
launching of attacks by armed gangs against our national
territory and against the security of our citizens.
15. If we have come to the Council today it is because
we feel compelled to do so. It should be recognized that
thus far we have shown patience, restraint and wisdom.
But that patience, that restraint and that wisdom have
not been rewarded. Out attitude has been interpreted as a
manifestation of weakness. Out of respect for international legality and desiring not to overdramatize a situation unduly, we initially felt satisfied with merely
informing the Secretary-General of the importance and

’ A/33/284.”
2

through the Secretariat, it will also be-noted that heavy
weapons were used-sophisticated
weapons, missiles,
tanks and armaments of various types. From the photographs the Council and the Secretariat will ascertain the
importance of what I am saying. Those are not the kinds
of weapons that would be found in the hands of guerrillas, if any existed in the region; they could only belong to
a regular, army, an army that has sophisticated weapons
8.)
at its disposal.

cise terms. One of those cases is the sending of armed
bands or mercenaries from the national territory of a
State to attack the territorial integrity of another State.
That is specifically included in article 3 gof the Definition
of Aggression. Paragraph 1 of article 5 of that same
instrument sets forth the following: “No consideration of
whatever nature, whether political, economic, military or
otherwise, may serve as a justification for aggression.”
The Declaration annexed to resolution 2625 (XXV).
establishes that States are in duty bound

21. This is the best illustration of the seriousness of the
acts of aggression committed .by the Algerian Government against the territory of a State Member of the
United Nations, Morocco, which has on many occasions
demonstrated its commitment to peace and to the principles and ideals of the Organization.

“to refrain from organizing; instigating, assisting or
participating in acts of civil strife or terrorist acts in
another State or acquiescing in organized activities
within its territory directed towards the commission of
such acts”.

22. There is no doubt that Algeria’s responsibility for
those acts of aggression is total. Those attacks were committed by bands which have been recruited, equipped,
armed, trained and financed by the Algerian authorities,
and protected in Algerian sanctuaries after having left
Algerian territory.

27. As we have just seen, substantive international law
leaves nothing unclear; it deals with the same specific
cases of aggression that we have brought today before the
Council. It clearly stems from it that under no pretext
should a State finance. arm or lead gangs against the
territorial integrity of another State, sowing death and
destruction.

23. The Organiiation,
on the .basis-of the principles
embodied in the Charter, .had repeatedly legislated on
these cases. Indeed, the General Assembly has, in numerous declarations, adopted appropriate provisions condemning such practices in relations among States; it has
even termed them crimes against international peace and
security. At this stage I merely wish to draw the attention
of the Council in particular to three documents of crucial
importance: the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, adopted on 24 October 1970 on
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations [resofurion 2625 (XXV’]; the Declaration on the Strengthening
of International Security, adopted on 16 December 1970
[resolurion 2734 (XXV)]; the resolution containing the
definition. of aggression, adopted on 14 December 1974

28. Consequently, Algeria cannot adduce any justification for such acts. Its attitude is all the more serious and
unjustifiable in that the Government of Algeria alleges
that it does not have any dispute with Morocco. That
Government should therefore revise its present policy,
the consequences of which are pregnant with threats and
dangers for peace and security in the region.
29. We wish to reaffirm for our part that, despite everything, we continue to believe that the construction of the
Maghreb is not only a duty for us all but, in our view, is
also part of the common destiny of the States of our
region.
30. Loyal to that constant principle of our policy and
our own traditions, we have retained our composure and
held to an exemplary position in the face of the attacks
perpetrated against us, since we are convinced of the
virtue of dialogue and of the need for the peaceful settlement of any dispute between States. I reaffirm here that
my country has always preserved its unswerving faith in
the capacity of the Organization of African Unity, the
United Nations and the League of Arab States to put an
end to such acts of aggression:

[resolution 3314 (XXIX)].

24. All those documents reaffirm the principies of international law which should govern relations among sovereign, independent States. They relate to strict respect for
the obligation to refrain from interfering in the affairs of
other States. Respect for those principles is the essential
condition for the maintenance of peace among nations.
Those international instruments unambiguously affirm
that the practice of intervention in any form whatever is
not only a violation of the spirit and letter of the Charter
but also tends to create situations which endanger international peace and security.
25. Furthermore, the aforementioned three declarations in a similar manner recall the duty of States to
refrain from recourse to the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or the political independence of
other States. Such action is considered to be a crime
against peace.

31. In the two messages which our Sovereign, King
Hassan II, addressed successively to His Excellency
Mohamed Gaafar Nimeiri, President of the Democratic
Republic of the Sudan and current President of the
Organization of African Unity, after the acts of aggression by Algeria which took place on 31 May and 4 June
1979 respectively and which are the subject of our complaint to the Council, we reaffirmed Morocco’s desire for
peace and its complete readiness to endeavour to put an
end to the state of tension in the region. In his first
message, His Majesty stated the following:.

26. Finally, those three documents not only define general principles but also define cases of aggression in pre-

“We had hoped to encounter the same desire and the
same readiness on the other side. Showing great self3

restraint, Morocco refrained from any action so as to
conlirm its desire for peace and, above all, so as not to
give Algeria the slightest pretext to justify its bad
cause.“*

38. Before I conclude mv statement, I should like to add
a few words that I consider necessary so as to eliminate
any ambiguity and to clear up any confusion that has
been deliberately created and spread since the day before
yesterday in the corridors of the Security Council. Tantan, Tarfaya, Zag and Assa-places that I mentioned
earlier in my statement and that are indicated by numbers
on the map I have had circulated and that were the targets
of attacks whose circumstances I have briefly recounted-are
completely outside our Saharan provinces-what was formerly known as the Territory of
Western Sahara-a territory where the international responsibilities of Spain came to an end on 26 February
1976. The map makes this matter perfectly clear.

32. Furthermore, Morocco has always been ready to
accept the praiseworthy efforts of mediation made within
an Arab, African or international context. Morocco has
spared no efforts to see to it that attempts are made to
clear the atmosphere among the States of the region and
to restore a climate of friendship and co-operation
among them.
33. To this constant desire for peace and harmony that
Morocco has always sincerely displayed, the Algerian
Government has responded in the manner of which we
are all aware.

39. The confusion that our adversaries are attempting
to create consists in their saying that the problem is one of
tension-tension,
incidentally, that they themselves have
created-that has been rife there since that region was
decolonized; that the problem is before the Organization
of African Unity, that the heads of State belonging to that
organization have set up an adhoc committee to deal with
it and that, therefore, the OALJ should be the only body
seized of the matter. Must I recall that this is a political,
opportunistic argument, since only a few weeks ago, in
the non-aligned movement as in the thirty-third session
of the General Assembly, it was our opponents who
endeavoured to show that OAU could not be the only
body to defend certain principles and that that organization could not be the only one to study this matter?

34. In the face of such an attitude we must therefore say
that our patience does not impair our resolve to defend
our sovereignty, our territorial integrity and the security
of our citizens and of their property. This is, in fact, the
sacred duty of any State worthy of the name.
35. The exercise of self-defence is an inherent right
recognized in international law and embodied in the
Charter, particularly in its Article 51. In application of
these rules of law, my country, which continually suffers
from acts of aggression for which the Algerian Government is solely responsible, will pursue the aggressors
wherever they may be found. We forcefully affirm that
Algeria must assume full responsibility for any situation
that may emerge. As was stressed by His Majesty Hassan II in his second message to President Nimeiri:

40. Today, the Securitv Council is seized of a certain
number of-deliberate act’s of aggression-and in particular those committed on the night of 31 May/l June and
on 4 June 1979-which, strictly speaking, have no con- ‘.
nexion with the problem before the Organization of African Un.ity.
_
41. Furthermore, upon the commission of those acts of
aggression, Morocco immediately informed His Excellency Mohamed Gaafar Nimeiri, current President of the
Organization of African Unity, and Mr. Edem Kodjo,
Administrative Secretary-General of OAU, who was in
Morocco at the time the attacks took place.

“Whatever may happen later will be beyond our
control. It will be the bitter fruit of the persistence of
others in their error and arrogance.“3
36. In having recourse today to the Security Council,
Morocco fosters the hope that the irreparable may be
averted. This hope is based on the virtue we recognize in
the peaceful settlement of disputes whatever may be their
nature. We trust that the Council will condemn the
aggressions against our country and adopt the relevant
measures to prevent their repetition.

42. I wished to draw to this confusion deliberately
created in an attempt to oppose consideration of this
question by the Council. I also wished to bring forth these
clarifications in the hope of allaying any doubt that may
exist in the minds of our brothers and friends of our
African family.

31. As we have stated before, the situation is ‘an
extremely serious one. From one moment to the next, it is
in danger of degenerating into an armed conflict with
unforeseeable consequences. This is why speedy action
by the Council is needed. The Council must take note of
these acts of aggression, condemn and use its prerogatives under the Charter to put an end to them once and for
all. Because we respect the Charter, we wish to preserve
peace in our region and to safeguard the security of a
Member State.

43. My country remains at the service of the Council to
facilitate any investigation that it may consider necessary
in order to ascertain the veracity of the facts and to
implement any measure it may deem useful to end these
acts of aggression which constitute a flagrant violation of
the principles of the Charter and which create an
extremely serious situation in our region, thus gravely
jeopardizing international peace and security.

2 SeeA/34/317,
annex I.
J Ibid. annex II.

The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

4

~~~,-jHlj~;rl~~WI.1;~C,j~~lrJI,~~l~'"il'rY'~l,~~JSJI;ZI.
. jtjr

u’ 31 A,+

,,i $1

+c

a.9

vY~ : J’ +fI

,\

ilJFJlDFX%S.SlXtii9h
B%~~T~bftl~~gBWBu~~~~u~

Ih#~~#BVQ~f!~~ffB~~B~~~U~~

HOWTOOBTAINUNITEDNATIONSPUBLKATIONS
Unite 1 Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
tbe world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

COMMENTSEPROCURERLESPUBLICATIONSDESNATIONSUNlES
Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
auprAs de votre libraire
ou adresses-vous
A : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou GenAve.
KAK

IIOlIYVZiTb

HBAAHEIII

BHHax

ODraHHJaUHH
H areHTeTBax

aaulem
HaaHB.

KAH~~KWOM warawixe
CeKaHn no nponlutte

HJAaHHB

OPrAHHBAUUH

O6'beAHReHAblX
110 scex
paitoHaX

OWbE~SfHEHHhIX

HaunR

~oauio

Arma.

HaBOxHTe

HAqHR

nymirb
B XXHXRIILIX
uaraCnpasKH
06 ,m3AawHlx
a

ww nmu~~e no anpecy:
Oprami3aun~
HwsamfR. HbIO-FiopK
HIGH XCexesa.

OCix.e~~ne~nh~x

COMOCONSEGUlRPUBLICACIONE!3DELASNACIONESUNIDAS
Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho ifi United Nations. New York

Price: sus.

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o didjase
a: Naciones

1.50

i9-70002-January

1982-2.250
