United Nations

A/RES/67/223

General Assembly

Distr.: General
4 April 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 24

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 21 December 2012
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/67/441)]

67/223. Promotion of ecotourism for poverty eradication
and environment protection
The General Assembly,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 1
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 2 the Monterrey
Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development, 3 the Rio
Declaration on Environment and Development, 4 the Plan of Implementation of the
World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation), 5 the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: outcome
document of the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development
to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, 6 the Outcome of the
Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on
Development, 7 the outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals 8 and the outcome document of
the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, 9 as well as the eleventh
meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity,

_______________
1

Resolution 60/1.
Resolution 55/2.
3
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico,
18–22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
4
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,
3–14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
5
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
6
Resolution 63/239, annex.
7
Resolution 63/303, annex.
8
Resolution 65/1.
9
Resolution 66/288, annex.
2

12-49198

*1249198*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/223

Promotion of ecotourism for poverty eradication and environment protection

Recalling further its resolutions 53/200 of 15 December 1998 entitled
“Proclamation of 2002 as the International Year of Ecotourism”, 65/148 of
20 December 2010 entitled “Global Code of Ethics for Tourism” and 66/196 of
22 December 2011 entitled “Sustainable tourism and sustainable development in
Central America”,
Recalling its resolution 65/173 of 20 December 2010 entitled “Promotion of
ecotourism for poverty eradication and environment protection”,
Stressing that poverty is a multifaceted problem that requires a multifaceted
and integrated approach in addressing its economic, political, social, environmental
and institutional dimensions at all levels,
Stressing also that ecotourism is a cross-cutting activity that can, within the
framework of sustainable tourism, contribute to the fight against poverty, the
protection of the environment and the promotion of sustainable development,
Stressing further the role of ecotourism in promoting rural development and
better living conditions of sustainable rural populations,
Welcoming the efforts of the World Tourism Organization, the United Nations
Environment Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
and the Convention on Biological Diversity to promote ecotourism and sustainable
tourism worldwide,
Welcoming also the efforts of the Marrakech Process on sustainable
consumption and production, the achievements of the International Task Force on
Sustainable Tourism Development and the objectives of the Global Partnership for
Sustainable Tourism, launched in 2011 as a permanent successor to the International
Task Force,
Noting the initiatives launched and the events organized at the subregional,
regional and international levels in the field of ecotourism and sustainable
development,
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General of the World Tourism
1.
Organization transmitted by the Secretary-General of the United Nations; 10
2.
Recognizes that the development of ecotourism, within the framework of
sustainable tourism, can have a positive impact on income generation, job creation
and education, and thus on the fight against poverty and hunger, and can contribute
directly to achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals;
Also recognizes the potential of ecotourism to reduce poverty by
3.
improving individual livelihoods in local communities and to generate resources for
community development projects;
Emphasizes the need to optimize the economic, social, cultural and
4.
environmental benefits stemming from ecotourism activities in all countries,
particularly developing countries, including African countries, the least developed
countries and small island developing States;

_______________
10

2/4

See A/67/228.

Promotion of ecotourism for poverty eradication and environment protection

A/RES/67/223

5.
Also emphasizes that ecotourism can contribute to sustainable
development, in particular environment protection, and improve the well-being of
local and indigenous communities;
Recognizes that ecotourism creates significant opportunities for the
6.
conservation, protection and sustainable use of biodiversity and of natural areas by
encouraging local and indigenous communities in host countries and tourists alike to
preserve and respect the natural and cultural heritage;
Underlines, in this regard, the importance of establishing, at the national
7.
level, where necessary, appropriate policies, guidelines and regulations, in
accordance with national priorities and legislation, for promoting and supporting
ecotourism, within the framework of sustainable tourism, and minimizing its
potential negative impact;
Invites Governments, international organizations, other relevant
8.
institutions and other stakeholders, as appropriate, to highlight and support best
practices in relation to the implementation of relevant policies, guidelines and
regulations in the ecotourism sector and to implement and disseminate existing
guidelines;
Encourages governments at all levels to use ecotourism, within the
9.
framework of sustainable tourism, as a tool to support poverty alleviation,
environment protection and/or biodiversity conservation, and to base the tourism
components on clear evidence of market demand and a sound economic base;
10. Encourages Member States to promote investment in ecotourism, in
accordance with their national legislation, which may include creating small and
medium-sized enterprises, promoting cooperatives and facilitating access to finance
through inclusive financial services, including microcredit initiatives for the poor,
local and indigenous communities in areas with high ecotourism potential, including
rural areas;
11. Underlines the importance of conducting an environmental impact
assessment, in accordance with national legislation, for the development of
ecotourism opportunities;
12. Stresses that indigenous cultures, traditions and knowledge, in all their
aspects, are to be fully considered, respected and promoted in ecotourism policy
development, within the framework of sustainable tourism, and underlines the
importance of promoting the full and early participation and involvement of local
and indigenous communities in decisions that affect them and of integrating
indigenous and local knowledge, heritage and values in any such ecotourism
initiatives, as appropriate;
13. Emphasizes the need for effective measures in the context of ecotourism
initiatives to ensure the full empowerment of women, including equal participation
of women and men at all levels and in decision-making processes in all areas;
14. Calls upon the United Nations system, in the context of the global
campaign for the Millennium Development Goals, to promote ecotourism, within
the framework of sustainable tourism, as an instrument that can contribute to
achieving those Goals, in particular the Goals of eradicating extreme poverty and of
ensuring environmental sustainability, and to support the efforts and policies of
developing countries in this field;
15. Encourages the regional and international financial institutions to
provide adequate support to programmes and projects related to ecotourism, taking
3/4

A/RES/67/223

Promotion of ecotourism for poverty eradication and environment protection

into account the economic, social, cultural and environmental benefits of such
activities;
16. Invites relevant specialized agencies, in particular the World Tourism
Organization, United Nations bodies and other organizations, to provide technical
assistance to Governments, upon request, to assist, as appropriate, in strengthening
legislative or policy frameworks for ecotourism and their implementation in the
context of sustainable tourism, including those for environment protection and the
conservation of natural and cultural heritage;
17. Invites all stakeholders to cooperate in supporting, as appropriate, local
and indigenous community participation in ecotourism activities;
18. Invites the public and private sectors and relevant stakeholders to
provide, upon request, assistance for capacity-building, developing specific
guidelines and awareness-raising materials and training for people involved in the
ecotourism sector, such as language training and training in specific skills in tourism
services, as well as to develop or strengthen partnerships, especially in protected
areas, within the framework of sustainable tourism;
19. Recognizes the role of North-South cooperation in promoting ecotourism
as a means to achieve economic growth, to reduce inequalities and to improve living
standards in developing countries, and also recognizes that South-South and
triangular cooperation, as complements to North-South cooperation, have potential
for promoting ecotourism;
20. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations to submit to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, in collaboration with the World Tourism
Organization and other relevant United Nations agencies and programmes, a report
on the implementation of the present resolution, including recommendations on
ways and means to promote ecotourism as a tool for fighting poverty and promoting
sustainable development, taking into account relevant reports prepared by the World
Tourism Organization in this field.
61st plenary meeting
21 December 2012

4/4
