26

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

3. Dectlti!J to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session an ítem entitled "Convention on
the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of
environmental modification techniques: report of the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3476 (XXX). Declaration and establishment of a
nuclear-free zone in South Asia
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3265 A (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, in which the General Assembly, while
recognizing, inter alia, that the creation of nuclearweapon-free zones could promote the cause of general
and complete disarmament under effective international
control, considered that the initiative for the creation of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in an appropriate region of
Asia should come from the States of the region concerned, taking into account its special features and
geographical extent,
•,
Noting with appreciation the comprehensive study
of the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its
aspects, 44 which has been prepared by the Ad Hoc
Group of Qualified Governmental Experts under the
auspices of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament,
Having considered the basic principie unanimously
accepted by the experts that, wherever appropriate
conditions for a nuclear-weapon-free zone exist, the
initiative for the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
should come from States within the region concemed,
and participation must be voluntary,
Decides to give due consideration to any proposal
for the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in an
appropriate region of Asia, after it has been developed
, and matured among the interested States within the region concemed.
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3265 B (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, in which it endorsed, in principle, the
concept of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia,
Noting the note by the Secretary-General,411
Further noting that, in the introduction to bis report
on the work of the Organization, the Secretary-General has urged the interested countries of the different
regions to consult together with a view to the establishment of additional nuclear-free zones, 46
1. Urges the States of South Asia to oontinue their
efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
South Asia, as recommended by the Geperal Assembly in resolution 3265 B (XXIX);
2. Further urges those States to refrain from any
action contrary to the objective of establishing a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia;
'4Jbid., Supplement No. 27A (A/10027/Add.1), annex I.
411 A/10325.

48See Of!icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth

.

Session, Supplement No. JA (A/10001/Add.1), sect. VIII.
,

3. Decides to include in the provisional agend::i. of
its thirty-4irst session an ítem entitled "Establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3477 (XXX). Establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the South Pacific

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the urgent need for agreement on
measures to achieve the goal of general and complete
disarmament, inoluding nuclear disarmament, under
.effective international control,
Convinced that the proliferation of nuclear weapons
and the continuance of the nuclear arms race are
among the greatest threats to world peace and the survival of mankind,
Noting that article VII of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons47 acknowledges the
right of any group of States to conclude regional treaties
in arder to ensure the to~ absence of nuclear weapons
in their respective territories,
N oting further the declaration of the Review Confereru::e of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons that the establishment
of internationally recognized nuclear-weapan-free
zones, on the initiative and with the agreement of the
directly concerned States of the zone, represents an effective means of curbing the spread of nuclear weapons
and could contribute significantly to the security of
those States,48
Endorsing the declaration of the Review Conference
that the co-operation of the nuclear-weapon States is
necessary for the maximum eflectiveness of any treaty
arrangements for establishing a nuclear-weapon-free
zone, 49
Recalling, in particular, the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa, 50 adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its first ordinary session, held at Cairo
from 17 to 21 July 1964, and the notable progress
achieved by the Latín American States towards the denuclearization of their regían,
Noting, in addition, that the Heads of Govemment
of the independent or self-governing States members
of the South Pacific Forum emphasized in their communiqué of 3 July 1975 the importance of keeping the
South Pacific region free from the risk of nuclear contamination and of involvement in a nuclear conflict
and commended the idea of establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone in the South Pacific as a means of
achieving that aim,
1. Endorses the idea of tlie estáblishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the South Pacific;
2. Invites the countries concerned to carry forward
consultations about ways and means of realizing this
objective;
3. Expresses the hope that all States, in particular
the nuclear-weapon States, will co-operate fully in
achieving the objectives of the present resolution;
47 Resolution 2373 (XXII), ami.ex.
48 See A/C.1/1068, annex 1, p. 9.
49 Jbid.
50 See Of!icial Records of the General Ass,mbly, Twentieth

Session, Annexes, agenda item 105, document A/5915 •
