United Nations

S/PV.3723

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-first Year

3723rd Meeting
Thursday, 12 December 1996, 6.40 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Fulci . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea-Bissau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Malebeswa
Mr. Searle
Mr. Qin Huasun
Mr. Abdel Aziz
Mr. Thiebaud
Mr. Metscher
Mr. Lopes da Rosa
Mr. Rendón Barnica
Mr. Wibisono
Mr. Wlosowicz
Mr. Choi
Mr. Lavrov
Sir John Weston
Mr. Inderfurth

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution 1035 (1995) (S/1996/1017)
Letter dated 21 November 1996 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1996/968)
Letter dated 5 December 1996 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/1996/1012)

96-87076 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-first year
The meeting was called to order at 6.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
dated 21 November 1996 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council; and
document S/1996/1012, which contains the letter dated 5
December 1996 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1035 (1995)
(S/1996/1017)
Letter dated 21 November 1996 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1996/968)
Letter dated 5 December 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/1996/1012)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, the Czech Republic,
Ireland, Malaysia, Norway, Turkey and Ukraine, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the Council
table; Mr. Fowler (Canada), Mr. Rovenský (Czech
Republic), Mr. Campbell (Ireland), Mr. Hasmy
(Malaysia), Mr. Biørn Lian (Norway), Mr. Çelem
(Turkey) and Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/1996/1017, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to Security Council resolution 1035
(1995); document S/1996/968, which contains the letter

2

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1996/1032, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by France, Germany, Italy, the
Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/1996/1024, letter dated 9 December 1996 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, conveying the communication from the
High Representative, Mr. Carl Bildt, on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina; and S/1996/1025, letter dated 9 December
1996 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council, conveying the exchange
of letters between the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Parties to the Dayton
Peace Accords concerning the Stabilization Force in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, on whom I now call.
Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): In this
month, the last month of the year 1996, let me express
our appreciation for the fashion in which you, Sir, have
handled the workings of the Security Council, obviously
under quite demanding circumstances.
At the same time, let me also take the opportunity to
express our appreciation for the work of His Excellency
Ambassador Wisnumurti of Indonesia for the most able
fashion in which he handled his tasks as President of the
Council last month.
We received the draft resolution before the Council
only late yesterday and, as a consequence, although we
have forwarded the draft to our Presidency for its review,
I have not received specific instructions nor could I
reasonably anticipate any specific instructions on the
matter. Therefore, my comments on the draft are based on
the following principles.

Security Council
Fifty-first year
First of all, I am here to represent, with fidelity and
integrity, all of Bosnia and Herzegovina and, in particular,
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole. I
take this responsibility most seriously. Secondly, the
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement is still the foundation of the
peace process and our stated positions are guided by this
Agreement. Finally, and most critically, the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as adopted under the Dayton/Paris
Peace Agreement, is the most basic foundation for our
expressed views.
On the basis of these criteria, I would like to express
our general satisfaction with the draft resolution before the
Council and to reaffirm that our Government has expressed
support for the commitments outlined generally therein.
Because of the length and detail of the draft before us, I
will not go through it issue by issue. Instead, I would only
like to highlight a few key issues that deserve special
comment or attention.
Let me start by thanking the Member States,
organizations and individuals behind the civilian, economic
and military implementation of the Peace Agreement. The
efforts are noteworthy and, in the overwhelming number of
instances, deserve our thanks and praise. The results of the
combined efforts of the international implementers, on the
one hand, and of the signatories on the other are,
unfortunately, not reflective of the efforts, or of the best
wishes of our friends, or of the longing of all the Bosnian
people, nor necessarily of the terms of the Dayton/Paris
Agreement.
In particular, we must highlight the following. First,
although economic recovery and reconstruction have moved
forward, the general and explicit promises of assistance
remain too frequently unrealized. Our country is in such
need of rebuilding that any unkept promise is both
pragmatically and symbolically painful.
At the same time, in agreement with the draft
resolution, we are — at least some of the members of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina are — in favour of
assistance being conditioned on fulfilment of the obligations
contained in the Peace Agreement. In fact, we call for
conditionality as a tool to compel compliance and
implementation. However, failure by some authorities
within Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot excuse the
international community from neglecting its promises to all
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
You, the sponsors of and implementers of the
Dayton/Paris Agreement, can see the facts on the ground

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
well enough to know who deserves your condemnation
and challenge, and who, on the other hand, deserves your
support — especially now, more than ever before. None
of us deserves generalizations. We understand that the
language in this draft resolution supports precise
identification of those who are in compliance and those
who are not, and that assistance will be distributed
accordingly — also, of course, taking need into
consideration.
Secondly, progress is being made in the
establishment of the new institutions of the central
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the
accommodation of the old institutions. Unfortunately,
significantly less progress — some might argue even no
real progress — has been achieved on the elements of the
Peace Agreement that constitute the reintegration of the
country and the real basis for real peace.
I am certain that the Council would agree with me
that we cannot substitute superficiality for substance, and
that would be exactly the case if more effort — sincere
effort — was not made to ensure freedom of movement,
freedom of the media, democracy, respect for human
rights and, most critically, the return of refugees and
displaced persons to their homes. A house with a roof,
but without walls or a foundation, is either a mirage or a
moment of suspended animation just before collapse.
Recently, under the sponsorship of the Office of the
High Representative and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), a gathering
of numerous refugee and minority organizations
representing individuals of all ethnic backgrounds —
Bosnian Muslims, Serbs, Croats and others — met under
the newly coined title Coalition for Return. They have
developed a comprehensive agenda to promote the
realization of their universally accepted right of return to
their homes. I was honoured to be requested by the
Coalition to represent their views in relevant international
forums.
In this context as well, we welcome the calls in the
draft resolution before us for return of refugees and for
the opportunity of refugees to choose their destination
upon return. However, I am certain that refugees of all
ethnic backgrounds do not believe that they, in fact, have
a choice as long as they cannot in actuality return to their
homes of origin. We would understand the language
promoting return to homes of origin or to homes of
choice to be, in fact, based upon the principle of first
securing the real opportunity to return to one’s home of

3

Security Council
Fifty-first year
origin. Otherwise, such language could be misappropriated
to deny a real choice and actually to further rather than
reduce the consequences of “ethnic cleansing”.
Thirdly, I would like to bring to the Council’s
attention our full support for the call under the terms of the
Dayton/Paris Agreement for regional arms control and
military stabilization. We believe this to be a cornerstone
for peace and security in our region. One point: in order to
make the already agreed upon arrangements truly effective,
transparency and credible reporting are absolutely decisive.
We believe that effective inspections are essential and that
public reporting of compliance or non-compliance is
absolutely determinative under the terms of the Peace
Agreement.
Fourthly, we welcome the continuing role of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) in supervising the forthcoming municipal elections
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. There appears to be full
agreement by all to this role. We can now only strive for
prompt execution of these elections and for all, including
the relevant international actors, to promote the standard of
free and fair elections called for by the terms of the
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement.
Fifthly, I would like to mention an issue with respect
to which there does not appear to be consensus between all
the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This Security
Council draft, numerous other resolutions and presidential
statements, as well as the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement,
call for full cooperation and compliance with the Tribunal
and its orders.
As the latest report of the Tribunal outlines, the level
of cooperation and compliance varies substantially from
country to country in the region, as well as between the
relevant authorities within Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Unfortunately, while the orders and demands of the
Tribunal are clear, and their priority under international law
is without doubt, the authorities of the Republika Srpska
take the view that their local constitution rejects
compliance.
I was a direct negotiator and signatory of the
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement, and there is no doubt that
full compliance is mandated not only by international
law — by this very Council, the Peace Agreement and the
aforementioned Paris and London Conferences — but also,
most relevantly, by our new Constitution, adopted in
Dayton and Paris by all the parties. I certainly would not

4

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
have agreed to and signed the Peace Agreement
otherwise.
That is also the reason why I have no doubt, as the
Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
expressing this position without reservation before this
Council. The legal and constitutional requirement for
compliance with the Tribunal applies to all equally, and
our central Government has already acted in full
consistency with this principle by surrendering to the
Tribunal all indicted persons who are under our control,
regardless of whether they are Serbs, Croats or Bosnian
Muslims.
Some have, inadvertently or otherwise, buttressed —
that is, given moral support — to the position of the noncompliant by arguing that somehow the Tribunal is not
impartial. The argument seems to be based solely upon
numbers, because the largest number of indicted
individuals are ethnically Serbs while the smallest number
are Bosnian Muslims.
First, this is not an issue of ethnicity or collective
ethnic guilt. We reject group guilt. This is an issue of
individual and State authority responsibility for the
heinous crimes committed.
Secondly, even the numerical argument does not add
up. Actually, because of the full compliance of the central
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the lack of
cooperation by others, ironically, more Bosnian Muslims
have been surrendered to the Tribunal than members of
any other ethnic group. For us, all of our citizens,
regardless of ethnic background or religion, deserve our
protection. At the same time, all those individuals who
committed crimes must be held accountable, also
regardless of ethnic background or religion. This is a
matter of our future, of reconciliation and of the rule of
law.
Finally, we did find offensive the implicit or explicit
suggestion that the Tribunal should exhibit impartiality
by, in future, indicting the same number of people from
each ethnic background. That truly would be a perversion
of justice that would transform the Tribunal into a
political court designed to serve the political expediency
of some, or refashion history and ignore the essential
foundation of individual responsibility.
I am certain that most will agree that the issue is not
about the integrity of the Tribunal and its judges, who
come from all corners of the world and all backgrounds,

Security Council
Fifty-first year
but is more about the support that the Tribunal is receiving
from the very United Nations organs that gave it initial life.
It is on this latter, general, issue that I should like to
conclude. On 3 December 1996 the Tribunal judges, from
Italy to Egypt and the United States, acting unanimously,
expressed their great dismay at not being given adequate
support for their repeated demands to compel compliance
with the Tribunal’s orders, and their growing sense that the
Tribunal is, perhaps, being marginalized. Indeed, it is most
unfortunate that the Tribunal judges cannot escape this
sinking feeling. It would be worse if their fears proved true.
In this context, we should like to endorse the position,
enunciated in the draft resolution, that the primary
responsibility for the Peace Agreement lies with the parties.
It is also true that the international community, in particular
the most influential sponsors of the Peace Agreement, have
a most decisive role — I emphasize the word “decisive” —
in certain key aspects of the Peace Agreement. Some
signatories, having failed in their commitment to the Peace
Agreement, especially as it relates to full cooperation with
the Tribunal, are waiting to see if these sponsors of the
Peace Agreement will abandon the Agreement or, at least,
just this element of the Agreement. Either way, this would
be a disastrous position, bringing the peace process to
decisive failure.
Clearly, the parties ultimately must be responsible for
their future — our future. Nonetheless, the valuable work
of the Security Council, the Contact Group, various
international factors on the ground and the Tribunal remain
essential, inescapable factors for peace. The role of the
international community in support of the peace process
remains unavoidable, although, of course, we all hope that
it will gradually decrease.
I should like to make one final point regarding the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
The Tribunal’s contribution to peace is, as we have said,
critical and decisive. However, the Tribunal is the court of
all of us — it is your court. It is meant to deliver justice
for Bosnian victims. But these are victims of violations of
the most basic standards of international humanitarian law.
By extension, we are all victims of these violations of
international humanitarian law. If we do not support the
Tribunal sincerely and effectively, it will be a further
injustice against all of us, as well as against the Bosnian
victims.
The President: I thank the Permanent Representative
of Bosnia and Herzegovina for the kind words he addressed
to me.

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
The next speaker is the Permanent Representative of
Ireland. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Campbell (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The following
associated countries align themselves with this statement:
Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia. Iceland has also
aligned itself with this statement.
The draft resolution before the Security Council this
evening marks a reaffirmation by the international
community that it is willing to support the consolidation
of peace and democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina by
continuing to provide the necessary stable and secure
environment within which the important objectives of the
Peace Agreement can be achieved. The European Union,
many of whose members will participate in the follow-on
multinational stabilization force, welcomes the decision to
authorize the establishment of the force. We also pay
tribute to the men and women of the many nations that
participated in the multinational force (IFOR), established
under resolution 1031 (1995), for the major contribution
that they have made to the peace process. We also
acknowledge the dedicated work of the High
Representative and his team, as well as the International
Police Task Force (IPTF), and we welcome the
commitment that has been made to reinforce their
respective roles for the period ahead.
The next stage must to be build on the achievements
of the last 12 months. The responsibility for doing that
and for bringing about reconciliation and economic,
political and social regeneration lies principally with the
authorities and the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Unless they are prepared to assume full responsibility for
the functioning of their State, the continued support of the
international community, through the provision of very
significant human and financial resources, cannot be
guaranteed. It must therefore be clearly understood that
without the fullest commitment from the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to meeting their obligations
under the Peace Agreement, the European Union will
have to reconsider the scope of its engagement in the
peace process.
The European Union and its member States have
been in the vanguard of the international community’s
contribution to Bosnia and Herzegovina — providing, in
1996, more than $1 billion in financial assistance,
including humanitarian aid. The diversity of the support

5

Security Council
Fifty-first year
mechanisms, ranging from humanitarian assistance to
reconstruction and assistance for transition to a market
economy, has a single aim: that Bosnia and Herzegovina
should develop into a just and stable political society with
a market-based economy anchored in the future Europe.
One of the fundamental components of political
stability and successful economic development in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is the establishment of effective
institutions. The European Union underlines the importance
of establishing these institutions without delay. We
welcome the setting up of the Council of Ministers and call
upon all its members to work together constructively and in
cooperation. The Council of Ministers and the collective
presidency can, and must, set an example to other
institutions at the national and local level by showing that
it is possible to make them function effectively to the
benefit of all the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
not solely to the advantage of the individual entities of
which they are composed.
The recent Conferences in Paris and London of the
Peace Implementation Council have provided a set of
guiding principles for a two-year civilian consolidation
period together with a comprehensive Action Plan for the
next 12 months. Underpinning both is the requirement that
all parties implement fully the Peace Agreement, including
cooperation with the International Tribunal. As we embark
on the next 12 months of consolidation, the focus must be
on the areas where progress has been slow and on
examining ways of accelerating this. Our common objective
is to urge the authorities at all levels in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to work as expeditiously as possible towards
the establishment of a fully functioning multi-ethnic State
with institutions that enjoy the support and confidence of all
citizens.
To this end, the European Union reaffirms its
willingness to contribute, through all the means at its
disposal, to the consolidation of peace and self-sustaining
stability in and around Bosnia and Herzegovina. It will
continue to monitor closely the progress that is being made
and will react as appropriate whenever it believes that
commitments are not being met. Of particular importance
in this respect will be the need for effective action in the
following areas:
Full respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including the rights of persons belonging to
minorities.

6

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
Marked progress in establishing freedom of
movement and communication between the entities:
Urgent steps must be taken to reduce incidents of
intimidation and harassment.
The elimination of obstacles to the early, phased,
safe and orderly return of refugees and displaced persons
to their homes: The European Union welcomes the efforts
being made by other bilateral donors, by United Nations
agencies — in particular the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees — and nongovernmental organizations in establishing projects
designed to facilitate the return and reintegration of
refugees and displaced persons to all areas of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We call upon all the parties to cooperate
fully with them in their work.
Full compliance by the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and other States with the orders of the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia,
particularly by those that have failed to cooperate fully
with arrest warrants issued by the Tribunal and to
surrender indictees to the Tribunal for trial: The European
Union, in reiterating its strong support for the work of the
International Tribunal, reminds the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina that their obligations under international
law take precedence over any provisions in their local or
national legislations.
Full respect for freedom of expression, including a
free and independent media: The European Union
believes this to be an essential precondition for ensuring
a democratic society in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The successful holding of municipal elections by
summer 1997 under the supervision of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE): In this
regard, the European Union underlines the importance it
attaches to ensuring a full, free and open political debate,
including full participation by and free access for all
opposition parties to the mass media.
The European Union has made it clear to those
involved that the future development of relations with it
will depend on how they perform in these areas. We see
the application of conditionality of this type, in a regional
context, as an important contribution to the peace process
overall. In this context, the European Union has made
clear its dismay at recent developments in Serbia
following the local elections and has stressed that
democratic norms, including rights of peaceful assembly
and free speech, must be respected. Compliance with

Security Council
Fifty-first year
these norms is a key factor in the development of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia’s relationship with the
European Union.

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
ensure the success of the Tribunal and that the guilty are
brought to justice.
(spoke in English)

An opportunity for the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to move forward in peace now exists. They
will have the full support and encouragement of the
European Union and of the international community as they
endeavour to rebuild their lives and reconstruct their
country. The challenges that lie ahead are formidable and
will require all involved to show generosity, a readiness to
compromise, a willingness to embrace reconciliation and,
above all, a determination to build trust and overcome past
enmities once and for all. It is our hope that 1997 will see
the progressive diminution of the remaining tensions and
suspicions, and the fostering of a spirit of constructive and
positive cooperation between the different communities,
from which can grow lasting stability and economic
prosperity based on mutual respect, democracy and the rule
of law.
The President: The next speaker is the Permanent
Representative of Canada. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French): I
am pleased to express my support for the draft resolution
being considered today by the Security Council on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This draft resolution
authorizes the establishment of a Stabilization Force
(SFOR) and extends the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Both operations are
central elements in the international community’s efforts to
consolidate peace.
We all recall that, less than a year ago, with resolution
1031 (1995), the Security Council authorized the
deployment of the Implementation Force in order to assist
in the implementation of the Dayton Accords. We have
made progress since last year’s truce. Among the
accomplishments, we should emphasize the holding of
national elections last September and the formation,
however limited, of common Bosnian institutions.
Nevertheless, it is evident that much more remains to
be done to ensure lasting peace. One of the issues which
requires particular focus is the prosecution of war criminals.
Peace can be sustained only if accompanied by justice. In
our view, the success of the work of the International
Tribunal is essential to stability in the region. The impunity
of persons responsible for war crimes represents a threat to
the viability of the peace process. Efforts must be made to

The Bosnian parties and the neighbouring States
have the main responsibility for turning over war
criminals to the Tribunal. At the same time, the
international community has a responsibility to encourage
and ensure that all the parties comply with their
obligations in this regard. It was agreed at the London
Conference that the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board would assess compliance with the war
crimes provisions of Dayton with a view to considering
possible additional measures by the international
community. We believe, in particular, that the parties’
compliance must factor into discussions concerning
ongoing international economic assistance.
Responsibility for implementing the peace has
progressively and appropriately shifted to the parties
signatory to the Dayton Accords. It will be up to the
Bosnians themselves to be the real peace builders. All
Bosnians must demonstrate the flexibility necessary to
make their country work. The international community
will of course remain actively engaged in these efforts.
The Paris and London Conferences set out the objectives
for the international community’s involvement over the
next two years. For its part, Canada will continue to
provide significant assistance, with emphasis on
humanitarian programmes, democratic development, social
rehabilitation and economic reconstruction.
An ongoing military presence is an important and
necessary part of this international engagement. The
Stabilization Force which the Council is considering today
will help to ensure a stable security environment for the
consolidation period, provide support for municipal
elections next year, contribute to the achievement of
arms-control objectives, support civilian implementation
of the Peace Agreement and deter outbreaks of fighting.
In addition, we believe that SFOR can and should
take a more assertive approach to the issue of war
criminals. The participants at the London Conference
agreed that the continuing impunity of persons indicted
for war crimes represents a threat to the viability of the
peace process. Canada has proposed a series of measures
for SFOR, under its authorized mandate, that we believe
will increase the pressure on and isolation of indicted
persons, especially those actively involved in their

7

Security Council
Fifty-first year
communities, and lead to their detention and transfer to the
Hague.
From the outset of the international community’s
involvement, Canadian military and civilian personnel have
been present in Bosnia, first through the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and then the
Implementation Force (IFOR). We are committed to
ensuring that this investment produces a lasting, durable
peace. For this reason, Canada will participate in the
Stabilization Force, with an increased troop contribution of
1,200. We welcome the fact that the Stabilization Force —
as its predecessor, IFOR — will be truly international,
comprised as it will be of troops from 32 countries.
As IFOR draws down to become the smaller
Stabilization Force, civilian activities will take on
increasing importance in the peace-building process. The
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in
particular the International Police Task Force and the
United Nations Mine Action Centre, will continue to play
an essential part in these efforts. For this reason, we fully
support the renewal of the Mission’s mandate.

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the Permanent Representative of Norway. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Biørn Lian (Norway): The Norwegian
Government welcomes the draft resolution prepared for
adoption today by the Security Council. This draft
resolution would authorize a Stabilization Force (SFOR)
to carry on the work so successfully started by the
Implementation Force (IFOR) in contributing to the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. Norway
strongly believes that the presence of a multinational
military force, with a robust mandate, is still required in
Bosnia. We support a duration for the mandate of 18
months, so that the force can provide security and
stability, and allow the peace process time to consolidate.
Norway will contribute substantially to SFOR, as we
did to IFOR and before that to the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR). Subject to parliamentary
approval, we will contribute more than 700 troops to
SFOR.

Training and restructuring the police forces throughout
Bosnia and Herzegovina are essential tasks. To this end, the
challenge for the International Police Task Force will be to
help the various authorities in Bosnia to reduce the number
of police officers, while putting the remaining —
retrained — officers under transparent, civil, democratic
control. As the Secretary-General notes in his report on the
United Nations Mission’s activities, there has been some
progress towards these objectives; however, the
International Police Task Force remains necessary to assist
the parties to this end.

Norway is also prepared to continue to contribute
significantly to the implementation of the civilian aspects
of the Peace Agreement. For 1997, the Norwegian
Government plans to allocate more than $160 million to
the rebuilding of Bosnia and to our military participation
in the Stabilization Force. We will continue our shortterm assistance programme. And we will increase our
longer-term reconstruction efforts. In implementing these
programmes, we will continuously assess how our
contribution can be put to the best possible and most costeffective use.

Canada also welcomes the work of the Mine Action
Centre, to which we have made a contribution in both
resources and personnel. Demining activities in Bosnia are
essential to peace-building and economic reconstruction.

The tasks and needs associated with civilian
reconstruction in Bosnia are enormous. It may therefore
seem paradoxical that the international community should
again have to invest heavily in military resources. It
should be kept in mind that IFOR has not only provided
a stable general environment for the civilian efforts, it
also gave specific support to these efforts. Without the
presence of the multinational force to be authorized today,
deterring the parties from resuming military hostilities,
civilian implementation would be very difficult indeed.

Through our contributions to the Stabilization Force
and the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and in reconstruction and reconciliation efforts, Canada
remains committed to helping the parties consolidate peace.
The draft resolution the Security Council is considering
today further underlines the international community’s
continuing engagement in the peace-building process.
However, as we enter the second year of the
implementation process, the focus will primarily be on the
parties themselves; the fulfilment of their obligations and
commitments is indispensable for lasting peace.

8

The international community has now set a time
limit for its involvement in Bosnia, in both the civilian
and the military spheres. When the multinational force
leaves after the end of its mandate, continued stability
must be provided by the agreements on confidence-

Security Council
Fifty-first year
building and arms control signed in Vienna and Florence
earlier this year. These agreements limit the size of forces
and their use, and it is of crucial importance to the stability
of the region that the commitments undertaken, and the
timetables agreed upon, are respected by all.
At the Peace Implementation Conference in London
last week, the state of civilian implementation of the
agreement was thoroughly examined. In some areas
important achievements have been made. Elections have
taken place throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. New and
joint institutions are now being put in place. The next
challenge will be to make these institutions work in an
efficient and democratic manner, based on the provisions
and on the spirit of the Peace Agreement.
The contributions of the International Police Task
Force (IPTF) were rightly emphasized at the London
Conference. And the success of IPTF in assisting the parties
in establishing modern, democratic law enforcement in
Bosnia will be of crucial importance for the development of
civilian society in general.
Democratic institutions must be complemented by free
and independent media. The leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its two entities must establish a legal
framework which will allow a pluralistic media society to
develop. This will be essential to the maintenance of peace
and to the process of reconciliation and democratization.
Norway intends to increase its support for the building of
democracy and free and independent media by providing
financial assistance, expertise and training. The importance
of independent media is currently illustrated by the
developments in Serbia, where a small number of radio
stations and newspapers have played a crucial role in
upholding popular resistance to a Government that refuses
to abide by democratic rules.
We note with deep regret that little or no progress has
taken place in important areas of the peace process. As has
been pointed out many times before, it is not acceptable
when we are asked to contribute to the reconstruction of
houses — in order to allow the return of refugees — that
existing houses are being destroyed in order to prevent
refugees from returning. It is not acceptable when we
finance costly demining operations — in order to facilitate
freedom of movement — that at the same time new mines
are laid precisely to prevent people from moving freely.
Freedom of movement, although a basic concept of the
Dayton Peace Agreement, is still lacking. Furthermore, the
parties’ record of cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal on the Former Yugoslavia has been

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
unsatisfactory. We should all insist that all parties
improve their cooperation with the Tribunal without
delay.
The message that was given to the leaders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in London was loud and clear: the
international community is determined to continue its
presence and its efforts in the military, political and
economic areas. The mobilization of international
resources to this effect for the benefit of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is impressive. But it must be matched by an
equally strong mobilization of political will by the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its two entities.
It is their country and their future that are at stake. They
must make the peace agreement work.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
Permanent Representative of Turkey. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Çelem (Turkey): The situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to occupy a very important place
in the agenda for peace and security in the Balkans and
beyond.
The developments which took place prior to the
Dayton Peace Agreement proved once again that a lack of
firm and prompt international response to aggression leads
to further aggravation of crises, causes untold human
suffering and makes it all the more difficult to find
solutions. We have witnessed this tragic development in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement therefore
constitutes a turning point in the unfolding of the events
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this respect, we would like
to express our full support for the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
annexes thereto signed in Paris on 14 December 1995,
which constitute the key mechanism for the achievement
of a durable and just peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as for stability in the region and for reintegration of
the country at all levels. The international community has
to exert every effort to help Bosnia and Herzegovina on
this path, and also in the reconstruction efforts under way,
in order to heal the wounds of the war and to achieve
peace, security and stability in this vitally important
country of Europe.
Turkey, along with other States, is actively
participating in the implementation of both the military
and civilian aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We

9

Security Council
Fifty-first year
feel duty-bound to continue observing the level of
compliance of the parties with the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement. Turkey strongly opposes the
selective approach adopted by the Serbian Entity with
regard to the implementation of certain provisions of the
Agreement.
For this purpose, it is essential that all the conditions
envisaged by the Dayton Peace Agreement, including the
return of refugees and displaced persons to their homes, are
put in place without delay. While we welcome the attention
given to the protection and promotion of human rights in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to the establishment of the
new common institutions in accordance with the provisions
of the Peace Agreement, we regret the continuing
obstruction faced by the refugees and displaced persons
wishing to return to their homes. We call upon all parties,
including the relevant international organizations and
Member States, to contribute to the formation of conditions
necessary to facilitate their return.
We would like to stress the importance of the work of
the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia for the
process of reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina among
its constituent peoples. Turkey supports fully the efforts of
the International Tribunal aimed at the prosecution of
persons responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law committed in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia since 1991 and believes that States and parties
to the Peace Agreement must meet their obligations to
cooperate with the Tribunal. In this context, we would like
to draw the attention of the Security Council to the third
annual report of the International Tribunal, which in part
states:
“The degree of cooperation encountered has varied
remarkably among these States and Entities. The
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina has been by far
the most cooperative party: it has replied to nearly
every warrant addressed to it, explaining its inability
to execute arrest warrants in Bosnian territories
outside its control”. (S/1996/665, para. 167)
In the report, it is also stated that the Republika Srpska has
failed to execute any of the scores of arrest warrants which
have been addressed to it or to explain its inability or
failure to do so.
Unfortunately, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) has been portrayed as a party with
an almost equally dismal record of cooperation with the
Tribunal. It is important to note that, under the Dayton

10

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
Accord, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) is responsible for the Serbian Entity’s
cooperation and compliance as well as its own.
Turkey welcomes the positive steps taken toward a
normalization of relations between the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We encourage the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to fulfil the
requirement of establishing diplomatic relations with
Bosnia and Herzegovina without any preconditions. We
believe that such a development will eliminate another
hurdle en route to normalization.
We also welcome the subregional arms control
agreements signed in Vienna on 26 January 1996, and in
Florence on 14 June 1996, as vital instruments in
ensuring regional stability. However, we are alarmed by
reports of non-compliance by some parties with the
provisions of these agreements. The international
community’s unwavering attention to the implementation
of these instruments is also crucial for the realization of
peace, security and stability in the area.
We hope that the irregularities and violations
encountered, especially by Bosnians, at the 14 September
election will be eliminated in the future and that, with the
cooperation of all parties with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), free and fair
elections throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina can be
realized at the municipal/local level promptly.
On the reconstruction front, we are pleased to note
the positive impact of the two previous pledging
conferences held on 21 December 1995 and 13-14 April
1996 and chaired by the World Bank and the European
Union. We believe that we cannot overemphasize the
urgency of providing the pledged financial and technical
assistance to the reconstruction efforts. Economic
revitalization is essential for the process of reconciliation,
for the improvement of living conditions and for the
maintenance of durable peace both in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in the region.
Turkey also welcomes the conclusion of the meeting
of the Ministerial Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council and the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina held in Paris on 14 November 1996, in order
to define the guiding principles of the civilian
consolidation plan of the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in accordance with the Peace Agreement.

Security Council
Fifty-first year

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996

Lastly, Turkey welcomes the conclusion of the Peace
Implementation Conference held in London on 4 and 5
December 1996, at which the Bosnian parties and the
international community committed themselves to a detailed
action plan to implement the Peace Agreement.

Bosnia and Herzegovina and to call upon those who are
obstructing the peace process to comply fully with the
relevant provisions of the Dayton Peace Agreement and
its annexes, including the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

In this respect, we would like to point out that lifting
of the economic sanctions should not be seen as a lack of
resolve on the part of the international community. It ought
to be seen as a goodwill gesture of the international
community in encouraging the Republika Srpska to become
a unifying element and a reliable partner of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Security Council resolution 1074 (1996), in its
operative paragraph 5, does not rule out the reimposition of
the sanctions if any party fails significantly to meet its
obligations under the Peace Agreement. This fact is also
recognized in the fifth paragraph of the guiding principles
of the civilian consolidation plan of the peace process.

We also take this opportunity to call upon all parties
to cooperate fully with SFOR and with the International
Police Task Force.

The Implementation Force (IFOR), led by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), has played a crucial
role from the time it was deployed until now in preserving
peace and order and in ensuring progress on the rough road
the peace process has been travelling on. The fragility of
the general situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina requires
that the international community move with caution and
determination in contemplating the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
It is significant to note that IFOR has brought together
33 NATO and non-NATO countries in an unprecedented
coalition for peace, stability and political and economic
reconstruction. Although IFOR’s mission has been
accomplished, an international military presence is still
required to provide the stability necessary to consolidate the
peace. As indicated in the statement of the Ministerial
Meeting of the North Atlantic Council held in Brussels two
days ago, NATO is prepared to organize and lead a
Stabilization Force (SFOR), to be authorized by a United
Nations Security Council resolution under Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter, to take the place of IFOR.
Turkey believes that SFOR, as a successor to IFOR,
will contribute to a secure environment necessary for the
consolidation and stabilization of peace and deter or, if
necessary, halt a resumption of hostilities. The duration of
the SFOR mission is also significant to its success. Turkey
is also prepared to contribute to SFOR.
We would like to emphasize that it is very important
for the Security Council to reaffirm its full support for the
sovereignty, legal continuity and territorial integrity of

In conclusion, this is the most appropriate time to
show that the Security Council is strongly committed to
supporting and ensuring compliance with the provisions
of the Peace Agreement and that it expects all parties to
do the same. There is no doubt in our minds that the draft
resolution before the Council will send the right and a
clear message in this respect.
The President: The next speaker is the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine): In adopting this draft
resolution, the Security Council will dot the i’s with
regard to an issue that has been discussed from practically
the moment it arose. The international community is
resolved to eliminate one of the bloodiest conflicts in
Europe since the end of the Second World War.
During the past year, we have very often heard the
question of whether implementation of the Dayton
Agreement was effective enough. Ukraine believes that
the answer should be affirmative.
One cannot but recognize that an effective separation
of the conflicting parties, a continuing ceasefire and peace
now prevail in the region. No Bosnian has died in a
military conflict in 1996. My delegation believes — and
we see that this idea is fully shared by other States —
that the military aspect of the Dayton Agreement, which
has been implemented to a large extent, can be considered
to be a significant success of the international community.
Having fulfilled its mission, the Implementation
Force (IFOR) nevertheless continues to play an essential
role. It will be years before bitterness and revenge will
finally yield to tolerance and reconciliation. We cannot
leave the peoples of Bosnia half way to peace. Having
engaged itself in the peace mission, the international
community should make it successful. At the same time,
we strongly believe that the ultimate responsibility for the

11

Security Council
Fifty-first year
establishment of a lasting peace in the region lies on the
shoulders of the peoples living there.
We have to realize that, while the war in Bosnia has
stopped, peace in Bosnia is far from being completely
restored. A number of major causes of the civil war in
Bosnia and Herzegovina have yet to be removed and it is
only the continuing sound international presence, both
military and civilian, that can prevent the resumption of
hostilities even on a minor scale.
For this very reason, our delegation supports the
provisions of part II of the draft resolution which stipulate
the continued presence of a multinational stabilization force
(SFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina for a planned period of
18 months.
Such a mission will contribute to the promotion of
confidence- and security-building measures and ensure the
full implementation of the Peace Agreement on subregional
arms control. At the same time, SFOR will give wideranging support to the economic reconstruction and
rehabilitation of civil society in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Realizing its responsibility for the maintenance of
peace and security in Europe, my country is willing to
participate in a new operation in Bosnia in 1997. In spite of
the extremely difficult domestic economic situation, the
Government of Ukraine is making every effort to allocate
the necessary financial resources that will enable it to
continue dispatching the Ukrainian battalion currently
serving with IFOR.
The presence of military force alone, however strong
it may be, will not immediately lead to peace in Bosnia.
Peace-building is a difficult and time-consuming process
that demands patience as well as financial and material
resources. My delegation believes that only economic
reconstruction and development in Bosnia and Herzegovina
can help to create a strong unified State.
In our opinion, in the process of restoring and
reconstructing Bosnia and Herzegovina, top priority should
be given to projects which would help to promote economic
cooperation between the Federation and the Republika
Srpska, as well as within the Federation itself. Such joint
projects should, first of all, provide for the development of
common transport and energy systems and the construction
of settlements for refugees and displaced persons. All ethnic
groups living in Bosnia and Herzegovina should enjoy
equally the advantages of peaceful economic reconstruction,
including international financial assistance. My delegation

12

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
supports the provisions of the Action Plan adopted by the
Peace Implementation Council at its recent Conference in
London on 5 December 1996, which insist on the
continued linkage between the provision of reconstruction
assistance and the commitment of the authorities of the
Federation and Republika Srpska to implementing the full
scope of the Peace Agreement.
Ukraine attaches special importance to the
involvement of its industrial potential in the process of
the economic restoration and reconstruction of Bosnia’s
destroyed economy. The representatives of our country
have repeatedly stated that such participation will be
considered compensation for the billions of dollars which
Ukraine lost as a result of its strict observance of
economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations
Security Council against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). It should be taken
into account that, in suffering these economic losses,
Ukraine directly contributed to the initiation of the
Dayton process.
With regard to part III of the draft resolution, my
delegation shares the view expressed in paragraph 29. The
successful implementation of the tasks of the International
Police Task Force definitely depends on the quality,
experience and professional skills of its personnel. At
present, 33 Ukrainian policemen are carrying out their
duties in Bosnia and Herzegovina. All of them have taken
special training courses organized by the Ministry of
Internal Affairs of Ukraine and have been acquainted with
the traditions and cultures of the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are pleased that their impartial and
unbiased attitude towards the representatives of all ethnic
groups in Bosnia is contributing to the strengthening of
law and order in that country.
The problems of mine clearance present a serious
obstacle to a stable, peaceful life and constitute a direct
threat to the safety of international military and civilian
personnel. That is why we consider it necessary to
intensify efforts to solve these problems. My country is
ready to dispatch its military experts to train Bosnians in
mine-clearance techniques and to participate in the future
programmes carried out by the United Nations Mine
Action Centre. My delegation is satisfied that this issue
has found its reflection in the aforementioned Action
Plan.
The nearly five-year history of the conflict on the
territory of the former Yugoslavia has convincingly
proved that the perception of the Roman historian who

Security Council
Fifty-first year
once wrote that certain peace is better and safer than
anticipated victory has finally been understood by the
international community, as well as by the parties in
conflict. It makes us more confident in the final success of
our common endeavour.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of Malaysia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation participated in
the Security Council meeting on 15 December 1995, when
the Council decided to endorse the implementation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, or the Dayton Peace Agreement. We are
happy to note that tangible progress has been made in the
implementation of the Peace Accord, in particular on its
military aspects. The fighting has ceased, and the warring
parties have been separated, while the ceasefire generally
has been respected.
In this respect, the presence of the multinational
Implementation Force (IFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina
has indeed contributed tremendously to the cessation of
hostilities and the promotion of peace. Malaysia is proud to
have been associated with IFOR. We welcome the
concurrence of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the States concerned with the decision of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to continue the
presence of a multinational Stabilization Force (SFOR) in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to replace IFOR at the end of its
mandate later this month. Malaysia is honoured to have
been invited to be part of the new multinational force. We
believe that the continued presence of the international
military force would be immensely helpful in preserving
and consolidating the peace and providing the necessary
climate for a successful implementation of the civilian
aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
In this regard, my delegation wishes to underline the
need for the mandate of SFOR to be reviewed to include
assistance for implementation of the civilian aspects of the
Dayton Agreements, in particular the apprehension and
prosecution of war criminals, the safe return of refugees
and displaced persons to their homes and the assurance of
free movement of people throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
While we commend those responsible for this
progress, we are concerned that many difficult problems
remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is appropriate,
therefore, that at this meeting of the Council the

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
international community is renewing its support for
further efforts to bring about continued progress towards
lasting peace, economic reconstruction, the strengthening
of national institutions, the promotion of human rights and
justice and, more importantly, respect for the
independence, sovereignty, legal continuity and territorial
integrity of a unified Bosnia and Herzegovina within its
internationally recognized borders.
Malaysia considers the establishment and effective
functioning of the appropriate common institutions of the
State important in ensuring a stable Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We therefore welcome the
holding of the elections for the Presidency and higherlevel bodies last September, signifying as it did an
important step in the process of democratization. We look
forward to just and fair municipal elections to be held
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina next year under the
supervision of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). While we recognize the
importance of strengthening those institutions, we wish to
emphasize the need for the international community to
remain concerned about attempts to minimize the role of
the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina vis-à-vis its Entities.
Malaysia is concerned with the serious difficulties
faced by the responsible authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the implementation of the civilian aspects
of the Peace Agreement pertaining to the safe return of
refugees and displaced persons and freedom of
movement. We believe that the right of return, as
provided for in the Dayton Agreements must be
honoured, and that the refugees must be allowed to return
to their homes free of any form of harassment by the
local authorities or ethnic majority in the area. We
strongly condemn the wanton destruction of houses and
other criminal acts aimed at hindering the free movement
of people in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The entire
international community must give adequate assistance to
efforts to ensure that human rights throughout the country
are fully respected.
Judge Antonio Cassese, President of the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, when presenting the
Tribunal’s third annual report to the General Assembly
last month, strongly expressed his dissatisfaction with the
parties concerned for their lack of cooperation and failure
to fulfil their obligations to the Tribunal as required by
the Dayton Peace Agreement. My delegation is disturbed
to note that the perpetrators of some of the worst crimes
against international humanitarian law are still free and
continue to exercise power and undermine the peace. It is

13

Security Council
Fifty-first year
most regrettable that those with the strength and ability to
do so have failed to apprehend these war criminals because
of fears of reprisal or other reasons. Malaysia firmly
believes that those responsible for the war crimes in Bosnia
and Herzegovina should be brought to trial and punished
for their heinous deeds. They must be held accountable for
the atrocities which they have committed and the sufferings
they have inflicted upon thousands of people in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The aggressors and murderers should not be
allowed to think that life can go on as usual for them. It is
therefore important that the political will of the international
community be translated into more concerted and robust
efforts to apprehend and prosecute those indicted war
criminals.
The international community must underscore the
importance of the work of the Tribunal in the context of
securing peace and reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina by ensuring that justice is served. In this
regard, it should continue to provide strong support for the
Tribunal, including financial support, to enable it to carry
out its important responsibilities.
My delegation wishes to emphasize the need for strict
compliance by the parties with their obligations under the
subregional arms control agreement, which is an integral
part of the Dayton Peace Agreement. Malaysia considers
this aspect of the obligations under the arms control regime
to be of the utmost importance in establishing regional
stability. This vital confidence-building measure, if flouted,
could have far-reaching consequences for the stability of
the entire Balkan region. It is therefore important that the
parties concerned comply in good faith with the obligations
contained in the agreements reached in Vienna on 26
January 1996 and in Florence in June this year. Effective
verification of the parties’ compliance with the provisions
of these agreements is imperative so that a credible balance
of force can be established in the region.
My delegation believes that for peace to hold in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, economic reconstruction and
rehabilitation must proceed rapidly. We are concerned that
the progress in this aspect of the Dayton Peace Agreement
has been slow. Bosnia and Herzegovina, devastated by four
years of war, requires enormous reconstruction efforts for
the restoration of housing and the rehabilitation of industry
to meet the immediate needs of returning refugees and to
help create jobs for the people. The reconstruction of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a basic precondition for the
stabilization of peace in the region. It is important to ensure
that the areas that have suffered the most devastation of
war are provided the bulk of this assistance. The victims of

14

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
aggression ought to be given priority in the provision of
assistance by the international community.
In this regard, Malaysia expresses the hope that the
vigour with which the countries of the West pursued the
transition to a market economy for the former Soviet
States should be equally demonstrated with regard to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are seriously concerned that
failure on the part of the international community to
respond with strong and decisive initiatives might undo
the gains that have been made through the implementation
of the military aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The international community should seek to consolidate
those gains rather than allow them to be whittled away
for lack of progress in the reconstruction efforts for
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In this regard, we welcome the conclusions of the
London Peace Implementation Conference held on 4 and
5 December 1996, which we earnestly hope will provide
the impetus for more vigorous efforts on the part of the
Bosnian parties themselves to consolidate peace in the
country. As a member of the Ministerial Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council, Malaysia has
played its role and will continue to take an active part and
contribute to the process to ensure that peace endures.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): The flames of war in Bosnia and Herzegovina
died out a year ago. During the past year, through the
efforts of the parties concerned and with the assistance of
the international community, the implementation of the
Peace Agreement has been going well. The elections held
in Bosnia and Herzegovina went smoothly and the
constitutional institutions at various levels have begun to
be formed. The Chinese delegation welcomes these
positive developments.
Peace is not easy to achieve, and it is even harder to
consolidate. Events have demonstrated that, as long as the
parties concerned display sincere political will and an

Security Council
Fifty-first year
earnest desire to implement the agreements reached, not
only can peace be achieved but it can also be maintained.
The achievement and the consolidation of peace in the
former Yugoslavia, particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
are not only consistent with the fundamental interests of the
peoples of the States of the former Yugoslavia and the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, it is also conducive to
the peace and stability of Europe and the whole world.
We hope that the parties concerned in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will continue to move the peace process
forward in order to achieve genuine national reconciliation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina at an early date.
On the basis of China’s consistent position of principle
of supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina’s peace process, and
also taking into account the requests of the parties
concerned and the actual situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Chinese delegation will vote in favour of
the draft resolution.
At this time when the Security Council is about to
adopt the draft resolution, I wish to point out the following.
First, the deployment of the multinational Stabilization
Force (SFOR) is an important, major operation following
the Implementation Force (IFOR). It should accept the
political leadership of the Security Council and should
report on schedule to the Security Council on its
performance of its tasks.

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
a serious, long-term peace process, we have witnessed
much progress, but it is clear that much remains to be
done.
Instrumental to the successes we have witnessed in
Bosnia have been the multinational Implementation Force
(IFOR) and the United Nations International Police Task
Force (IPTF). Under the leadership of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), IFOR has assured
compliance with military aspects of the Dayton Accords,
created secure conditions for conducting other tasks
associated with the peace process and assisted in other
aspects of implementation. Similarly, the IPTF has
promoted long-term civil security by working with the
parties to achieve fundamental reforms in lawenforcement institutions.
The United States would like to take this opportunity
to express its appreciation and gratitude to all the men
and women who have served with IFOR and the IPTF,
and to the Governments which have cooperated to make
these operations successful. The United States also
expresses its appreciation to the High Representative and
his associates, who have worked to implement civilian
aspects of the Peace Agreement in a manner that both
benefits from and enhances the activities of the military
and police forces. And, of course, we express our
appreciation to the non-governmental organizations and to
the private individuals who are working to achieve peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and throughout the region.

Thirdly, it is the understanding of the Security Council
is that the paragraphs of the draft resolution that invoke
Chapter VII of the Charter do not apply to part III.

Knowing that IFOR’s Security Council authorization
was for approximately one year and bearing in mind the
still very delicate nature of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the United States and other members of the
international community have carefully considered the
need for maintaining a military presence there. The
United States believes that the deployment of a
multinational Stabilization Force is an appropriate next
step. SFOR will carry out IFOR’s crucial functions but,
in view of the progress that has been made, at a reduced
scale. The United States encourages all members to
cooperate with this Force, and all States to assist it in
accomplishing its goals.

Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): Today the
Security Council, in authorizing the Stabilization Force
(SFOR) and extending the mandate of the International
Police Task Force will be taking two important steps in the
international community’s efforts to assist in the resolution
of the tragic problems confronting the former Yugoslavia.
In the year since the parties at Dayton agreed to engage in

The United States also firmly supports the extension
of the IPTF mandate. The law enforcement reform
process that the IPTF has initiated with the parties, and
will continue to oversee, is vital to maintaining not just
basic law and order but also broader peace and stability.
The provisions of the draft resolution that we are about to
adopt will enable the IPTF to follow through more

Secondly, with regard to the draft resolution’s
invocation of Chapter VII of the Charter, regarding the
authorization of enforcement measures and the use of force,
China continues to have reservations. It is our view that
SFOR must maintain strict neutrality and fairness and must
not misuse force, and in its operations and should
steadfastly promote peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

15

Security Council
Fifty-first year
effectively in this process. The ability of the IPTF to fulfil
its responsibilities has in the past been handicapped by the
lack of full cooperation by the parties and by serious
administrative and logistical problems. By taking steps to
ensure that the IPTF has the necessary resources in terms
of both the quality of its personnel and adequate logistical
support for its operations, we will permit the IPTF to focus
on its most important mission. That mission is to help the
parties develop law enforcement structures that are
competent and dedicated to upholding internationally
recognized standards of democratic policing and human
rights.
In particular, we urge the parties to abide by the IPTFpromulgated internationally accepted principles of policing
in a democratic State. To do so will require a vigorous
process for screening, investigating and evaluating police
officials in order to make sure that their performance
conforms to international standards of policing and human
rights. In general, we are convinced that improvements in
this area, rather than any numerical increases in the number
of IPTF personnel, will be the key to the success of the
IPTF. The United States looks forward to regular reports
from the Secretary-General that describe not only the
IPTF’s progress on these and other issues related to its
mandate but also the parties’ degree of cooperation with the
IPTF.
To support the parties’ efforts, the United States has
pledged to provide appropriate assistance where significant
progress towards these goals can be demonstrated. We will
provide this aid through bilateral channels in coordination
with the efforts of, and in furtherance of, the guidelines set
out by the IPTF. We call on other Member States to do the
same.
The United States and the international community
maintain their commitment to working for peace and
stability in the region, and the action we have taken today
underscores the depth of that commitment. But we must
also emphasize that, ultimately, the responsibility for
maintaining peace and achieving reconciliation rests with
the parties. We can assist, but only the parties can take the
necessary steps to make peace a permanent feature of their
landscape. In order to help achieve that goal, the United
States calls on the parties to cooperate fully with the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) and the IPTF, and with the
several other broad-based international efforts now in
progress in the region.
Indeed, it is the parties’ responsibility not only to
cooperate with SFOR and the IPTF, but also to implement

16

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
all aspects of the Dayton Accords. In this regard, all
States and parties must fully cooperate with the war
crimes Tribunal in The Hague. The obligation to
cooperate includes, as a matter of urgency, the arrest of
individuals indicted by the Tribunal and their expeditious
transfer to The Hague to stand trial. Efforts to avoid this
obligation with so-called constitutional arguments or
delays in transfer of apprehended indictees lack
credibility.
We note that SFOR will continue to have the
authority to detain indictees when it encounters them in
the performance of its duties. All States and parties
should recognize that there will be consequences for noncooperation.
We call on the parties to honor commitments that
would allow freedom of movement to all, including
refugees and displaced persons, thus permitting them to
return to their homes in dignity and without fear, and we
emphasize the need for all parties to secure for each and
every individual, regardless of his or her religious or
ethnic background, the highest level of human rights.
If these steps are taken, the parties will be much
closer to achieving stable democratic institutions and
norms that promote the peaceful resolution of disputes
and that encourage respect for a variety of beliefs and
political views. For our part, the United States remains
committed to the peace process and to promoting
international engagement to help the parties achieve
peace.
Mr. Abdel Aziz (Egypt) (interpretation from
Arabic): The Security Council is meeting today to adopt
a draft resolution that reaffirms a serious international
resolve to achieve peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina through a commitment to the full
implementation of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Annexes
thereto.
The draft resolution before the Security Council
today is the beginning of a new phase, following the
elections that took place according to Annex 3 of the
Peace Agreement, and the beginning of the establishment
of civilian institutions. This is a new phase, based on the
conclusions of the meetings of the Ministerial Steering
Board and of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
held in Paris, which adopted the Action Plan for the next
12 months to promote the civilian implementation of the
peace process.

Security Council
Fifty-first year
As we stand on the threshold of this new phase, my
delegation would like to reaffirm a number of
considerations that we believe should receive priority
attention within the framework of the full implementation
of the provisions of the Peace Agreement. These
considerations are the following.
The first consideration is the importance of the resolve
of the members of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to commit themselves fully and without
exception to follow up the peace process, on behalf of the
three peoples that make up Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
order to achieve full implementation of the Peace
Agreement and to maintain the sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its territorial integrity.
The second consideration is the importance of the
commitment of all parties to full cooperation with all the
entities participating in the implementation of the Peace
Agreement, as well as with those entities charged with
special missions by the Security Council, particularly the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and its
orders for the arrest of those accused of violating the
principles of international humanitarian law.
In this context, I should like to pay tribute to the
central Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina for having
carried out such orders, and to express our condemnation of
the continuing refusal by other parties in the region to do
so. I should like also to underline the role that the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) must undertake in carrying out
the arrest orders of the indictees as well as the need for the
international community to exert as much pressure as
possible to ensure full compliance with the Tribunal’s
orders.
The third consideration is the principle of
conditionality underlined in operative paragraph 4 of the
draft resolution, which links the availability of international
financial assistance and the degree to which all the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina implement the Peace
Agreement, including cooperation with the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and cooperation with
the Action Plan that has been approved by the London
Conference. That principle must be implemented so as to
differentiate between those who cooperate and those who
do not. It must be a continuing incentive to implement all
the provisions of the Peace Agreement. It must not be used
in a way that might cause some parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to fall victim to the irresponsible behaviour of
others.

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
The fourth consideration is the importance of the
municipal elections to be held in 1997 under the
supervision of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) through its mission, which
will continue its duties in the next phase.
The fifth consideration is the utmost importance of
implementing arms-control measures in the region, fully
and without any further delay. This must be done with
goodwill, without seeking ways to avoid it. Full
transparency must be ensured in such an implementation
in order to establish mutual confidence.
The sixth consideration is that the highest level of
respect for internationally agreed human rights and
fundamental freedoms must be ensured, without religious
or ethnic discrimination. All parties must ensure the right
of all refugees and displaced persons to return freely and
in safety to their original homes or any other place of
their choice in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Finally, the reconstruction and development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the creation of a civil
society there take on special importance at this stage.
Such activities will lessen tensions in the region.
Therefore, international financial institutions and donor
States have a great responsibility to provide as much as
possible in this field.
In the light of these considerations, and given the
importance of continuing the uninterrupted
implementation of the provisions of the Peace Agreement,
Egypt has decided to contribute forces to SFOR. We have
decided to continue providing police officers to the
International Police Task Force in the next phase. Within
the same context, the Egyptian delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Thiebaud (France)(interpretation from French):
For a year now, France, together with its European Union
partners and many other countries, has given its full
military, political and economic support to the
implementation of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina signed at Paris on 14 December 1995.
Much progress has been made. A considerable task
remains to be accomplished. The Conference held at Paris
on 14 November 1996, which brought together for the
first time the Foreign Ministers of the principal countries
involved in the process and the newly elected Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, made it possible to mark a
new stage in the process. A plan for the consolidation of

17

Security Council
Fifty-first year

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996

the civilian aspects of the peace process was adopted to
cover a period of two years, during which the international
community is ready to maintain its efforts for the recovery
of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the condition that the
authorities of that State fully respect their commitments.

reference in the Conclusions of the Paris Conference, in
which the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
recognize the link that the international community may
make between their cooperation with the Tribunal and
assistance in the reconstruction of the country.

On the basis of the priorities for action very
specifically defined at Paris with the full agreement of the
parties, the London Implementation Conference, meeting
from 4 to 5 December, developed a detailed 12-month
programme that will be carefully followed. At those two
Conferences, the terms of a moral contract, reiterated in the
draft resolution, were concluded between the international
community and the new authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The primary responsibility for implementation
of the peace process falls to the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina themselves, who, over the next two years,
must assume a growing share of the responsibilities borne
or coordinated today by the international community.

As regards the reaffirmation and strengthening of the
substantial role of the High Representative, the experience
of the past year has confirmed his centrality in the
effective implementation of the Peace Agreement. In
officially confirming his powers to coordinate
international action, interpret the Peace Agreement and
counsel the parties, we will give the High Representative
the means to play the full role as an initiator and monitor
that is essential to the success of the consolidation plan
over the next two years. Beyond the mechanisms, the
office of the High Representative depends on the high
calibre of the incumbent. France wishes to take this
opportunity warmly to congratulate Mr. Carl Bildt for the
work he has already done.

If these authorities do not honour their commitments
and do not participate actively in the reconstruction of their
civil society, they will not be able to expect the
international community or the major donors, first among
them the European Union, to continue to assume the
political, military and economic burden of efforts to
implement the peace process and to reconstruct the country.
In that context, France will support the draft
resolution. The text authorizes the establishment of the
Stabilization Force, which will take over from the
Implementation Force (IFOR) for a planned duration of 18
months, which should ensure a safe environment for the
activities of the international community during the
consolidation period of the civilian aspects of the Peace
Agreement. This text more generally reflects the agreements
reached between the international community and the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina on how to approach
the coming two years.
Among the main points, I will mention four: the
commitment of all the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to participating without reservation in the
establishment of a democratic Bosnian State, which will
require the implementation without delay and in good faith
of new common institutions; and the obligation to cooperate
without reservation with the International Tribunal for the
prosecution of crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia,
which will entail - in particular for all the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina - the obligation to surrender all
persons indicted. The responsibilities of the parties is very
clear on this important point and was the subject of specific

18

Finally, in agreement with the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, a more active mandate should be
defined for the International Police Task Force. In this
area, however, the primary responsibility for progress will
once again fall to the Bosnian parties, whom the
international community is prepared to encourage and
assist but cannot and should not replace.
It is for all of those reasons that France will vote in
favour of the draft resolution.
Sir John Weston (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland): Twelve months ago, this Council
adopted a resolution which helped set in motion the
largest and most complex operation to reconstruct a
shattered European country to be undertaken by the
international community for the last 50 years. Since then,
much has been achieved. The guns have stayed silent.
The armies are back in barracks. A quarter of a million
refugees have returned. Reconstruction has begun in
earnest. Sarajevo, so long under siege, has been
transformed. Elections have been held. The newly elected
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina has begun its
work. And last week in London, for the first time since
the Peace Agreement was signed, all members of that
Presidency, together with the elected leaders of the two
Entities, took part in an international Conference sitting
behind a single name-plate labelled “Bosnia and
Herzegovina” — a small but nevertheless significant step
in itself.

Security Council
Fifty-first year

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996

This is a good record and should be recognized as
such. The British Government acknowledges the efforts of
all those who have contributed and in particular, as other
have said, the exceptional dedication shown by the High
Representative, Mr. Carl Bildt.

Significant progress has been made in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since the Peace Agreement was signed in
Paris, and since this Council authorized the
Implementation Force a year ago. The fighting has
stopped; peace is taking root.

But, of course, such progress is not enough in itself.
That is why the international community decided, at the
recent Peace Implementation Conference held in London,
to continue to devote very significant resources to help the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina re-establish their own
country. The United Kingdom, for its part, is contributing
up to 5,000 troops as part of the Stabilization Force, which
will involve the members of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) in partnership with 17 or more other
countries. We particularly welcome the participation of the
Russian Federation in that Force.

This is, above all, a cause for relief and satisfaction
after the four years of bloody fighting. And it is a reason
to pay tribute to all those men and women in the
multinational force, as well as those in the other
international organizations, who have helped to make that
progress possible. We commend the dedication, courage
and professionalism with which these men and women
have carried out their tasks and continue working for a
lasting settlement of the conflict.

The United Kingdom will increase its assistance to the
United Nations International Police Task Force, including
the deployment of 30 police officers to assist in the
retraining of the local police forces, as well as providing
training for senior police officers in the United Kingdom
and on the ground. And the United Kingdom is
significantly increasing its financial support to the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, including
the secondment of personnel to enhance the Tribunal’s
ability to track the whereabouts of war-crimes indictees. We
urge others to join us in such undertakings.
Underlying the approach set out in the Action Plan
agreed with the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina last
week in London is the principle that responsibility for
promoting reconciliation lies with the authorities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina themselves and that the international
community’s willingness to help them by devoting
significant resources will inevitably depend on the degree
to which those authorities shoulder this responsibility,
including implementing the Peace Agreement.
One key area in this respect is compliance with the
International Tribunal. The Peace Implementation Council
last week formally reaffirmed its strong support for the
work of the Tribunal. We particularly welcome the
emphasis placed on the surrender of indictees in the draft
resolution before us, of which my delegation is a sponsor.
It is now up to authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as the Governments of neighbouring states, to respond.
Mr. Metscher (Germany): Allow me first to endorse
fully the statement made by the Permanent Representative
of Ireland on behalf of the European Union.

However, we all agree that this peace is still a
fragile one. There is a compelling need to safeguard the
progress achieved so far and to stabilize peace in the
region by a further and substantial commitment on the
part of Member States. This commitment includes a
continued military presence in the field, which we will
authorize today, which is tasked to secure the
environment for consolidation, stabilization and, in the
end, for political reconciliation and economic
reconstruction.
Allow me to stress two important aspects of the
stabilization period ahead of us. The main and primary
responsibility for implementing the Peace Agreement rests
with the authorities and the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Furthermore, the willingness of the
international community to devote human and financial
resources to the peace process is dependent on the
commitment of all authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to fulfil their obligations under the Dayton Accords. This
includes full cooperation with all the institutions set up to
support the peace process.
Among these institutions, the International Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia figures prominently. My
Government attaches particular importance to the
requirement that all authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and all States in the region, execute arrest
warrants against indicted persons and surrender them to
the Tribunal without further delay.
Of equal importance to my Government is the
obligation of the Entities to create and maintain
conditions which encourage refugees and displaced
persons to return to their homes of origin or to other
places of their choice. The return of refugees is an

19

Security Council
Fifty-first year
essential condition, perhaps the most important condition
for the reconciliation and rehabilitation of the country.
Together with our partners in the European Union and
in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
Germany has devoted substantial means to supporting the
implementation of the Peace Accords, in both their military
and civilian requirements. We will continue to do so.
Yesterday, the German Government decided to provide
3,000 troops to the new Stabilization Force (SFOR). Our
German contingent will be stationed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and will include infantry and armoured
reconnaissance units. We will also continue to provide one
of the largest contingents of police officers for the
International Police Task Force.
Although we will agree today on a mandate for the
legal successor to the Implementation Force, it is evident
that the emphasis is now on the civilian aspects of the
Peace Agreement. The building of common institutions,
respect for human rights, adherence to the principles of
democratic policing, social rehabilitation, the return of
refugees and displaced persons and the reconstruction of the
economy have become the focus of our efforts.
Allow me, therefore, to conclude by paraphrasing
Martin Luther King: Our aim is not only a negative peace,
which is the absence of tension, but also a positive peace
which is the presence of justice.
Mr. Choi (Republic of Korea): By dint of the
concerted and unstinting efforts of the international
community, including United Nations agencies, the
Implementation Force (IFOR) and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), significant
progress has been made during the past year towards peace
and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The guns have fallen silent. The terrible bloodshed
that has plagued the Balkan region for four years has
finally stopped, and life is slowly returning to normal. The
long and difficult healing process of reconciliation among
the warring parties and ethnic reintegration can at last get
under way. On the basis of the Peace Agreement for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, elections were held, and common
institutions are taking shape. Furthermore, relations among
all the successor States to the former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia have greatly improved.
What has been achieved thus far must not be
squandered, but rather consolidated. To that end, we firmly

20

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
believe that the support of the international community
must continue. In this context, my delegation welcomes
the decisions taken at the recent Paris and London
Conferences designed to strengthen the peace process by
encouraging reconciliation and economic, political and
social rehabilitation.
In the same vein, we fully support the establishment
of the multinational Stabilization Force (SFOR) for a
period of 18 months, the extension of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) mandate
for another year and the continued coordinating role of
the High Representative.
However, these international commitments and
burden-sharing are contingent upon the active
participation and full cooperation of all the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in rebuilding a unified and
harmonious multi-ethnic society. This linkage must be
clearly understood.
On the eve of the next stage of the peace process,
my delegation urges all the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to intensify efforts to match the resolve and
commitment of the international community. That having
been said, we wish to underscore two critical problems
calling for immediate and resolute action by the parties
directly concerned.
One is the disturbing trend of ethnic separation,
manifested in the ever-worsening conditions surrounding
freedom of movement and the return of refugees and
displaced persons, as well as the ongoing harassment of
minorities. The other is the lack of progress in bringing
indicted war criminals to justice. In our view, these
lamentable facts are perhaps the greatest obstacles to farreaching peace and social stability for the war-weary
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and can only be
overcome through the demonstrated will and
determination of their leaders. With these remarks, my
delegation supports the draft resolution before the Council
today, and will vote in favour of its adoption.
In closing, my delegation would like to pay high
tribute to the dedicated men and women of IFOR,
UNMIBH and all the other international agencies
operating in the region whose commendable dedication
has paid off through the burgeoning peace and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): One year ago, the
successful conclusion of the London and Paris

Security Council
Fifty-first year
Conferences and the signing by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina began the process of restoration of peace and
security to the Balkan region. To assist the signatories of
the Agreement in its implementation, the Security Council,
by adopting resolutions 1031 (1995) and 1035 (1995),
authorized the establishment of the multinational
Implementation Force (IFOR) and the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH).
In the course of one year the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has changed immeasurably. The end of the
bloody war, and the recognition by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign independent State within its
international borders, were among the most important
developments. During this year, much has been achieved in
the implementation of both the military and civilian aspects
of the Peace Agreement. The ceasefire continues to hold;
the parties to the Agreement have withdrawn their forces
from the zone of separation; the process of withdrawal of
heavy weapons, as well as the demobilization or quartering
of troops, has significantly advanced; most prisoners of
war — although, regrettably, not all of them — have been
released.
For lasting peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, full
implementation of the civilian aspects of the Peace
Agreement is crucial. We welcome the progress made in
this direction. In particular, we would like to underline the
fact that, in spite of difficult conditions, the elections in
Bosnia and Herzegovina were held in September this year
in a calm and orderly manner. They laid the foundations for
establishing and developing common democratic institutions
in that country. Another sign of a positive tendency in the
implementation of the civilian aspects of the Agreement is
a noticeable increase in the frequency of movements across
the Inter-Entity Boundary Line, as well as the continuation
of training and restructuring of the Federation Police Force.
However, regardless of the progress already achieved, we
cannot forget that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and in the whole region, continues to be precarious. There
are some outstanding issues between the States of the
region that must be settled as soon as possible. Moreover,
there are provisions of the Peace Agreement that still
remain to be implemented or whose implementation must
be improved.
In the view of the Polish delegation, the voluntary
return of refugees and displaced persons to their places of

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
residence before the war remains a fundamental provision
of the Peace Agreement that still has not been
implemented. This question takes on key importance for
the future of the country, especially in the present
circumstances, before the local elections planned for
1997. The problem of refugees is additionally aggravated
by the severe shortage of housing space caused by
damage to housing stock and by the fact that previously
abandoned households are now occupied by refugees from
other regions. Delays in the implementation of this
particular part of the Peace Agreement has produced
further tension in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and remain a
source of possible conflict in the future.
Another problem that in our view is of paramount
importance to the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the issue of cooperation of States and
Entities with the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. Unfortunately, the parties to the
Agreement have not yet met their obligation to detain
indicted war criminals and turn them over to the Tribunal.
We reiterate our strong support for the work of the
Tribunal and stress the need for consistent prosecution of
war crimes committed during the conflict in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia.
It is our conviction that without the various forms of
the presence of the international community in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the process of consolidation of peace would
not be possible. The Polish delegation is of the view that
the multinational Implementation Force and the
International Police Task Force (IPTF) in particular have
played an extremely important role during this year in
creating conditions conducive to a secure and durable
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We therefore pay
tribute to all the women and men of IFOR and IPTF who
have dedicated their untiring efforts to performing their
tasks in an effective manner. Poland, together with many
other countries, contributed personnel to the multinational
Implementation Force and the International Police Task
Force. Today, we remain equally committed to the
consolidation of peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and wish to declare our readiness to use all
the means at our disposal to make a further contribution
to that cause.
It is our firm belief that, in order to ensure further
implementation of the Peace Agreement and, thus, the
consolidation of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
international community must maintain its presence in
that country. We therefore fully support the draft
resolution that is before us today and the decisions

21

Security Council
Fifty-first year
contained therein, which will lead to the establishment of
the multinational Stabilization Force (SFOR) for a planned
period of 18 months, and to the extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
for an additional period of one year. The Polish delegation
is convinced that SFOR, as the legal successor of IFOR,
will fulfil the role specified in Annex 1-A and Annex 2 of
the Peace Agreement. We are also confident that UNMIBH
will carry out its mandate with the same dedication as in
1996.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): It is almost one year since the Security Council
took a decision that began the implementation of the Peace
Agreement for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Today, we note
with satisfaction the significant progress that has been
achieved along this road. The primary achievement is,
unquestionably, the preservation of peace. This has made it
possible to ensure the holding of elections and to begin
building joint institutions of power. We are grateful to the
High Representative, to the staff members of the
international organizations, and to the soldiers and officers
of the multinational Implementation Force, which includes
a Russian brigade, for their contribution to the
implementation of the Peace Agreement.
Today, in response to the request of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Security Council has given its
approval to the continuation of international efforts to
consolidate the peace process on the basis of the principles
laid down in the decisions taken at the Paris and London
Conferences. It is clear that primary responsibility for the
successful development of the peace process lies with the
Bosnians themselves, and also with their elected organs of
power, to whom there must be a gradual transfer of full and
complete responsibility for the situation in the country.
Their level of cooperation in the implementation of the
Peace Agreement will largely determine the degree of
involvement of the international community in the process
of reconstruction of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We welcome the confirmation, by the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, of its commitment to the
establishment of a Bosnian State, based on the principles of
democracy, and consisting of two Entities: the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska. It is
important to ensure the rapid establishment of all remaining
joint institutions in accordance with the constitution.
The United Nations Security Council, in the draft
resolution before it today, clearly sets out as priorities the
civilian aspects of the settlement at the present stage. The

22

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
role of the High Representative has been strengthened. On
the agenda is the holding of municipal elections under the
aegis of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), further assistance in ensuring human
rights, and a solution to problems related to the return of
refugees, which must be orderly and must be carried out
under safe conditions.
The greatest attention is being focused on lowering
the level of armaments on the basis of the relevant
agreements, and making progress in the process of
regional control of armaments.
The experience of the first year of international
efforts in support of the Peace Agreement is convincing
testimony to the fact that success is possible only on the
basis of an impartial approach. Everything must be equal:
the support for the recovery of various regions in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and, if necessary, the punishment,
including the refusal of economic assistance or the
adoption of other measures, for failure to carry out
obligations assumed under the Peace Agreement.
The draft resolution before us clearly lays down the
principle of equal treatment of the parties. This also
applies to the issue of cooperation with the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, which, as the draft
resolution emphasizes, is to carry out its responsibilities
for dispensing justice impartially. The Tribunal should not
be used as a political instrument.
In our view, success in this incipient stage of the
Bosnian settlement and in the work of the Stabilization
Force is guaranteed by the fact that their key parameters,
including measures of influence, are supported by all
members of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and by the leadership of Croatia and the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, as reflected in the Security Council
resolution.
We hope that the unanimous adoption of this draft
resolution will symbolize the need for sustained
coordinated efforts by the United Nations, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, all
participants in the settlement and the interested parties
themselves to move the peace process forward to the
point of no return.
Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): Let me begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report of 9 December 1996 on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The report highlights the fact that the

Security Council
Fifty-first year
implementation of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina is now entering a new
phase of consolidation of the peace process. This
consolidation is illustrated by the Conclusions of the Peace
Implementation Conference held in London, following the
Paris Conference on the civilian consolidation plan of the
peace process. This brings to light the many tasks needed
to be accomplished by the parties to rebuild Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the help of the international community.
Given the hostile forces that continue relentlessly to oppose
a unified Bosnia and Herzegovina, and especially any type
of harmonious relations between the different ethnic and
religious groups, it is no small accomplishment that the
peace has held and that progress has been made.
The fact that the international community stepped into
this conflict and laid down the framework for peace has
given the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina an historic
opportunity. The Implementation Force (IFOR), which was
created in accordance with the Dayton Agreement, played
a pivotal role, inter alia, in enforcing the ceasefire and in
separating the warring parties along the demilitarized zones.
Furthermore, the elections held last September have brought
the country nearer to reconciliation and paved the way for
the establishment of common national institutions. These
were the first steps towards creating a unified Bosnia and
Herzegovina and bringing democracy to the country.
However, Bosnia and Herzegovina is still devastated
and traumatized after four years of brutal warfare and its
soil remains fertile for the eruption of tension and violence.
Indeed, the Peace Implementation Conference, held this
month in London, expressed concern and dismay at the
continuing deadlock in the full implementation of all
aspects of the Peace Agreement.
My delegation is of the view that the persistent
attitude of non-compliance with many of the essential
provisions set out by the Peace Accords is a constant threat
to peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is especially
complicated by the refusal of the States to turn over
indicted war criminals to the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia. Furthermore, the right of refugees and
displaced persons to return to their homes has been
trampled upon by the Bosnian Serbs. Consequently,
hundreds of thousands of people whose homes are located
in the territories gained as a result of aggression remain
refugees, while countless more remain unaccounted for.
Likewise, freedom of movement is seriously hampered and
human rights abuses continue to be carried out on the basis
of ethnicity. The situation is compounded by the inordinate
delay in the establishment and functioning of the new

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
common institutions. Adding to the atmosphere of
continued tensions, the non-compliance with the armscontrol provisions of the Dayton Accords and the noncooperation with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and IFOR cannot but have
ominous implications for regional security and stability.
Hence, at this critical stage, my delegation deems of
utmost importance the respect for the principal provisions
of the peace accord, such as cooperation with the
International Tribunal, leading to the arrest, extradition
and trials of those responsible for atrocities; the
resettlement of refugees to their homes of origin, free
from harassment and discrimination; the rapid
establishment and functioning of the new political
institutions; and respect for the arms-control provisions of
the peace plan.
The Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
accepted the reality of one State, two entities and three
peoples. Hence, the international community must render
its full support to the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina at this critical and historic moment as it
struggles to establish peace, security and stability on the
basis of full and consistent implementation of the General
Framework Agreement. The leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina now have an unprecedented opportunity to
work for the consolidation of a sovereign and united
country based on the rule of law, respect for human rights
and the development of viable representative institutions
within the framework of a multi-cultural, multi-ethnic and
multi-religious society. However, this will become a
reality only when priority is accorded to economic
reconstruction, leading to the restoration of the prosperity
of the Bosnian people. This should be bolstered by the
fulfilment of the solemn commitments to the Peace
Agreement undertaken by the parties concerned and their
respect for the internationally recognized borders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My delegation is of the view that a continuing and
credible international presence will be essential to
consolidating the gains achieved so far. In this context,
the continued deployment of international military forces
will be necessary, not only to reflect the commitment of
the global community to facilitating the transition to a
lasting peace, but also to prevent the resumption of
conflict, with its attendant consequences. In this regard,
my delegation is of the view that the creation of the
Stabilization Force to replace IFOR for a planned period
of 18 months is imperative to keeping the momentum of
the peace process going. In addition, my delegation fully

23

Security Council
Fifty-first year
supports the Secretary-General’s recommendation to extend
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) until December 1997. UNMIBH,
including the International Police Task Force (IPTF), will
make substantive contributions in the coming consolidation
period to bringing lasting peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Based on these considerations, we will vote in favour of
this draft resolution.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to express its
deep gratitude to the international community for its work
to establish peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, to the High
Representative, Mr. Carl Bildt, for his coordination efforts
and to the numerous United Nations agencies which are
relentlessly endeavouring to help rebuild this country.
Finally, we would like to thank the Special Representative,
Mr. Iqbal Riza, and the IPTF Commissioner, Mr. Peter
FitzGerald, as well as their staff, for their commitment to
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Malebeswa (Botswana): We wish to pay special
tribute to all the international personnel on the ground in
Bosnia, and in particular to the High Representative, Mr.
Carl Bildt, who, along with others, has helped to ensure the
substantive progress towards peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina that we celebrate today.
We welcome the substantial progress achieved in the
last 12 months towards restoring order and tranquillity to
the State of Bosnia. Most of the military provisions of the
Dayton Peace Agreement have been implemented. The
national elections were held on schedule on 14 September
1996 in a relatively calm atmosphere, though there has been
an unwelcome delay in the establishment of the new
institution of Government. In addition, the International
Police Task Force (IPTF) has made substantial progress in
the implementation of its mandate.
Despite the progress, the overall situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is not what we would have liked it to be.
This does not, however, come as a surprise because we
have always known that, after four years of bitter civil war,
the path to lasting peace and stability would be strewn with
formidable obstacles. To our regret, there are ominous signs
that some in Bosnia still continue to pursue the aim of
communal separation.
The draft resolution we are about to adopt gives the
multinational peacekeeping force and the IPTF new
mandates. It is yet another important demonstration of the
international community’s continuing commitment to
support the process of national reconciliation and

24

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
reconstruction in Bosnia. It is important that the people of
Bosnia not misuse this support. Botswana has consistently
maintained that the ultimate responsibility for lasting
peace and stability in Bosnia rests with none other than
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina themselves. The
international community can only help them to help
themselves.
It is most regrettable, therefore, that the parties have
continued to lag behind schedule in the implementation of
the various aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement. The
most troubling delays concern the return of refugees, the
free movement of people, respect for human rights,
cooperation with the war-crimes tribunal, the arbitration
of the Brcko Area and the disarmament process.
We are particularly concerned at reports of local
incidents caused by ethnic tension and intolerance
throughout the country. Over 1 million internally
displaced people do not feel secure enough to return to
their communes because of ethnic intolerance and
harassment. In addition, 1.2 million people still live
outside the country as refugees. The great majority of the
people of Bosnia want to live in peace, but it is their
political leaders, from all sides, who continue to prevent
them from putting the horrors of the recent past behind
them. They continue to exploit and fuel ethnic tension for
their own personal benefit. We want to appeal to those
concerned, in the interest of peace and national
reconciliation, to put aside their personal interests in
favour of the common good in Bosnia. It is time for the
people of Bosnia to begin to realize that they have a
common destiny. They should assume greater
responsibility for the establishment of peaceful conditions
in their country, and they should do so with utmost
dispatch. They should not assume that the international
community will baby-sit Bosnia indefinitely.
Certainly, the process of reconstruction and
development will require generous support from the
international community, but, as the draft resolution
rightly points out, the link between the availability of
international financial assistance and the degree to which
all the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina implement
the Peace Agreement cannot be overlooked. The
differences that impede the implementation of the Peace
Agreement must be resolved as a matter of urgency. In
this respect, the human rights provisions of the Peace
Agreement should be fully implemented and all the
indicted war criminals rounded up and handed over to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
in The Hague for prosecution. The authorities in Bosnia

Security Council
Fifty-first year
and Herzegovina must also create the necessary conditions
for the early return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to their homes of origin.
We are concerned at the report of the re-arming of the
parties. It is important for the parties to commit themselves
once and for all to the disarmament provisions of the Peace
Agreement. It would be tragic, to say the least, if hostilities
were to resume in Bosnia simply because one side or the
other had received enough weapons from outside Bosnia to
give it the courage to try and wrest from others, through the
use of force, what it could not obtain at the negotiating
table. We therefore want to appeal to Member States to
heed the arms provisions of the Peace Agreement and desist
from supplying any of the sides in Bosnia with weapons.
My delegation fully supports the conclusions of both
the Paris and London Conferences, and will therefore vote
in favour of the draft resolution before us.
Mr. Searle (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): A
year has elapsed since the signature in Paris in December
1995 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The various bodies involved in
the peace process have had a chance to take stock of what
has been achieved and to draw some basic conclusions to
help guide the action of the international community in the
months to come.
On this occasion, my delegation would first like to pay
tribute to the High Representative, Mr. Carl Bildt; to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of the United Nations operations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Iqbal Riza; to the Commissioner of the
International Police Task Force (IPTF), Mr. Peter
FitzGerald; to the Commander of the Implementation Force
(IFOR); and to the many men and women from various
international organizations, within or outside the United
Nations system, who this year have been devoting their
utmost efforts to the cause of peace.
We are satisfied and encouraged by the great strides
made in the implementation of the peace process and by the
resulting substantial improvement in the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The fact that in 1996 no human lives
were lost as a result of direct military action is a relevant
indicator that contrasts with those of previous years. It
alone justifies the extensive resources that have been
deployed.
The holding of elections last September, with broad
participation by the citizenry; the gradual establishment of

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
new, joint multiethnic institutions; economic
reconstruction; the restoration of essential public services;
and internationally, mutual recognition between
neighbouring States: these are all obvious steps forward.
They have contributed to an improvement in the living
conditions of the entire population, and they encourage
the international community to persist in its efforts for
peace.
However, at the same time we cannot conceal our
concern at the fact that certain essential commitments
made in Dayton have not been implemented and continue
to be delayed or to make very slow progress. These
commitments include freedom of movement, the return of
refugees and displaced persons to their places of origin,
an end to the harassment of minorities and respect for
human rights. Generally speaking, the predominance of
the forces of separation over those of integration is,
unfortunately, gravely undermining the very spirit of the
Dayton Agreement and seriously threatening the mediumor long-term success of the Peace Agreement.
We believe that the international community is fully
aware that, after four years of bitter war, complete
normalization cannot be achieved in the short space of
one year. However, we also believe that we should not
resign ourselves to the fact that, in this initial stage,
progress is not being made on many of the basic aspects
of the Dayton Agreement mentioned earlier —
particularly since, as time goes by, it is going to become
even more difficult to make headway.
We find it appropriate that the draft before says that
the primary responsibility for further implementation of
the peace process falls to the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina themselves, and unless they fulfil their
obligations and participate actively in the reconstruction
of a civil society, they cannot expect the international
community to continue to bear the political, military and
economic burden of the activities of implementation and
reconstruction.
Similarly, the availability of international financial
assistance has been very reasonably linked, in our
judgement, to the extent of fulfilment of the Peace
Agreement by all authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We note that fulfilment includes cooperation with the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, which
is of particular importance to my delegation. We recall
that no Member State can be exempted from the
obligation to cooperate fully with the activities of the
Tribunal.

25

Security Council
Fifty-first year
We believe that lasting peace and reconciliation will
become possible in the Balkans only to the extent that
justice can be administered, and we feel that the terrible
crimes that have been repudiated by international
conscience in recent years must not go unpunished.
While it is true that a period of consolidation is now
beginning, in which the emphasis will be mainly on
fulfilment of the civilian aspects of the Peace Agreements,
we cannot overlook the continuing importance of the
military provisions of the Agreement. We therefore
welcome the creation of the Stabilization Force as the legal
successor of the Implementation Force (IFOR) to fulfil the
tasks stipulated in annex 1-A and annex 2 of the Peace
Agreement, and we express our recognition of the Member
States that have committed themselves to participate in it.
We are convinced that their essential involvement will be
a decisive contribution to the cause of peace, as was the
case in 1996 with the Implementation Force.
In the same vein, my delegation firmly supports the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), including the
International Police Task Force (IPTF), which will be
entrusted with the tasks set forth in annex 11 of the Peace
Agreement. Its primary role in assisting in the restructuring
the local police forces and the establishment of lawenforcement institutions deserve our full support.
Finally, we appeal to the authorities of the two Entities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to give their resolute and
unreserved support, commitment and total dedication to the
comprehensive implementation of the Peace Agreement in
this new stage so as to make the peace, progress and wellbeing so long awaited by their peoples a reality.
The President: I now call on the representative of
Honduras.
Mr. Rendón Barnica (Honduras) (interpretation from
Spanish): The General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its annexes constitute the most
important international instrument, and the most difficult to
implement, ever signed for the achievement of peace in that
region of the world. Its main goals are the achievement of
national reconciliation based on justice in a country that has
suffered the devastating effects of war; a return of refugees
and displaced persons to their homes in a country where
much of the population was displaced by the civilian
conflict, harassment and fear; and national reconstruction in
a country whose economy is devastated and whose society
must gradually be rebuilt.

26

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
A year has gone by since the signing of the Peace
Agreement, and several advances have been made during
this initial period of its implementation. The military and
territorial provisions have been complied with, and
compliance with the political provisions of the Agreement
has gained renewed impetus with the elections held on 14
September last, certified by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). In spite of certain
difficulties the elections reflected the will of the peoples
of Bosnia and have paved the way towards the beginning
of the establishment of common institutions in the country
and towards a new constitutional order in which there will
be no room for the structures, practices and institutions of
the past. The peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina must
now seek to ensure that the conditions exist for those
common institutions to be established, to function and to
be duly respected.
My delegation welcomes the achievements made in
the process of implementation of the Peace Agreement.
However, we believe that much remains to be done.
Observance of and respect for human rights in all of the
territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina remains the key,
central element of the Peace Agreement. Unfortunately, in
this area the situation has not changed. In Bosnia we still
see a pattern of continuous ethnic harassment, which, if
not reversed, will jeopardize the achievement of the goal
of a unified society in that country. If human rights are
not respected there will be no true freedom of movement.
If there are no guarantees that human rights will be
observed, one cannot hope that refugees and displaced
persons will return to their places of origin and thus
contribute to national reconstruction. Therefore, we
believe progress in this area is essential for the
implementation of the peace process.
Similarly, there must be greater cooperation by the
parties with the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia. Not complying with this obligation would
have a negative effect on all the efforts being made to
promote reconciliation between the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We urge all States involved to arrest those
who are accused of committing war crimes and to turn
them over without delay to the Tribunal for trial.
The peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina is in
a stage of consolidation in which the assistance of the
international community for the tasks of economic
reconstruction is vital. We observe with satisfaction the
renewed commitment by the international community to
contribute substantially to that goal by providing the
necessary human and financial resources. At the same

Security Council
Fifty-first year
time, however, we recognize that these efforts could be in
vain if the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina do not
respond appropriately by fulfilling their obligations under
the Peace Agreement and adopting the measures needed for
serious economic reform.
While my delegation recognizes that the primary
responsibility for implementation of the obligations
contained in the Peace Agreement falls to the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, we consider that the United
Nations should continue to contribute to that task and to
lend its full support to the High Representative in his
activities of monitoring the implementation of the
Agreement.
My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution extending the mandate of United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) to 21 December
1997, expanding the mandate of the United Nations
International Police Task Force to tasks related to the
investigation of violations of human rights mentioned in the
conclusions of the London Conference and authorizing the
establishment of a multinational Stabilization Force as the
legal successor of the Implementation Force (IFOR) to
carry out the functions set out in annex 1-A and annex 2 of
the Peace Agreement.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to pay tribute to
the High Representative, the Commander and staff of IFOR
and the international organizations and bodies working in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as to the Special
Representative of the United Nations and the IPTF
Commissioner for all their efforts in the cause of peace.
Mr. Lopes da Rosa (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation
from French): My delegation welcomes the recent positive
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. These may, in
our view, herald an era of peace in this region, which has
been ravaged by war for four years. The significant and
encouraging events that have taken place a year after the
signing of the Peace Agreement, namely the disengagement
of armies; the end of military operations; the elections of
14 September 1996, which prompted massive participation
on the part of the population; and, above all, the
establishment of the joint institutions provided for in the
Constitution, all strengthen our delegation’s conviction that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will enjoy peace in the future.
However, we should note much remains to be done if
this country is to be a united society in which its people
can live in harmony and enjoy the freedom they so keenly
desire.

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
We call once again on all parties to show political
will and make further sacrifices to ensure the full
implementation of the Peace Agreement, and thus help
reconcile the country’s communities. Guinea-Bissau has
always maintained that the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia could be settled only on the basis of a
negotiated political solution that takes full account of
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
States within their internationally recognized borders.
We are convinced that the prospects for peace
cannot become reality unless justice is done in the case of
the numerous victims of the fratricidal war that has
devastated Bosnia and Herzegovina. Let us not forget that
true peace can be achieved only if all citizens, and
particularly the victims of the atrocities committed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, feel that justice has been well
served. To that end, the international community must not
fail in effectively preventing any recurrence of such
situations. Justice must ultimately prevail. Those who
have committed crimes against humanity must be brought
before the courts and held accountable for their acts.
That is why it is essential for us fully to support the
work of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. We hope that cooperation with the
Tribunal, which was pledged at Dayton, will be cordial
and genuine and that all States will be prepared to arrest
persons indicted for war crimes and hand them over to
the Tribunal.
The fate of thousands of refugees and displaced
persons, who are far from their homes and homeland, is
of concern to my delegation. Suitable conditions need to
be created so that these people can return home with
dignity and in safety.
We believe that the United Nations must continue to
help implement the Peace Agreement. Consequently, we
endorse the recommendation made by the SecretaryGeneral regarding the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), which must be accompanied by the necessary
financial and human resources for it to carry out its
activities. In this spirit, we join in the appeal made by the
Secretary-General in his most recent report inviting the
international community to contribute generously to the
financing of programmes to help Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We welcome the content of the draft resolution
before us, which we are about to adopt, because we look
forward to the time when all the peoples of Bosnia and

27

Security Council
Fifty-first year
Herzegovina and elsewhere in the former Yugoslavia will
be able to forget the years during which the country was
torn apart and finally work together to build a better future.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as Permanent Representative of Italy.
I wish first of all to associate myself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of Ireland,
Ambassador John Campbell, on behalf of the European
Union.
Italy strongly supports the draft resolution the Council
is about to vote on for the establishment of a Stabilization
Force (SFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the
renewal of the United Nations Mission there.
Despite substantial progress in the peace process, to
consolidate these achievements the international community
must take a careful look at the future. The parties should
renew their determination to respect commitments freely
entered into and work towards full stabilization of the
region. The international Force will undoubtedly play a
major role in this regard.
We believe that priority must be given to
implementation of the agreements on arms reduction and
control signed in Vienna and Florence. In this regard, we
cannot fail to underline that the Bosnian Serb party has
consistently failed to comply with the Peace Agreement.
Economic assistance, which is vital to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, should be conditioned by the parties’ full
implementation of the Peace Agreement and used to
encourage democratization of the political and economic
life of the region.
Meanwhile, the international community has a moral
obligation to continue to provide emergency aid to Bosnia.
Also in this regard, I wish to recall that following the
pledging conferences in Brussels in December 1995 and
April 1996, Italy contributed $70 million for reconstruction
and $15 million to the restructuring of Bosnia’s debt with
the World Bank.
Another essential aspect of the peace process is full
cooperation by the parties with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. We fervently hope that
the parties’ commitments will translate into concrete
collaboration. We also share the general concern at the need
to provide the Tribunal with adequate resources.

28

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996
Italy will be relentless in these efforts to restore
peace, security and stability in the region. My country has
been at the forefront of providing logistical support for air
operations in Bosnia; it has made 21 airports available
and has continuously committed men and resources since
April 1993. Moreover, Italy has participated in the
Implementation Force (IFOR) by providing a brigade of
2,600 men as well as a major naval task force and air
component. Italy is ready to provide the same air and
naval units and a brigade of 1,830 men for the future
Stabilization Force.
The International Police Task Force (IPTF) has a
crucial role to play in the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, especially in restructuring law enforcement
institutions. It will perform the essential function of
reassuring the civilian population and paving the way for
national reconciliation and peaceful coexistence.
Therefore, we welcome the reinforcement of its role in
monitoring and investigating human rights abuses.
In conclusion, the adoption of today’s draft
resolution will be another major step in the process aimed
at bringing peace and stability to this region. Italy remains
fully committed to this goal and to sustaining the
important efforts of the United Nations in that part of the
world.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/1996/1032.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Botswana, Chile, China, Egypt, France, Germany,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, United

Security Council
Fifty-first year

3723rd meeting
12 December 1996

Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
1088 (1996).
There are no more speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 9.30 p.m.

29
