United Nations

S/PV.9311

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9311th meeting
Wednesday, 26 April 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Almazrouei
Mr. Eckersely
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (S/2023/274)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-11841 (E)
*2311841*

S/PV.9311

The question concerning Haiti

circulate through some of the streets of Port-au-Prince,
where I felt the tension and recognized the fear that the
Haitian people experience every day.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

During my initial exchanges and interactions, I
observed that a path had been charted for Haitians
to engage in dialogue towards restoring democratic
institutions in the country. However, the general
sentiment is that it will be difficult to move forward
without effectively addressing rampant insecurity.

The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(S/2023/274)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Canada,
the Dominican Republic and Haiti to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Jean Victor Généus, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Haiti, and His Excellency Mr. Roberto Álvarez Gil,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. María Isabel
Salvador, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti; and Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive
Director, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/274, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. Salvador.
Ms. Salvador: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Council for the first time since I took office this month
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti. It is also an honour to be in the presence of
Foreign Ministers Généus and Álvarez Gil, from Haiti
and the Dominican Republic, respectively.
During my first week in Haiti, I had the opportunity
to interact with civil society representatives, notably
women’s groups, as well as with national authorities
and senior Government officials. I also managed to
2/22

26/04/2023

Since the previous briefing to the Council by
my predecessor, in January (see S/PV.9247), gang
criminality has grown. Gang violence is expanding at an
alarming rate in areas previously considered relatively
safe — in Port-au-Prince and outside the capital.
The horrific violence, including sexual violence and
particularly against women and girls, in gang-ridden
areas is emblematic of the terror afflicting much of
Haiti’s population.
Allow me, to share figures that illustrate the
shocking increase in criminality in Haiti. According to
data collected by the Haitian National Police and by the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), in
the first quarter of 2022, 692 criminal incidents — that
is homicide, rape, kidnappings and lynching — were
reported. In the same period in 2023, the number of
recorded criminal incidents more than doubled to 1,647.
Last month showed the highest incident rates since 2005.
Faced with increasingly violent armed gangs vying
for control of neighbourhoods of the capital, with limited
or no police presence, some residents have begun to
take matters into their own hands. Those dynamics
inevitably lead to the breakdown of the social fabric,
with unpredictable consequences for the entire region.
As the Council may know, only two days ago in Portau-Prince, a group of civilians took 13 suspected gang
members from police custody, beat them to death and
burned their bodies.
The Government has continued to invest in the
Haitian National Police. However, the force is severely
understaffed and ill-equipped to address the violence and
criminality. Deaths, dismissals and elevated resignations
among the police have cut its operational strength from
14,772 to about 13,200 personnel, of whom only some
9,000 perform police tasks. Barely 3,500 police officers
nationwide are on public-safety duty at any given time.
In the meantime, the recruitment of new police officers
has been halted due to deteriorating security and
logistical constraints.
23-11841

26/04/2023

The question concerning Haiti

The national police succeed in mounting some
effective anti-gang operations but holding those
security gains is merely momentary. The need for
providing urgent international support to the police
to address the rapidly deteriorating security situation
cannot be overemphasized.
Beyond the immediate support the national police
requires, it is urgent to make progress towards a
nationally led solution to the long-standing political
impasse. This is fundamental to restore sustainable and
durable security, as well as social and economic stability.
Despite Haiti’s security challenges, efforts continue
towards the implementation of the 21 December
agreement. The newly established High Transitional
Council, which I had the opportunity to meet, has
continued to work with the Government and various
stakeholders. Their efforts to broaden consensus on
the way forward continue, as does the implementation
of the agreement, including through steps towards
the establishment of a provisional electoral council.
This milestone is critical for the eventual holding
of elections that will hopefully usher in a return to
democratic governance.
The Court of Cassation was rendered functional
on 28 February and stands ready to swear in a new
provisional electoral council once established. In
parallel, the Court has also started to address the
obstacles faced by the judiciary.
In accordance with the 21 December agreement
and in efforts to continue dialogue, the upcoming
national security forum and political round table, to be
convened under the auspices of the High Transitional
Council, provides a critical opportunity. The aim
is to build national consensus on the creation of the
necessary security and political conditions for holding
elections. Notwithstanding those political gains, the
overall process remains fragile and vulnerable to the
deteriorating security situation.
I will now turn to the human rights situation.
With the increase in armed-gang violence, Haitians
have continued to suffer one of the worst human rights
crises in decades. People living in areas under gang
control are exposed to the highest rate of human rights
abuses. Interviews carried out by BINUH indicate
that gangs continue to use sexual violence, including
multiple-perpetrator rape, to terrorize and inflict pain
on populations living in areas under the control of their
rivals. Other forms of sexual violence, such as sexual

S/PV.9311

exploitation, were also reported as being used by gangs
against women and girls living in communities under
their influence.
Children are among the victims of the most heinous
crimes, including murder, abduction and rape. Over the
past three months, school children have been hit by
bullets while sitting in their classrooms and kidnapped
when being dropped off at school. Furthermore, many
schools closed late last year as a result of violence
and extortion by gangs. Despite most reopening in
early 2023, many children have not returned to the
classroom due to violence near the school or in their
neighbourhoods or due to their family’s inability to
pay school fees. I am deeply shocked by reports of
snipers indiscriminately targeting civilians. In this
context of high vulnerability, children are being
recruited into armed gangs. The appointment by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
of an Independent Expert on human rights, following
a request from the Haitian Government, is a welcome
development that will strengthen human rights
monitoring and protection mechanisms.
(spoke in French)
I strongly condemn the widespread incidents of
sexual violence committed by armed gangs. These
incidents are severely underreported compared to other
types of violence due to fear of reprisals, stigmatization
by families and communities and limited availability of
health and psychosocial services, among other factors.
It is essential that those crimes do not go unpunished
and that the perpetrators of sexual violence are brought
to justice.
Almost half of the population — 5.2 million
people — are in need of humanitarian assistance. The
number of internal displacements increased by 50 per
cent in the Port-au-Prince commune, compared to
November 2022. Some 39,000 suspected cholera cases
have been reported since the outbreak resurfaced in
October. The United Nations and its humanitarian
partners remain on the ground and are providing
essential services. Between March and April, at least 22
emergency missions were conducted in gang-controlled
areas of Port-au-Prince.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
urgent need for the deployment, authorized by the
Security Council, of an international specialized force,

23-118413/22

S/PV.9311

The question concerning Haiti

as articulated by the Secretary-General in his letter
dated 8 October 2022 (S/2022/747). We need to find
innovative ways to define the force to support the
Haitian National Police.
Haiti requires immediate assistance to counter
increasing armed-gang violence and to develop its
police. The rapidly deteriorating security situation
demands that the country remains at the centre of
international attention and action. Further delay in
addressing the unprecedented insecurity in Haiti could
also lead to a spillover of insecurity in the region.
The decisive support of the Security Council remains
crucial in ensuring security, rule of law, stability and
peace in Haiti.
Time is of the essence, and the Haitian people
deserve urgent action from the Security Council. If the
Haitian people are not supported, the vicious circle of
violence and political, social and economic crisis in
which they struggle every day will continue to turn.
Breaking this daunting circle must not be delayed. The
Haitian people cannot wait. We need to act now.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Salvador for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Waly.
Ms. Waly (spoke in French): I am grateful for the
opportunity for the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) to again address the Security Council
on the deteriorating security crisis that is paralysing
Haiti. Since my last briefing to the Council in September
(see S/PV.9136), the lack of law enforcement, escalation
of violence and scale of organized criminal activities
have continued to fuel the crisis and brought no relief to
the Haitian people. On the contrary, these phenomena
have progressively contributed to the deepening of the
crisis and the weakening of national efforts for peace and
security. Even more disturbing, we note new dynamics
of groups acting outside of Port-au-Prince directly
involved in the trafficking of increasingly sophisticated
weapons and seeking to enlist new recruits in camps for
displaced populations.
(spoke in English)
The latest report of the Secretary-General General
on the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH) (S/2023/274) points to an escalation of
violence and insecurity in the country, including rising
numbers of homicides and kidnappings. The flows of
illicit firearms and drugs into Haiti are compounding
4/22

26/04/2023

the situation, fuelling violence and adding complex
challenges. Last month, UNODC published an
assessment entitled “Haiti’s criminal markets: mapping
trends in firearms and drug trafficking”, which we
had the honour to present at the first meeting of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2653 (2022).
The assessment paints an alarming picture.
Increasingly sophisticated and high-calibre firearms
and ammunition are being trafficked into Haiti, with
most new firearms and ammunition entering the country
illegally by land, air and, most frequently, sea. Severe
limitations in maritime control capacities, personnel
and equipment, as well as a lack of border surveillance
and patrol infrastructure have curtailed efforts to stop
the influx, which is enabling gang-related violence to
reach unprecedented levels. Heavily armed criminal
gangs are targeting such critical infrastructure as
ports, grain storage, customs offices, police stations,
courthouses, prisons, businesses and neighbourhoods.
They have also gained control of major highways and
roads, providing access to the capital. Some gangs have
expanded their territory outside Port-au-Prince.
The dire security situation is overwhelming the
already limited capacities of Haiti’s national police,
customs and border patrols and coast guard. Haiti is
leading its security response the best it can, but this comes
at great human cost. Homicide rates are skyrocketing,
while an increasing number of police officers are
being targeted and killed in the line of duty by gangs.
Meanwhile, Haiti’s law-enforcement and bordercontrol challenges make it an attractive hub for drug
traffickers. Haiti acts as a trans-shipment country for
drugs, primarily cocaine and cannabis, which arrive
through public, private and informal ports, as well
as clandestine runways; these drugs are mostly being
shipped onwards to North America and Western Europe.
As illicit drug markets expand around the world
and global supply and demand of cocaine reached
record highs, the threat of trafficking as a destabilizing
factor in Haiti only grows. These realities undermine
prospects for the political process, not to mention the
catastrophic implications on efforts to address acute
hunger and access to essential services. The international
community and invested partners need to urgently
develop and support large-scale comprehensive actions
to assist law enforcement and border management to
prevent illicit flows and help stabilize the situation.
23-11841

26/04/2023

The question concerning Haiti

S/PV.9311

The Security Council has repeatedly stressed
the importance of reinforcing the capacities of the
Haitian National Police, including its specialized units
focused on borders, drugs and firearms. Significant
investments are also needed for community policing
and criminal-justice reforms, as well as combating
corruption and money-laundering.

support provided to Haiti’s police with the long-term
vision to restore criminal justice, border control and
customs institutions. It is through these fundamentals
that we can protect Haiti’s people from violence in the
long term, return normalcy and security to their daily
lives, and pave the way for more effective efforts to
meet basic human needs.

Black markets are relying on corruption and
patronage networks to thrive, with the complex web
of public and private actors implicated in trafficking,
while corruption in the criminal-justice sector leads
to impunity. The conditions for a political process
leading to peace can be achieved only when Haiti
has the institutions and capacities capable of meeting
these challenges.

UNODC is encouraged by the establishment of a
sanctions regime that will help fight impunity for the
crimes committed in Haiti. We support the Panel of
Experts appointed by the Security Council and will
remain, within mandate and means, at its disposal.
We will also continue to collaborate closely with
BINUH and the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. Our cooperation has been
key to developing effective interventions on border
control, corruption, money-laundering, criminal justice
and the rule of law. In thanking BINUH, I take this
opportunity to welcome the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. María Isabel
Salvador. I very much look forward to working closely
with her, and I assure her that she will have the full
support of my Office.

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
continues to work with its partners to help lay the
foundations for the progress that is needed in Haiti. Since
I last addressed the Council on this topic, UNODC has
been fast-tracking its assistance on border management.
Our Office has successfully carried out assessments of
six border points, identifying urgent equipment needs,
including to support patrolling and maritime-domain
awareness, and now our Office is procuring the
equipment to be provided to national authorities.
In parallel, we are exploring the potential of greater
Haitian/Dominican cooperation on border control to
develop mirroring skill sets, vision and commitment.
We stand ready to engage with both countries to
expand support, but much greater investment is
needed. UNODC has also continued to support Haiti’s
General Customs Administration, and I would like to
take this opportunity to congratulate its staff members
on some of the promising results they have produced.
Last month alone, customs revenue collection saw an
increase of 44 per cent from the previous month and
a 216 per cent increase as compared to March 2022.
In addition, our Office has been cooperating with the
Organization of American States to strengthen Haiti’s
capacity to investigate, prosecute and adjudicate
cases of corruption, money-laundering, and economic
crimes, as well as to improve information-sharing
with international investigators on transnational
organized crime.
These represent important first steps, but the scale
of what is needed in Haiti requires greater international
investment and support. Sustained comprehensive
assistance is needed, complementing any operation and

(spoke in French)
We all know how the political, security, humanitarian
and development dimensions are interrelated and
mutually reinforcing. To help Haiti build strong
security and justice institutions and address the root
causes of instability, I would also like to reiterate the
importance of financial support commensurate with
the challenges. UNODC is strengthening its support
programmes in Haiti in close collaboration with its
national, regional and international partners, so that
the country can regain the foundations of peace and
security necessary for its economic development and
the well-being of Haitians.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Ms. Waly
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Special Representative of the
Secretary-General María Isabel Salvador in her first
appearance at the Security Council since the SecretaryGeneral announced her appointment on 1 March. I
would also like to thank the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Waly for

23-118415/22

S/PV.9311

The question concerning Haiti

her briefing, and I acknowledge the presence here this
morning of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Haiti
and the Dominican Republic.
The United States welcomes the appointment by
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights of William O’Neill as an Independent Expert
on Human Rights in Haiti. There is an urgent need
to monitor and report on the human rights situation,
with special emphasis on the safety and well-being of
women and children.
As we heard this morning, the reports on the
security and humanitarian situation in Haiti are pretty
horrific. In the capital city of Port-au-Prince, schools
and community hubs have become sites for terrorizing
and recruiting young people. Gang violence threatens
the daily lives of citizens and the economic prosperity
of Haiti. Women and girls are most vulnerable to the
unacceptable rise in sexual and gender-based violence,
used as a tool of fear and intimidation. We are deeply
concerned about the increase in violent gang activity. The
United Nations reported that homicides increased 21 per
cent in the first quarter of this year, and kidnappings
by 63 per cent. As the Special Representative noted,
schools have closed after teachers and students were
hit by stray bullets in classrooms in what the United
Nations describes as gang attacks of an indiscriminate
character. Abductions of children and parents have
often taken place within the vicinity of schools.
The United States also condemns in the strongest
terms the killing in the line of duty of brave the
Haitian National Police officers. The brutal tactics
gangs have enacted in carrying out those crimes are
deeply troubling.
Political stability is a key element towards
restoring peace and security in the country. Since the
December 2022 signing of the National Consensus for
an Inclusive Transition and Transparent Elections, we
have seen positive political developments, including
the appointment of members to the High Transitional
Council and the Court of Cassation. While those
political developments are promising, we urge the
Government of Haiti and all political stakeholders to
establish an inclusive and broad-based Provisional
Electoral Council to restore democratic governance in
the country.
Despite increased assistance from the international
community, more is needed to support the security,
health and stability of the Haitian people. We
6/22

26/04/2023

applaud the United Nations recent approval of the
Humanitarian System-Wide Scale-Up for Haiti to
address malnutrition, cholera, gender-based violence
and child protection needs in the country. The United
States has committed more than $90 million to support
the Haitian National Police and provided more than
$204.7 million in humanitarian funding to Haiti. In
the past six months, the United States announced an
additional $56 million in humanitarian assistance,
delivered 450 metric tons of health, logistics and water,
sanitation and hygiene commodities and transported
232 metric tons of personal protective equipment for
health workers, as well as rehydration fluids for cholera
patients, and water-disinfection tablets.
The Government of Haiti and its people have
asked for international support to address violence and
insecurity. The United States continues to work with
a growing number of international partners to support
the urgent security needs in the country. The Security
Council will need to do its part in helping Haiti,
including by advancing additional sanctions against
those who finance and foment violence and instability
in Haiti. The United States stands in solidarity with the
Haitian people during these difficult times.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank Ms. María Isabel Salvador,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH), for her informative briefing, and I wish her
every success in her work. I also thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, for her informative
briefing. I acknowledge the presence in today’s meeting
of the Foreign Ministers of Haiti and the Dominican
Republic, as well as the Permanent Representative
of Canada.
We are not starting from scratch. I wish to
acknowledge the extraordinary work that Ms. Helen
La Lime is doing as the Head of BINUH, which is
not clearly reflected in the situation on the ground
because the security crisis exceeds the composition
and logistical and institutional capacities of BINUH,
which authorizes only 42 civilian personnel to advise
on police and penitentiary matters. But the work of
the Integrated Office remains crucial in the efforts
to promote political stability and good governance,
promote and protect human rights and accompany and
support Haitian dialogue.
23-11841

26/04/2023

The question concerning Haiti

The
Security
Council
should
encourage
the strengthening of the initiative launched on
21 December to build a national consensus, including
through the ensuring the effective implementation of
the initiative and an increasingly broad and inclusive
participation of all Haitian actors and sectors. That
will be conducive to strengthening the rule of law
and institutions, including in the justice sector, with a
view to advancing accountability and the democratic
transition, through transparent elections held by the
February 2024 deadline.
But restoring security is indispensable to achieving
that major objective, as affirmed by the Human Rights
Council in its resolution 52/39, adopted unanimously on
4 April. In response to the Security Council’s request
contained in resolution 2645 (2022), the SecretaryGeneral — six months ago already — recommended
the deployment of a specialized multinational force to
support the Haitian police. And the people of Haiti are still
waiting. In the face of that, we cannot delay any longer.
Week by week, as we reflect on the situation, analyse
options and discuss ideal solutions, day by day — it
becomes too late — there are too many violations and
too many lives lived only to be lost.
How many more Haitians must die? In the first
quarter of 2023, more civilians died in Haiti than in
many of the bloodiest ongoing conflicts in the rest of
the world. Just two days ago (see S/PV.9308), in this
very Chamber, we debated effective multilateralism. I
therefore want to say here today that if we are unable
to contribute to overcoming the state of gang-generated
violence and cruelty in Haiti, how can we hope to resolve
the much larger conflicts around the world? How can we
hope to comply with Article 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations, which confers the Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, in addition to the same Article also
recognizing that we act on behalf of the Members of the
Organization to ensure prompt and effective action? I
would therefore like to insist on the Security Council’s
responsibility to work reciprocatively with the people of
Haiti to benefit from their historic contribution not only
to the freedom of Latin America and the Caribbean but
,also to freedoms throughout the world.
Ecuador highlights Gabon’s leadership as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2653
(2022) concerning Haiti and supports a visit to Haiti
as soon as possible to hold a dialogue and assess the
situation and issues, such as security-sector reform,

S/PV.9311

strengthened sanctions and a targeted arms embargo. We
are particularly concerned about the issues raised by the
report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
entitled Haiti’s criminal markets: mapping trends in
firearms and drug trafficking. The Council must support
efforts to promote border and port controls and combat
the illicit trafficking of arms and ammunition, which
continues to increase. The Council must encourage
all United Nations system authorities to pay special
attention to Haiti. In that regard, we appreciate the visit
by United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Volker Türk in February and the recent appointment
of Mr. William O’Neill as an expert on human rights
in Haiti.
Ecuador is alarmed by the projections in the Food
Price Monitoring and Analysis Bulletin of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
World Food Programme for this month. According to
the Bulletin, by June of this year 4.9 million people will
likely be affected by acute food insecurity, that is to say,
half of Haiti’s population. With thousands of displaced
persons adding to such already challenging conditions,
issues related to displacement particularly affect women
and girls. Sexual and gender-based violence cannot
go unpunished.
Lastly, we call on the Security Council to send a
message of unity and determination to ensure full, safe
and unimpeded humanitarian access and the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel, and to move forward
with coordinated and targeted international action to
support Haitian efforts.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to make this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council (A3), namely,
Ghana, Mozambique and my own country, Gabon. We
welcome the appointment of Ms. María Isabel Salvador
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, and express our support for her during her term
as Head of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti.
We thank Ms. La Lime for her work and commitment
during her term in that post. We also thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
for her insightful briefing. We welcome the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Haiti and the Dominican Republic and
the Permanent Representative of Canada to this meeting.
We listened very carefully to the Special
Representative’s informative briefing on the situation
in Haiti, which has continued to deteriorate over the

23-118417/22

S/PV.9311

The question concerning Haiti

years. It is terrifying on the human front and alarming
on the political front, and its economic repercussions
are intolerable. All of that should compel every one of
us to act, considering that it is happening less than four
hours by plane from our meeting today.
In terms of security, Haitians continue to face
unspeakable terror, fueled by the criminal acts of
gangs that are expanding their control in the country
with the most heinous crimes, including rape, other
forms of sexual violence, kidnapping for ransom,
robberies and various forms of illicit trafficking.
We are extremely concerned about the fact that such
violence does not spare children, who, together with
women, are the preferred victims of the gangs that
are directly targeting the police and have no qualms
about using schools and health-care facilities as bases
for their mafia-style operations. Ghana, Mozambique
and Gabon firmly condemn the continued use of rape
and other forms of sexual violence by armed gangs,
which disproportionately affect women and girls with
serious consequences for their human rights and health.
The statistics speak for themselves. Violence in Haiti
has reached unprecedented levels, with a 63 per cent
increase in kidnappings and a 21 per cent increase in
homicides compared to the last quarter of 2022.
The pressure that gangs are able to exert on the
police shows that there is a power imbalance in their
favour. The gang members are more heavily armed
and are violating every conceivable right, including
human rights. In their attempts to combat the violence,
particularly in the Ouest and Artibonite departments,
the police, with inadequate supplies of equipment and
personnel, are struggling to achieve results and are
running out of steam in the face of the scale of the
challenges. On 23 April, clashes broke out between
the Haitian National Police and armed gangs in the
Débussy and Turgeau neighbourhoods of Port-auPrince. The incident resulted in several deaths, looting
and the burning of houses and vehicles. The A3 believes
firmly that we must prioritize overcoming the security
challenges if we are to restore Haiti’s ability to take
control of its destiny. In that regard, we welcome all
complementary initiatives aimed at strengthening
the material, technical and human capacities of the
Haitian police and call on donor countries to increase
their contribution to the basket fund in support of the
professionalization of the Haitian National Police,
which to date has received only about $14.9 million
of its $28 million goal. We take note of the ongoing
8/22

26/04/2023

consultations on the deployment of a specialized force
that will work with the Haitian National Police and
encourage discussions aimed at finding a concerted and
effective response that can end the prevailing insecurity.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
stabilization of the cholera epidemic appears to have
provided a respite in an alarming environment marked
by a 15.8 per cent increase in humanitarian needs as
compared to 2021, including the 92.3 per cent increase
in funding needs for the humanitarian response plan.
The humanitarian situation is the result of multiple
combined factors, including endemic poverty and
insecurity, mass displacement and forced repatriation,
which continues to add men, women and children
returned from a forced exile caused by the harshness of
daily life to a population that is already in difficulties.
The situation must be very quickly stabilized to enable
those 4.9 million Haitians to be lifted out of acute
food insecurity and to provide schooling for the more
than 500,000 children who are not in school and are
living in gang-controlled areas. We welcome and
encourage the initiatives of the specialized agencies of
the United Nations, including the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, UNICEF, the World
Health Organization, the World Food Programme and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, along with bilateral partners, to meet
the urgent humanitarian needs. We especially note
the Spotlight Initiative, aimed at providing medical
care and psychological support for victims of sexual
and gender-based violence, as well as measures for
returning children to schools that have been occupied
by armed gangs.
We urge international partners to intensify their
efforts to bolster women’s resilience, reduce stigma
and strengthen the community fabric. In that regard, we
welcome the constructive discussions on establishing
the presence of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the reinstatement
of an independent human rights expert in Haiti, as well
as the consideration by the Human Rights Council of the
human rights situation in Haiti under its agenda item 101.
We note that the re-establishment of the rule of law
in Haiti goes hand in hand with the strengthening of the
presence of State institutions, in particular the police,
throughout the country. No place should be left to the
mercy of gangs. The appointment of eight judges to the
Court of Cassation, the measures taken concerning the
evaluation of prosecutors and other initiatives launched
23-11841

26/04/2023

The question concerning Haiti

to improve the judicial system are steps in the right
direction. Those laudable efforts should be supported by
donors in order form them to achieve their full impact,
including with respect to the successful completion of
penal reform with a view to combating impunity and
corruption in a sustainable manner. It is essential that
ongoing judicial cases — particularly those related to
the assassination of the late President Jovenel Moïse, as
well as those concerning the killings in Grand Ravine
and Bel Air — are brought to a conclusion.
On the economic and social front, we encourage
the various reforms initiated by the Government in
the customs and tax sectors, as well as those aimed at
improving the social situation. Even bolder reforms
are needed to reduce poverty and social inequality and
strengthen the resilience of Haitians to tackle the many
different crises they face. Haiti must be supported in its
efforts to build a more inclusive and resilient economic
model that will provide employment opportunities
for the thousands of young people who are otherwise
obliged to leave the country each year.
At the political level, the conclusion of the
21 December agreement is a positive development in the
search for a consensus to re-establish State institutions.
We call on the Haitian authorities to implement it in all
its aspects in order to pave as solid a path as possible
for the organization of credible elections. The actions
taken to create a peaceful climate for the elections, in
particular the prevention of electoral violence and the
updating of the electoral roll, reflect the will of the
Haitian people to tackle the challenges that lie ahead.
We welcome the establishment of the High
Transitional Council and the creation of a monitoring
committee with the objective of advocating for
the agreement’s rapid implementation. We urge
political actors to seize the opportunity presented by
the agreement to create a dynamic of constructive
consultations. Only the Haitians themselves have
the ability to sustainably chart their path towards
democracy, peace and stability.
Ghana, Mozambique and Gabon believe in the
important role that the Caribbean Community can
play in accompanying Haiti through this painful era in
its history. We encourage the countries of the region
to strengthen their solidarity with Haiti, which we
Africans consider to be an integral part of the sixth
region of Africa. We will continue to stand alongside
the brotherly Haitian people.

S/PV.9311

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I wish to thank Special Representative Salvador for
her briefing on the situation in Haiti and congratulate
her on her new assignment. I also thank Executive
Director Waly of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) for her briefing and welcome the
representatives of Haiti, the Dominican Republic and
Canada to this meeting.
Haiti remains mired in political, security,
development and humanitarian crises. The Haitian
people are struggling in pain and despair. Their
situation, as the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights described it, is “a living nightmare”.
That is deeply disturbing.
After the Haitian interim authorities reached an
agreement on a transition with some of the country’s
political parties and civil society organizations, the
High Transitional Council was established. However,
the political transition process still lacks broad
support. An immediate end to the political stalemate
should be an urgent priority for all parties in Haiti. It is
imperative that the Haitian interim authorities and all
political parties and factions put the essential interests
of all Haitians first, show a commitment to dialogue
and meeting their responsibilities by taking concrete
actions and strive for broader agreements on transitional
arrangements so as to create the necessary conditions
for holding free, fair, transparent and credible elections
at the earliest possible date. We look forward to seeing
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, under
the leadership of Special Representative Salvador, play
an important role in facilitating an inclusive dialogue
among Haitian political groups in order to forge a
consensus on transitional arrangements and advance
the Haitian-led and Haitian-owned political process.
Curbing the rising tide of gang violence and
criminality is the key to improving security in Haiti.
In that regard, it is imperative to urgently eliminate
political support for the gangs and the sources of
their funding and weapons. According to the latest
assessment report by UNODC, the raging gang violence
is inextricably linked to the illicit flow of weapons into
Haiti from abroad, especially from the United States. We
find that trend deeply worrisome — if left unchecked,
it will fuel the reckless and violent behaviour of
gangs and exacerbate the current levels of insecurity
and instability. Resolution 2653 (2022) provides for
sanctions, including an arms embargo, targeting Haitian
gangs. Those provisions must not remain on paper only,

23-118419/22

S/PV.9311

The question concerning Haiti

and the countries concerned must take effective steps
to implement them. China supports Gabon in its work
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2653 (2022), concerning Haiti.
We encourage the Panel of Experts to step up its work
and the Sanctions Committee to update the sanctions
list as soon as possible in order to further refine
sanctions measures and ensure the proper monitoring
of their implementation.
Haiti is experiencing a rampant cholera epidemic
and an economic decline. Nearly half of its population is
threatened by food insecurity. We are deeply concerned
by the dire humanitarian situation facing the Haitian
people. We support the United Nations and other
international partners in their continued support for Haiti
through the formulation of a cooperation framework for
sustainable development and other means, in particular
by providing assistance to women, children, migrants
and other vulnerable groups. We support the countries
and organizations of the region in playing a larger role
and working in synergy with United Nations agencies
to jointly improve the humanitarian situation on the
ground. Haiti’s many crises are intertwined.
Our thoughts are with the Haitian people in the
current circumstances. There is no quick fix for such
a complex problem. Together with the international
community, China will continue to support the Haitian
people in finding an effective solution to their current
plight and suffering.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, Ms. María Isabel Salvador, for her briefing in her
new role as the Head of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti and I would like to reaffirm Switzerland’s
continued support for the discharge of her mandate.
I also thank Ms. Ghada Waly, the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for
her briefing. We acknowledge the presence at today’s
meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Haiti
and the Dominican Republic, as well as the Permanent
Representative of Canada.
The briefings we just heard illustrate the continuing
deterioration of the security situation and the gross
violations of human rights that Haitians are facing daily.
The freedom and movement of the population in the
Port-au-Prince metropolitan area are severely restricted.
Almost no area of the capital and its surroundings has
been spared from gang violence. We condemn the
10/22

26/04/2023

gangs’ systematic use of sexual violence as well as their
targeting of children and recruitment of minors. The
Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/274) emphasizes that
insecurity in the capital has reached levels comparable
to those in countries experiencing armed conflict.
Restoring stability and security in the country
remains crucial. Tens of thousands of people have
been displaced. Stopping the gang violence, including
by disarming them, will help to support the efforts
to rebuild State institutions. Through its continued
presence in various regions of Haiti, Switzerland aims
to provide humanitarian assistance in these difficult
times. Let me highlight the following three points.
First, food insecurity must be reduced urgently
and for the long term. Almost half of the population
is experiencing acute food insecurity and for an
estimated 1.8 million people that is now an emergency.
The food crisis has deteriorated rapidly over the past
two years and is now at an unprecedentedly severe
level. The structural challenges, the adverse effects of
climate change and recurring natural disasters have
exacerbated the situation, while the increased gang
activity in areas that are important for food production
could leave even more people hungry. Switzerland has
increased its funding to the World Food Programme.
We encourage humanitarian and development
organizations to continue to provide the necessary
emergency aid. Without food security, stability in Haiti
will not be possible.
Secondly, the safe, timely and unhindered delivery
of humanitarian assistance remains essential to the
survival of many. Gang activities are limiting access
to people in urgent need of basic goods and services,
and unrestricted access for humanitarian personnel
must be guaranteed. Switzerland is concerned about
the gangs’ continuing attacks on medical personnel
and critical infrastructure, teachers and humanitarian
actors. We echo the Secretary-General’s call for
their protection. Our long-standing engagement in
Haiti has shown that despite the difficult security
situation, strengthening communities and Government
institutions at the municipal and departmental levels
can make a difference. In the south of the country, for
example, Switzerland is committed to strengthening
local governance of water and sanitation.
Thirdly, in addition to the progress made at the
political level, the strengthening of the judicial system
must be ramped up without delay. Impunity and
23-11841

26/04/2023

The question concerning Haiti

corruption must be addressed to effectively combat
the growing autonomy and independence of gangs
and break the cycle of violence. The international
community must stand with Haitians to meet their needs
and support them in their quest for a consensus that can
enable them to emerge from the political crisis. That
is also vital to creating the conditions for safe and free
elections. Switzerland is committed to those efforts.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I welcome Special
Representative María Isabel Salvador and wish
her the best of luck in her mission. I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Ms. Waly for their briefings and would also like to
recognize the presence of Foreign Ministers Généus
of Haiti and Álvarez Gil of the Dominican Republic at
today’s meeting.
Albania reaffirms its full support for the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and recognizes the
critical role it plays in a context of heightened violence
and insecurity. In these trying times, amid a profound
political crisis, as the country remains in the grip of
vicious gangs that are dominating daily life through
rampant warfare and extortion, we stand with the
people of Haiti as they struggle with a catastrophic
deterioration of human rights and pervasive insecurity.
As we heard from the briefers, the cycle of violence
is compounding an already disastrous humanitarian
situation, worsened by high prices and a shortage of
food. Albania fully supports all efforts to restore the
rule of law and the functioning of State institutions. In
that spirit, we welcomed the recent establishment of
the High Transitional Council and the appointment of
judges to the Court of Cassation — encouraging steps
following the signing of the National Consensus for
an Inclusive Transition and Transparent Elections. But
they are far from enough and will not resolve the crisis.
It is imperative for Haiti to restore law and order and
to combat corruption and the impunity of armed gangs.
With their brutal methods of extortion, kidnapping and
drug trafficking, the gangs are suffocating the capital
and have metastasized throughout the country. It would
be naive to think that they exist in isolation. All those
responsible for the spread and financing of gangs and
their violence, including those within the Haiti elite
who are using or profiting from them, should be held
accountable. Haiti cannot move ahead with illegality
and without legitimacy for its core institutions. We
therefore believe that we should make further use of the

S/PV.9311

sanctions toolbox in order to track gang leaders, as well
as arms traffickers and those who benefit from chaos.
Experience has shown that Haiti’s police
force, which is undermanned, underpaid and
underequipped — conditions that make it vulnerable to
penetration by gangs — has been unable to gain the
upper hand. The longer that situation lasts, the more
powerful the gangs will become, eventually being
enabled to dictate their terms and seek a place in the
country’s political and financial circles. That is why we
support the deployment of an international specialized
armed force, as the Secretary-General and Haiti’s Prime
Minister, Ariel Henry, have advocated for. That is the
only adequate response to the Haitian people’s legitimate
demand for international assistance, as armed gangs
are expanding their influence, targeting everyone and
making normal life impossible, while State authorities
are unable to prevent the spread of anarchy and chaos.
The Haitian people have been deprived of their most
fundamental rights, including the right to normal life,
water, food and health care. The restoration of security,
which would create an environment conducive to
preparing for elections, a return to legitimacy and the
building of responsive governance, is a must.
As we heard, Haiti is burning. It needs help, and
it needs it now if it is to avoid becoming a failed State
owned by gangs, in which law would lose all meaning.
Albania continues to believe that only through domestic
unity among political actors, regional and international
solidarity and a sense of urgency on the part of all can Haiti
start to reverse the chaotic situation it is going through
and allow people to return to normal life in dignity.
Let me end by reiterating Albania’s firm commitment
to supporting Haiti and its people in their efforts to
overcome the crisis and move towards a stable and
sustainable future.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): On behalf of France, I too would like to
thank Ms. María Isabel Salvador for her briefing and
wish her every success in her crucial mission. I also
thank Ms. Ghada Waly for her briefing and would
like to acknowledge the presence at today’s meeting
of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Haiti and the
Dominican Republic and the Permanent Representative
of Canada.
France is very concerned about the new escalation of
violence that we have witnessed in Haiti over the past few
days. The suffering of the Haitian people is intolerable

23-1184111/22

S/PV.9311

The question concerning Haiti

and the situation continues to deteriorate. We urge the
international community to redouble its efforts. The
insecurity in Port-au-Prince has reached levels comparable
to those in countries in armed conflict. Homicides,
kidnapping, sexual violence, recruitment of children by
gangs — the list of abuses in Haiti cannot be ignored.
The absolute priority must be to restore security.
Collectively, we must support the Haitian National Police
much more effectively, as we know they need equipment,
funding and training. The Haitian authorities have been
appealing to the international community since October
of last year. We stand ready, with our partners, to do
more to redress the situation on the ground. The United
Nations must also provide more support to Haiti in terms
of security, via the work of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti.
France hopes that the Council will soon be able to
adopt its first sanctions against the criminals destabilizing
the country and that the panel of experts will be able to
make proposals quickly. However, sanctions alone will
not solve anything. At the same time, justice must be
restored in Haiti. The fight against impunity must be a
priority if we want to put an end to the violence. The
appointment of the members of the Court of Cassation is
a positive step in that regard.
France will continue to encourage Haitian actors
to pursue an inclusive dialogue. We welcome the
efforts made to encourage broader participation in the
National Consensus for an Inclusive Transition and
Transparent Elections, as well as the installation of the
High Transitional Council. The objective remains the
organization of democratic elections when the security
conditions are met. We urge Haitian political actors
to reach the broadest possible agreement for the rapid
appointment of a Provisional Electoral Council. The
political class must show responsibility to overcome the
current impasse.
Finally, and this is my last point, France will remain
committed to providing humanitarian aid, in particular in
terms of health care and food. In 2023, our humanitarian
assistance will reach €9 million, and given the need, we
are working on mobilizing additional funds.
France will continue to support the efforts of the
United Nations, the International Organization of la
Francophonie and other partners working to assist Haiti.
We cannot stand by and let Haiti sink into chaos. We will
continue as long as necessary to stand side by side with
the Haitian people.
12/22

26/04/2023

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
extend a warm welcome to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General María Isabel Salvador
on her first briefing to the Security Council and
express our appreciation for her work and thank for
her comprehensive report. I also thank Ms. Waly,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime. I welcome the presence of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Haiti, Jean Généus,
and of the Dominican Republic, Roberto Álvarez Gil.
I also welcome the participation in this meeting of the
Permanent Representative of Canada.
The security landscape in Haiti remains fraught
with challenges. The escalation of gang violence has
become increasingly alarming, with State authorities
mostly failing to mount an adequate response. The police
face daunting odds as they attempt to combat gangs
that are targeting police infrastructure and recruiting
minors. It is appalling that the gangs are extending their
control to a large part of Port-au-Prince, significantly
worsening the dire multidimensional crisis affecting
the country. As a result, Haiti is grappling with high
levels of internal displacement, a sharp increase in food
insecurity and limited access to essential services, such
as education and health care.
The prevailing political stalemate, coupled with
the humanitarian and security crises, has created a
vicious cycle in Haiti in which one crisis reinforces
the other. A breakthrough in the political dialogue
between the Government and the opposition is therefore
essential. At present, Haiti lacks any democratically
elected Government representatives. Failing to
address that legitimacy vacuum could potentially
plunge the nation into a more severe crisis with
unpredictable consequences.
As we stated at our meeting in January (see
S/PV.9247), we took positive note of the initiative
launched on 21 December to build a national consensus
for an inclusive transition and transparent elections.
We also expressed hope that it would represent the
beginning of a comprehensive process of national unity.
Since then, some positive steps have been taken to
implement the agreement, such as the investiture of the
High Transitional Council and the recent appointment
of judges to fill vacant seats in the Court de Cassation.
Restoring the rule of law is of utmost importance to
enable the Haitian people to fully exercise their political
and civil rights. We encourage intensified efforts to
23-11841

26/04/2023

The question concerning Haiti

ensure a broad and inclusive national political dialogue
in order to forge a wider consensus, so that institutional
normalcy can be re-established and elections organized.
Brazil is deeply concerned about the fact that
incipient advances in the political process can be
jeopardized if the deterioration of the security situation
is not curbed. The control of gang activities is necessary
for creating conditions that enable the organization of
credible elections. Brazil stands ready to engage with
Council members and other stakeholders to discuss
how to respond to those challenges.
We must also ensure that political and economic
groups do not exploit the humanitarian crisis for
their petty interests in Haiti. We remain hopeful
that the sanctions regime adopted last October, by
helping to break the link between the political and
economic power and the Haitian gangs, will facilitate
a peaceful political understanding among key actors
in the country and eventually lead to a solution to
this vicious cycle. We call upon the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2653
(2022) concerning Haiti to expeditiously initiate its
deliberations to impose sanctions with the full backing
of the international community.
Brazil firmly believes that Haiti’s path to change
extends beyond controlling criminal activities.
Socioeconomic progress is vital for effectively and
sustainably addressing the crisis. Haiti remains a
priority for Brazilian international cooperation. We
appeal to the international community to strengthen
efforts to foster economic and social development,
thereby preventing Haiti from relapsing into violence.
In conclusion, we urge all Haitian political actors to
deepen their dialogue and to work towards organizing
safe and fair elections. Haitian-led solutions can
materialize only if Haitian stakeholders engage in
good faith and in a spirit of compromise. Brazil has
historically contributed to the promotion of peace and
stability in Haiti and remains committed to supporting
the country, particularly in these challenging times.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I would like to thank Special
Representative Salvador for her briefing, and I welcome
her to the Chamber for the first time in her new role.
I also thank the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for her briefing and
welcome the participation of the Foreign Ministers of
Haiti and the Dominican Republic and the Permanent
Representative of Canada.

S/PV.9311

Malta remains deeply concerned about the
deteriorating security and humanitarian situation in
Haiti. As detailed in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/274), violence, including sexual violence, and
homicides continue to escalate. Acts of kidnapping
continue to intensify, and hunger is at an all-time high,
with nearly half of all Haitians experiencing acute
food insecurity.
The Haitian people continue to suffer at the hands
of armed gangs, as they compete to expand their
territorial control, displacing over 100,000 people. The
international community must do all it can to support the
Haitian National Police and their efforts to bring security
and the rule of law to Haiti.
Malta believes the sanctions regime, established by
the Council in resolution 2653 (2022), is an important
tool for targeting and deterring those who engage or
support illicit financial and criminal activities, including
the forced recruitment of children and sexual and genderbased violence. The Council should look to update the
list of those designated for sanctions as soon as possible,
as well as to ensure the full implementation of those
measures. As highlighted by UNODC in its March
report and again today, that includes strengthening
border controls and customs authorities to combat the
illicit trafficking of drugs, arms and people, as well as
transnational organized crime.
Malta remains deeply concerned by the political
crisis in Haiti. We urge the Haitian authorities to engage
with civil society groups in order to build the broadest
possible consensus on a road map for the necessary
political and security conditions that would allow for
free and fair elections. That should be a Haitian-led
and -owned political process, with the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women and young people.
That will require continued investment in capacitybuilding for women and youth leaders. It must be a priority
of the international community to strengthen Haiti’s
judicial system to fight corruption and impunity that feed
the cycle of violence and insecurity. Those responsible
for perpetuating this crisis must be held accountable.
The people of Haiti are suffering from a
catastrophic human rights crisis. Women and girls are
disproportionately affected by sexual and gender-based
violence, including rape, which is being used as a tool by
gangs to terrorize, punish and subjugate communities.
These actions are utterly reprehensible, and Malta
condemns this violence in the strongest possible terms.

23-1184113/22

S/PV.9311

The question concerning Haiti

Children also suffer some of the most serious
abuse in this crisis, being targeted by armed groups
for kidnapping, sexual violence and recruitment into
their criminal gangs. As we have been briefed by
the Special Representative, hundreds of thousands
of children struggle to access education, with many
schools becoming hotspots for abduction or forced to
close. The protection of children and women must be of
paramount importance for the international community,
and we must urgently take steps to ensure that they are
shielded from violence.
We recognize the efforts of humanitarian actors
on the ground who continue to work to alleviate the
suffering of people in Haiti. As we heard, humanitarians
face many access challenges throughout the country.
Malta therefore reiterates its calls on all parties to
facilitate rapid, safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access to all people in need. In addition, we remind
parties of their obligations under international law with
regard to the safety and protection afforded to medical
and humanitarian personnel and assets.
In conclusion, the situation in Haiti must remain
a priority for the Council, as the country continues to
suffer from a multidimensional emergency. We reaffirm
our solidarity with Haiti and pledge our collective
commitment to support the Haitian people.
Mr. Almazrouei (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I welcome Special Representative María Isabel
and wish her immense success in her new role. We
fully support her work and that of the United Nations in
Haiti, including through the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti, as it is a key component in efforts to
achieve security and stability in the country. We thank
Ms. Waly for her comprehensive briefing. We also
welcome the participation of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti and Dominican Republic, as well as the
representative of Canada in today’s meeting.
As the situation in Haiti remains dire, we underscore
that a political solution remains the heart of any holistic
approach to addressing the multifaceted challenges in
Haiti. It is therefore imperative to continue broadening
political dialogue. The success of such efforts will
rely on the participation, in good faith, of all relevant
stakeholders. Economic recession, political deadlock
and unprecedented violence has meant that a daily,
terrifying struggle is an all-too-common reality for
the people of Haiti. Progress on the political track will
14/22

26/04/2023

undoubtedly contribute to mitigating this multifaceted
and intersecting crisis and to ensuring Haiti’s longterm stability.
With that in mind, I would like to make the
following points.
First, we remain deeply concerned about the
growing levels of violence in Haiti. Departments and
regions once considered safe from gang violence are
now under threat. Clear signals of that are this week’s
harrowing reports of people set on fire, as well as
Médecins Sans Frontières suspending activities in the
capital, which is part of a greater trend of international
non-governmental organizations being forced to close
down parts of their operations despite the critical need
for them.
It must therefore remain a priority to build the
capacity and response skills of the Haitian National
Police to these challenges, as well as to strengthen
anti-corruption measures and tackle the trafficking
and proliferation of illegal arms and illicit financial
flows. We welcome regional efforts to face domestic
and regional challenges, including the Caribbean
Community high-level delegation visit in February,
as well as the efforts of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in that regard.
Secondly, supporting Haitian-led community-based
violence-reduction approaches, particularly those that
include young people, are just as critical for improving
the security situation and tackling humanitarian
challenges. With the continued recruitment of children
and closure of schools, those approaches are increasingly
important as they can mitigate the vulnerability of
Haitian young men and women and help them take
ownership of their future.
Thirdly, the rule of law represents a guiding
compass for states, especially for those facing the
widespread and deep insecurity as it is the case in
Haiti. The rule of law provides the backbone for justice
and accountability, particularly for heinous crimes such
as sexual violence. For example, according to United
Nations estimates, 30 per cent of Haitian women
between the ages of 15 and 30 have been victims of
sexual abuse or violence. For survivors of sexual
violence who fear retaliation, State institutions built on
a strong rule of law must serve as both a safe haven
and a vehicle for swift and definitive justice. That is
particularly important as current efforts are taken to
enhance the judicial sector in Haiti.
23-11841

26/04/2023

The question concerning Haiti

In conclusion, Haiti is facing one of the worst
humanitarian crises in today’s world. It also suffers from
an underfunded response to its humanitarian needs. We
note the horrific reports of gang violence, increased
mass displacement, child recruitment and sexual and
gender-based violence, compounded by restricted
access to basic services and humanitarian assistance, a
multi-year drought and soaring food insecurity, as well
as the resurgence of cholera. We reiterate the need to
respect and protect women and children in Haiti. We
also stress the need to respect and protect hospitals,
educational institutions and humanitarian facilities.
With national institutions lacking the capacity to
adequately respond to those calamities, armed gangs
continue to expand their criminal enterprises as the
country approaches hurricane season, which will
inevitably exacerbate the humanitarian crisis. Haiti
cannot be forgotten and must remain in our minds as it
faces these challenges.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): Let me start by expressing our
appreciation to the former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. La Lime, for her tireless efforts
during her tenure and welcoming the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Salvador,
for her first appearance here. Japan looks forward to
working with her and her Office.
The work of the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti in pivotal areas such as governance, security
and human rights is indispensable for the stabilization
of Haiti, and we commend its efforts. I also thank
Executive Director Wali for her insightful briefing and
welcome the participation of the Foreign Ministers
of Haiti and the Dominican Republic, as well as the
Permanent Representative of Canada.
Japan is deeply concerned about the dire
humanitarian and security situation in Haiti. The
worsening security situation is alarming, as we observe
a rapid increase in the number of cases of kidnapping
and violent crime. We deplore that women and children
have been subjected to serious crimes, including sexual
violence and forced recruitment. Japan underlines the
need to protect the most fundamental rights of the
people, such as to life, water, food and health, as well
as the need to respect the rule of law.
In that regard, strengthening the capacities of
the Haitian National Police (HNP) is vital, and Japan
notes the initiative taken by the Government to procure
necessary equipment. Although the main responsibility

S/PV.9311

for stability rests with the Haitian authorities, regional
and international initiatives should augment national
efforts. Japan will continue to support such initiatives
as the basket fund managed by the United Nations
Development Programme to strengthen the HNP, and
we applaud the continued engagement by such regional
groups such as the Organization of American States
and the Caribbean Community.
Japan also recognizes the role of targeted sanctions
in addressing insecurity in Haiti. To that end, Japan
welcomes, and will engage constructively in, the
discussion to strengthen and broaden sanctions, as
appropriate, against those who engage in criminal-gang
activities and violence, based on listing requests from
Member States and through the Panel of Experts.
As pointed out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/274), addressing security should go
hand in hand with resolving political crises, including
the holding of free, fair and transparent elections and
the establishment of an accountable and effective
judicial system. Japan welcomes the progress made
in the implementation of the 21 December agreement,
including the establishment of the High Transitional
Council and the appointment of eight Court of Cassation
judges. Concrete and timely implementation of the
agreement is essential, and Japan is considering possible
support for the elections stipulated in the agreement.
To garner further support for the political process,
Japan calls on political actors and all stakeholders to
participate and achieve progress through dialogue.
In conclusion, I reiterate our support for and
solidarity with the people of Haiti.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): First of all,
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
thank her for her briefing. We wish her every success
in her new role.
We would also like to take this opportunity to put
on record our gratitude to all United Nations staff in
Haiti for their work in very challenging circumstances.
We would like to thank the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for her
briefing and to welcome the Foreign Ministers of Haiti
and the Dominican Republic to the Chamber.
As we have heard today, the situation in Haiti
remains bleak, and it is getting worse. Like, I think, all
of us in this Chamber, the United Kingdom is deeply

23-1184115/22

S/PV.9311

The question concerning Haiti

concerned by the deteriorating security situation, the
dramatic increase in homicides and kidnappings, the
widespread instances of gang rape and other forms of
sexual violence perpetrated by gangs as a means to strike
fear into communities, the recruitment of children into
gangs, indiscriminate sniper fire in civilian areas and
high food insecurity. All of that has contributed to what
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights has called a living nightmare. It is a tragedy
that the Haitian people — and women and children
in particular — continue to experience this horror on
a daily basis, and it should be a wake-up call for the
international community. We strongly support the High
Commissioner’s appointment earlier this month of an
expert on human rights in Haiti, following the request
of the Human Rights Council.
As set out in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/274), it is clear that the Haitian National
Police remains over-stretched and under-resourced to
tackle the immense security challenges it faces. There
needs to be a coordinated international effort to assist
Haitian-led efforts to tackle the underlying causes of
gang violence. We recognize the need for a response to
Haiti’s request for further international assistance, and
we support further Council discussions on that.
We note the installation of the High Transitional
Council as a positive step towards implementing the
21 December political accord. We welcome recent moves
towards a broader political dialogue and call once again
on all actors to redouble their efforts to reach a consensus.
The Security Council should be ready to consider further
sanctions designations of those who seek to undermine
the peace and stability of Haiti. Above all, we must
support every effort for Haitians to come together to
overcome the political impasse and to agree a road map
that creates the conditions for successful democratic
elections and for a better long-term future for Haiti.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We welcome the participation in this meeting of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti, Mr. Jean
Victor Généus, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Dominican Republic, Mr. Roberto Álvarez Gil.
We would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. María Isabel Salvador, for
16/22

26/04/2023

her briefing, and we are very grateful to the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, for her assessments.
News from Haiti continues to give us cause for
grave concern. Haitians are sick and tired of waiting
for order to be restored by the security forces. They
are therefore taking the law into their own hands. They
are lynching their gangs. As we understand it, Port-auPrince is literally besieged by such armed gangs, if it
is not already fully under their control. All exits from
the city have been blocked, thereby disrupting supply
routes as well as the movement of people around the
country.
The population lives in fear for their lives.
Abductions, rape and homicides are now becoming
the norm. There can be no talk of the national healthcare system or the educational system operating as
they should. What is happening is very difficult to
just describe as a crisis. Rather, this is a genuine
humanitarian, socioeconomic and political disaster.
We must recognize that currently neither the
Haitians nor the international community have a full
understanding of how to untangle this knot of Haitian
problems or how to help the country not fall into the abyss.
Humanitarian organizations, including United Nations
bodies, are doing everything they can to save Haitians
from hunger and help meet the population’s basic needs.
The Security Council must address those interrelated
political and security problems in Haiti, and that must
be done as a matter of priority.
Based on statements of the country’s authorities and
their Western partners, resolving the country’s pressing
problems — and this is a long-suffering country — by
restoring the legitimate and sustainable power of the
State should be achieved through the implementation
of the so-called consensus document. Nevertheless,
four months have gone by since it was published, and
we can see no genuine progress on ensuring a political
transition or preparation for transparent elections in the
country. Neither do we see any results of the national
investigation into the assassination of the President,
Mr. Moïse. Almost two years of silence is what we have
seen since this awful crime was committed, which only
heightens the people’s distrust of the authorities. The
extradition of the suspects to the United States further
saps the hopes for independent court proceedings.
We call on the Haitian parties to stand ready to
partake in an inclusive political dialogue based on the
23-11841

26/04/2023

The question concerning Haiti

support of broad swathes of Haitian society. However,
we cannot impose on Haitians solutions that do not
take into account local Haitian realities, as has often
been, and still is, the case. We see brazen attempts to
interfere in the political process in Haiti in the form of
unilateral sanctions against individuals who are not to
the liking of some. The crisis facing Haitian statehood
is to a large extent the outcome of outside political
engineering and neocolonial policy. Fixing the situation
this way is not an option. There is also a growing body
of evidence suggesting that the institutional crisis and
the gang violence in Haiti are two sides of the same
coin. We must come to grips with the issue of political
and economic actors amalgamating with armed gangs,
and on that front we count on the Security Council
sanctions committee’s Panel of Experts.
A separate issue is the ongoing illegal flow of
weapons into Haiti from outside the country. It is clear
that the authorities have lost control over the ports and
border crossings, which criminals can use freely now.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime’s report
shed some light on the weapons and drug trafficking
routes through Haiti, confirming what was already
clear: the lion’s share of weapons that trafficked into
Haiti come from the United States. According to
available information, it is not uncommon to find
bandits on the streets of Port-au-Prince carrying guns
and assault rifles with identifying marks indicating
their use by United States troops in Iraq.
The data provided by the customs service of the
Dominican Republic helps to indicate the true extent of
the ongoing smuggling. In the first half of 2022 alone,
customs officers seized 112,000 small arms destined
for Haiti. Another concern is the growing trend of using
the country as a transit hub for drug flows from Latin
America and the Caribbean to the United States. We are
convinced that such large-scale operations to stem that
scourge would be impossible without the involvement
of the American partners of the Haitian gangs. That
would clearly be an opportunity to clip the wings of
Haitian organized crime.
Special Representative Salvador has without a doubt
one of the most complicated areas of work in our global
Organization. We are convinced that her expertise and
enthusiasm will guide her all the way through the twists
and turns of the Haitian file and help her to assist the
people of Haiti in the best way possible. We wish her
every success in her Office of great responsibility and
assure her of our unstinting support.

S/PV.9311

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Worship of Haiti.
Mr. Généus (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would
first like to commend the Russian Federation on its
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April, and I acknowledge the other members of the
Council. I extend my greetings to the Foreign Minister
of the Dominican Republic, who travelled to be here
with us today. I warmly congratulate Ms. María Isabel
Salvador on her appointment as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH),
whom the Council has welcomed today to deliver her
first briefing on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/274) on the situation in Haiti, and I wish her
every success in her task. My greetings also go to
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime. I also welcome the presence at
today’s meeting of the Permanent Representative of
Canada, as well as all the other guests invited to today’s
important meeting.
I speak today in a context in which the security
situation in Haiti has deteriorated considerably over
the past 48 hours. The appalling scenes of violence
witnessed in the streets of the country’s capital reflect
the extreme anger of an exasperated people who refuse
to accept to passively suffer gang violence any longer.
The frightening spectre of violent confrontations is
already looming, with harmful consequences that we
can imagine. We must act quickly before it is too late. I
once again wish to echo the unspeakable suffering of a
people deprived of its fundamental right to security and
the freedom of movement, held hostage by armed gangs
and their backers.
The report of the Secretary-General, which the
Special Representative delivered brilliantly, paints
a very dark picture of the situation. My Government
endorses the Secretary-General’s call reaffirming the
need for the immediate
“deployment of an international specialized armed
force, as articulated in my letter of 8 October 2022
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2022/747). Alongside the strategic and advisory
support provided by BINUH to strengthen police
capacities, the deployment of such a force remains
crucial to the efforts of national authorities to stem

23-1184117/22

S/PV.9311

The question concerning Haiti

the violence and human rights abuses committed
against the Haitian people, restore the rule of
law and create conditions conductive to credible
elections.” (S/2023/274, para. 72)
There is every reason to be alarmed. Systematic and
indiscriminate gang violence has become commonplace.
Attacks, destruction, hostage-taking, robberies,
assassinations and rapes are the modus operandi of the
criminal gangs, which are creating an overall climate of
terror in the country. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights has expressed its
deep concern about the abuses committed by the gangs,
which continue to spread uncontrollably, resulting
in serious human rights violations, causing massive
displacements of people and aggravating the migration
issue. Haiti’s Directorate for Civil Protection, as well as
the International Organization for Migration, estimates
that approximately 128,000 people have been displaced
by gang violence. Those terrifying acts also affect
neighbouring States and those in the region, especially
in terms of migration. Haiti is in danger and needs the
urgent help of the United Nations family to exit this
zone of turbulence. As a Member of the United Nations,
Haiti is seeking the support it so deeply requires.
The promises and announcements of cooperation
from our main partners are welcomed by the
Government and the people of Haiti, who are waiting
for them to materialize. However, as significant as
those promises are, they are not enough to respond
to the current reality. I would therefore like to take
this opportunity to commend the Haitian National
Police for the commitment, dedication and courage of
our brave officers who face armed gangs every day,
without respite, at the risk of their lives and despite
the limited means at their disposal. In that context,
I reiterate the request made by Prime Minister Ariel
Henry in his official letter of 7 October 2022 addressed
to the Secretary-General and forwarded to the
Security Council.
Must I remind the Council that, historically, the
principle of international solidarity has been at the
heart of Haiti’s foreign policy since the country was
established? Indeed, on many occasions, Haiti has
consistently responded to calls for assistance from its
brother peoples, whether in Latin America and the
Caribbean, Africa or Europe, in their legitimate struggle
for self-determination and political emancipation.
18/22

26/04/2023

The use of force, as a first step, is essential to
defeating the gangs, restoring order and creating an
environment conducive to the proper functioning of the
State. However, the Government is aware that the use of
legitimate violence alone is not the definitive solution
to the problem. Socioeconomic development must be
taken into account in order to sustainably address
extreme poverty — the source of all ills. There is a clear
correlation among underdevelopment, extreme poverty
and banditry. Social inequalities and the very uneven
distribution of national wealth have created a huge
gap between the needy masses of the population and
the small minority of property owners — 5 per cent of
people — who control 90 per cent of the country’s wealth.
Extreme poverty accentuates youth unemployment,
marginalizing those in poor neighbourhoods, who are
easily drawn into delinquency and crime. That category
constitutes a fertile recruiting ground for armed gangs
which, worse still, are now recruiting child soldiers.
According to estimates, 80 per cent of the
metropolitan area is under the control or influence
of armed groups. The same individuals who are
terrorizing the population often live in marginalized
neighbourhoods of extreme poverty. There are some
political and economic actors who are both encouraging
and financing the gangs’ criminal activities in order
to control and maintain their petty interests. They
engage in all kinds of illicit activities, including
organized crime and trafficking in drugs, arms and
organs. At issue is the burdensome legacy of a complex
set of socioeconomic and political factors, coupled
with epidemics and natural disasters, which over the
past five years has resulted in the contraction of the
national economy, with a negative growth rate and an
uncontrollable rate of inflation of more than 50 per
cent. The humanitarian crisis is also deteriorating,
with severe shortages of essential goods. According to
estimates, 4.9 million people are in a situation of food
insecurity that has reached record levels. Almost half
of the population is living below the poverty line on
less than $2 a day. In addition to all of that, we are
dealing with the closure of hospitals and the risk of a
serious health crisis.
Strong institutions are the engines of democracy.
The normal functioning of democratic institutions in
the service of good governance is a prerequisite for
emerging from this disaster. The Prime Minister is well
aware of that and intends to move resolutely towards
the process of normalizing political life, despite the
23-11841

26/04/2023

The question concerning Haiti

current enormous security challenges. Significant
progress has been made in the implementation of the
21 December 2022 agreement known as the National
Consensus for an Inclusive Transition and Transparent
Elections. Following the establishment of the High
Transitional Council and the Court of Cassation, the
country’s highest judicial body, the focus has shifted
to the formation of the Provisional Electoral Council,
the independent body responsible for the holding of
elections. The High Transitional Council has to choose
nine electoral advisers from a list of 20 people proposed
by various sectors to form the Provisional Electoral
Council. Prime Minister Ariel Henry is eagerly
looking forward to handing over the stewardship of the
country’s destiny to an elected President and legitimate
representatives as soon as possible.
With regard to the sanctions regime established
pursuant to resolution 2653 (2022) of 21 October 2022,
the sanctions imposed by Canada, the United States of
America and the Dominican Republic have begun to
have positive results, although the gangs are becoming
increasingly arrogant and seem to be gaining in strength.
I commend the Sanctions Committee established by
the same resolution for the work it has already done.
In that regard, the Government encourages the Panel
of Experts to speed up the work of updating its list
of all those responsible for fuelling instability and
committing violence against the population through the
funding of gangs and corruption. The implementation
of the United Nations sanctions will be universal with
tangible effects.
The Government is committed to restoring law
and order. A secure and stable security environment
remains a priority. It continues to be the cornerstone for
building a democratic framework that can enable the
re-establishment of institutions and address the major
socioeconomic challenges. In order to achieve that goal,
the Government is counting on robust international
support for the Haitian National Police. The deployment
of an international force remains key to halting the
violence and human rights violations, restoring the
rule of law and creating the conditions necessary for
the holding of credible elections. I urgently appeal for
international cooperation to help secure the country and
provide financial support in the medium and long term
for addressing the issue of sustainable development and
thereby ensuring the reintegration of the marginalized
members of society and improving the current living
conditions of the vast majority of the population.

S/PV.9311

Despite periods of distress and disappointment, hope
continues to spring in the hearts of Haitians, who are
seeking a better future of freedom and dignity. On behalf
of the children who have been deprived of playtime and
the right to an education, the women and girls who have
been raped and the families of the innocent victims of the
gangs’ barbarity, I urge Council members to act quickly.
The situation is urgent, and Haiti cannot wait any longer.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Álvarez Gil (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): We commend Russia for its presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April. I would like
to reiterate my heartfelt congratulations to Ms. María
Isabel Salvador on her appointment as Head of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, which is so critical to
achieving peace and security in the region, and to wish
her every success in carrying out her new functions. We
assure her of the Dominican Republic’s responsible and
sustained support.
We are meeting once again today to address the
tragic catastrophe that is having such an enormous
impact on the lives and physical and mental stability of
millions of Haitians, an untenable situation that is not
only affecting Haiti but also my country, the Dominican
Republic. Despite the disastrous scale of the situation,
it has so far been unable to move the emotions or the
conscience of those who must make the final decisions in
support of Haitians. Pope Francis recently prayed,
“Turn your gaze to Haiti, which has long
been experiencing a grave social, economic and
humanitarian crisis, and support the efforts of
political actors and the international community to
seek a definitive solution to this troubled country’s
many problems.”
I believe firmly that our words have not been falling
on deaf ears, but we do not understand why it has taken so
long for this vital organ, the Security Council, to do what
must be done to respond to Haiti’s request for help. There
are examples of other initiatives to support countries in
crisis for which international assistance has not had to
travel such a winding road. Frankly, we are inclined to
consider the possibility that as some say, countries receive
attention according to discriminatory stratification. Are
the Haitian people not victims of an aggression that
is breaching peace in the region? Was this venerable
Organization not created precisely to address atrocious
situations such as the one that Haiti is enduring?

23-1184119/22

S/PV.9311

The question concerning Haiti

To date, the recurrent pleas of the Haitian authorities
for effective cooperation to end the violence, as
reiterated here today by Foreign Minister Généus, have
been futile. The response to help the Haitian people
to return to a minimum level of normality remains
inadequate. In their long ordeal, the humanitarian
situation is worsening to such an extent that according
to the most recent report of the World Food Programme,
which has been cited here today, the Integrated Phase
Classification estimates that for the period of March to
June this year, 19,200 people are in catastrophic phase 5,
while 17 per cent of the population, or some 1.65 million
people, are in emergency phase 4, and 31 per cent, or
3 million Haitians, are in crisis phase 3. Almost half
of the Haitian population are in a state of crisis. How
can we allow such a scandalous humanitarian situation
to take place before our very eyes, with those who are
most vulnerable — women and children — the worst
affected? What more must the Haitian authorities do
in their call for assistance to confront the criminal
gangs, who are primarily responsible for the current
humanitarian disaster?
We are aware of the important work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2653 (2022) concerning Haiti, chaired by the
representative of Gabon, Ambassador Michel Biang, to
whom we reiterate the full support of the Dominican
Government in view of the Committee’s future visit
to our country. We also recognize the efforts of the
Panel of Experts, which recently began its work on the
Haitian crisis. We also greatly appreciate the efforts
to identify the sectors within Haiti that encourage
criminal activities and contribute to insecurity,
which will undoubtedly allow for accountability to
be established and hopefully lead to the imposition
of effective sanctions. For our part, the Dominican
Government has imposed entry bans on a number of
Haitian nationals in order to safeguard our security and
territorial integrity, thereby supporting the efforts of
the Security Council. In the same vein, we appreciate
Human Rights Council resolution 52/39 approving the
appointment of an independent human rights expert for
Haiti, which was recently adopted.
In addition to those measures, other steps are needed
to put a definitive stop to the source of insecurity, the
whereabouts and operations of which are well known.
In that regard, we wish to refer to the most recent report
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), which refers to the alarming increase in the
20/22

26/04/2023

trafficking of sophisticated firearms to Haiti, as well
as ammunition, which is one of the main causes of the
increase in violence. According to the report, on which
UNODC Executive Director Ms. Ghada Waly briefed us
extensively, gang activities have reached unprecedented
levels, as has drug trafficking, thereby fuelling Haiti’s
insecurity crisis in an uncontrolled manner and causing
it to spill over its borders. We therefore reiterate our
urgent appeal to the members of the Security Council:
there is no time to lose. By whatever means it deems
appropriate, the Council must implement the measures
required to prevent the flow of arms and ammunition
into Haiti. State sovereignty carries with it the obligation
to protect its own people. When a State is unable to
do so fully and the peace and security of a region is
endangered, that responsibility falls to the international
community. Diplomatic, humanitarian and any other
means within its competence should be employed.
In the case of Haiti, the Haitian authorities have
repeatedly requested the deployment of a special force
to support the Haitian National Police. That is urgent
in the light of what continues to happen in the country:
one week ago, about 50 people were killed by armed
bandits in Source Matelas, in the commune of Cabaret,
while the day before yesterday, owing to the failure of
law enforcement agencies, about 13 or 14 presumed
members of a criminal gang were lynched in the streets
of Port-au-Prince. Those tragic episodes, which were
dramatically brought to our attention today by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General María Isabel
Salvador, are occurring again and again and are
painfully reminiscent of other situations in which the
international community has not reacted with sufficient
diligence to avoid greater disasters. We have said it in
the past before the Security Council and we say it again
today: the situation in Port-au-Prince is comparable to
that of an internal armed conflict, the difference in this
case being who qualifies as a belligerent. In fact, what
we are witnessing today is the dissolution of the Haitian
State. The case at hand requires no further evidence.
Any decision to evade the provision of urgent and
effective assistance to Haiti or to avoid taking measures
that are proper and exclusive to this Organization, as
mandated by its Charter and by international law, may
be considered an abdication of responsibility. The
Security Council cannot ignore that.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
23-11841

26/04/2023

The question concerning Haiti

Mr. Rae (Canada): I am pleased to speak on behalf
of the Economic and Social Council’s Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti, which comprises 22 Member States
that are committed to accompanying Haiti’s long-term
socioeconomic development. Since last year, our group
expanded to include Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Barbados, Kenya and Saint Kitts and Nevis.
I want to express my gratitude to Ms. Salvador
for her presentation today and the meetings we have
been able to have together. I very much look forward to
her further discussions with the Advisory Group to be
held later on today. I also want to thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, whose report has been extremely helpful to
us, and we look forward to further collaboration and
discussions on the impact of what is taking place and
how we can deal with it.
(spoke in French)
I welcome my colleague, Mr. Jean Victor Généus,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti, and I can assure
him that our collaboration will continue.
(spoke in English)
I am also pleased to see the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Dominican Republic, and we look forward
to further discussions with his Government about what
is taking place.
We can see that Haiti’s complex and
multidimensional crisis is deepening, with devastating
impacts on the daily lives of Haitians. As we have
heard, gangs have expanded their control and continue
to terrorize the Haitian population. Kidnapping has
become a lucrative industry. In fact, as gang members
become aware that actions are starting to take hold,
they increase their activities in order to increase their
profitability. Children and young people are being
recruited into gangs. Women and girls and boys are the
targets of horrendous sexual violence. Parents cannot
trust that their children will return safely home from
school. The price of food and fuel is putting further
strain on families and businesses. Nearly half of Haiti’s
population does not have enough to eat and some
communities are facing famine-like conditions.
On behalf of the Advisory Group, I would like to
emphasize four points. First, all the people to whom
we have spoken in Haiti, as well as those in agencies
outside it, have emphasized one point, which is that the
restoration of security to help alleviate the suffering of

S/PV.9311

Haitians, allow people to be able to leave their homes,
work and go outside and strengthen investor confidence
in the country is absolutely critical. That calls for a
comprehensive approach that stops the flow of arms
and ammunition, strengthens the Haitian National
Police and the rule of law, protects human rights and
reduces community violence. That is the top priority
and steps must be taken to achieve it.
Secondly, we strongly encourage intensified
efforts to ensure a broad and more inclusive national
political dialogue to chart a way forward that can put
the country back on a path to stability and sustainable
development, including eventually through the holding
of credible, free, fair and transparent elections. But
there is still work to be done to create that critical
national consensus.
Thirdly, the international community must move
swiftly to address the immediate humanitarian needs
of Haitians, while investing in the country’s sustainable
development in order to increase its resilience to shocks
in the future. This year’s humanitarian response plan sets
out the largest appeal for Haiti, more than $700 million,
since the devastating 2010 earthquake, underscoring
the scale, severity and urgency of Haiti’s humanitarian
crisis. Measures must be taken urgently — that is to
say, now — to help address Haitians’ emergency food
needs, while also providing emergency livelihood
assistance to build a more resilient and productive food
system in the country.
Lastly, immediate measures to restore security
must be accompanied by efforts to address the root
causes of violence in the country, which are extreme
poverty, corruption, impunity and collusion between
the political and economic spheres. Sanctions are one
important tool to help break the power of armed gangs,
and we encourage the work being done in that regard
by the Panel of Experts and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2653 (2022) concerning Haiti.
We must also fight corruption and impunity in Haiti by
restoring the rule of law through the strengthening of
its institutions, particularly the judicial and correctional
systems. The implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, in its entirety, is the best way
to address the root causes of violence in Haiti, as well
as to sustain peace.
While we have of course heard these words used
before by many present here today, it bears repeating
that the solutions to the crisis must be Haitian-owned.

23-1184121/22

S/PV.9311

The question concerning Haiti

However, we, the partners, friends and neighbours
of Haiti, must mobilize with urgency to scale up our
coordinated support. Words must be followed by deeds.
A comprehensive approach that is informed by the
interlinkages among peace, humanitarian action and
development is required for Haiti to one day come
off the Council’s regular agenda, and hopefully soon.
Above all, we owe it to the people of Haiti, all of us,
to work collectively and constructively to support their
country through its crisis.
(spoke in French)
I would also like to once again explain the position
both of the Committee and my Government. Canada
firmly believes that we must act, not just talk. That
is why our Government announced its decision to
increase its support to the Haitian National Police,
including training and direct assistance for equipment.
We will also increase our contribution to peace and
humanitarian assistance. We announced more than
$100 million this year, in addition to the money we
have already spent, and our intensive dialogue with the
Haitian authorities is ongoing.

22/22

26/04/2023

At the same time, I can assure the Council that
we will continue the cooperation efforts with all
the States in the region that we have already begun
working on with our colleagues, and we are following
the discussions here in the Council with great interest.
I can assure you, Mr. President, that Canada remains
willing to participate in all discussions to find concrete
and specific solutions to the issues.
We commend Ms. Salvador and Mr. O’Neill, and
I also thank my colleague from Gabon for his work on
the issue of sanctions. We support the efforts of our
colleagues from the United States and Ecuador and
thank them for their work. I believe that our work of
showing solidarity, providing support and engaging in
cooperation must continue. We owe it to the Haitian
population and to all the countries in the region to
ensure their security.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

23-11841
