S/2019/303

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 April 2019
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to Côte d’Ivoire
and Guinea-Bissau
I. Introduction
1.
In his letter to the Secretary-General dated 15 January 2019, the President of the
Security Council indicated that the Council had decided to send a mission to West
Africa (Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea-Bissau). The terms of reference for the visit were
subsequently approved by the Council (see annex I). The mission, co-led by the
representatives of Côte d’Ivoire and Equatorial Guinea (the latter of whom served as
President of the Security Council in the month of February 2019), comprised
representatives of all current members of the Council (see annex II).

II. Côte d’Ivoire
2.
On 14 and 15 February 2019, the Security Council undertook its first visit to
Côte d’Ivoire since the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI)
completed its mandate in 2017. The main objective of the visit was to take stock of
the transition processes in Côte d’Ivoire and in Liberia and to express support for the
conflict prevention and peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and of the United Nations country teams in the
Mano River subregion.
3.
The Security Council met the Vice-President of Côte d’Ivoire, Daniel Kablan
Duncan, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Marcel Amon-Tanoh, and took part in
a round table on the transition from peacekeeping to peace consolidation in Côte
d’Ivoire and in Liberia, which was also attended by the resident coordinators for the
two countries.
Meeting with the Vice-President and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire
4.
The Vice-President Duncan expressed appreciation for the work of the United
Nations, in particular UNOCI, for peace and stability in Côte d ’Ivoire. He suggested
that the case of Côte d’Ivoire be used as a model for countries making the transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. He stated that the leadership of the President,
Alassane Ouattara, national ownership of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform processes, efforts to foster national
reconciliation, an effective partnership with UNOCI and close collaboration with
neighbouring countries were key factors that contributed to the successful transition
process in Côte d’Ivoire.

19-06087 (E)

060519

*1906087*

S/2019/303

5.
He noted the impressive economic performance of the country, with an 8 per
cent rate of growth and efforts to improve the socioeconomic conditions of the
population with the adoption of an education and health-focused programme for the
period 2019–2020 (valued at approximately $2.8 million). He underlined the good
performance of Côte d’Ivoire in the area of governance. He stated that the political
situation in West Africa was stable and encouraged the United Nations to increase
support to security efforts, notably the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
Lastly, he reiterated the country’s commitment to supporting the work of the United
Nations in the areas of peacekeeping and conflict prevention.
6.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs thanked the Security Council for the visit. He
referred to President Ouattara’s recent briefing to the Council in December 2018,
highlighting the progress achieved since the closure of UNOCI, noted the good
cooperation between the Government of Côte d’Ivoire and UNOCI and thanked the
United Nations and the international community at large for the support provided
during the electoral process and post-electoral crisis in 2010–2011. He noted an
improvement in the socioeconomic conditions of the population, underlined the 8 per
cent rate of economic growth and stressed that the crisis was over in the country.
Lastly, he referred to Côte d’Ivoire’s successful presidency of the Council in 2018.
7.
The Permanent Representative of Equatorial Guinea to the United Nations,
Anatolio Ndong Mba, as co-lead of the mission, stated that the visit was aimed at
taking stock of the achievements of Côte d’Ivoire since the closure of UNOCI. He
said that the country was an economic driving force in the region and expressed the
hope that it would remain a model of peace consolidation. He welcomed progress
towards achieving lasting peace and economic prosperity in the country and renewed
the Security Council’s strong commitment to the sovereignty and integrity of Côte
d’Ivoire. He underlined the need to strengthen national reconciliation and dialogue
and to continue efforts in the areas of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and security sector reform to prevent the reoccurrence of conflict in Côte d’Ivoire and
the Mano River Basin. He commended the improved security and humanitarian
situation in the country. He stressed the primary responsibility of the Government of
Côte d’Ivoire to promote stability and commended efforts to combat terrorism and all
forms of illicit trafficking. He also stressed the need for Côte d ’Ivoire to ensure a
credible electoral process in 2020 for the consolidation of peace and stability in the
country. Lastly, he praised the important role played by UNOWAS in working with
Member States and regional organizations to tackle threats to peace and security in
the subregion and reiterated the Council’s support for Côte d’Ivoire.
8.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs referred to recent political developments in the
country, such as the establishment of a new unified ruling party called the
Rassemblement des houphouëtistes pour la démocratie et la paix, the beginning of a
political dialogue on the review of the Independent Electoral C ommission and the
resignation of the Speaker of the National Assembly, Guillaume Soro. Regarding the
latter, the Minister clarified that, by deciding not to join the Rassemblement, Mr. Soro
was no longer a member of the parliamentary majority and therefore had to resign.
He also gave assurances that the upcoming presidential election would provide the
opportunity to consolidate democracy in Côte d’Ivoire.
9.
The Vice-President informed the mission that 93 per cent of former combatants
had been reintegrated. For his part, the Minister for Foreign Affairs noted three
elements that contributed to the success of the Ivorian disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process: (a) the commitment of President Ouattara; (b) a clear
programme designed by the Government, which provided training and work
opportunities for those who chose to leave the army; and (c) national funding. In that
regard, he highlighted that the Government had financed 72 per cent of the
programme over a three-year period. With regard to security sector reform, he noted
2/26

19-06087

S/2019/303

that emphasis had been placed on the need to strengthen the armed and police forces,
including through training and the provision of equipment. He explained that the
security sector reform process was ongoing.
10. In response to the queries of the members of the Security Council mission, the
Vice-President stated that national reconciliation was one of the priorities of President
Ouattara, along with peace, security and economic recovery. He informed the mission
of the establishment of two commissions, in 2011 and 2015, as well as the creation of
a dedicated ministry in 2016 to foster national reconciliation. He also referred to the
amnesty granted in August 2018 to 800 individuals, including the former First Lady,
Simone Gbagbo, convicted of crimes related to the post-election crisis of 2010–2011.
He underlined efforts to identify and compensate the victims of the crisis, with a
10 billion CFA franc fund allocated to the process. He mentioned that the Government
had identified key partners to accompany the process of national reconciliation,
including traditional leaders, youth groups and civil society organizations, and noted
the successful holding of local and regional elections in 2018, notwithstanding
incidents, and underlined efforts to foster national dialogue, supported by the
inclusive review of the Independent Electoral Commission, for peaceful and credible
elections in 2020.
11. The Minister for Foreign Affairs noted the efforts of President Ouattara to create
the conditions for continuous dialogue and facilitate the return of the 2010–2011 postelectoral crisis refugees. He stressed that national reconciliation was a long process
and called upon partners to give Côte d’Ivoire time to achieve more results.
12. The Vice-President highlighted that the improvement in women ’s living
conditions was one of the priorities of President Ouattara. He underlined the emphasis
placed on gender equality in the Constitution, which was adopted in 2016, and
mentioned initiatives for women’s empowerment, including the creation of a women
and development fund to support women entrepreneurs in Côte d ’Ivoire. The Minister
for Foreign Affairs added that Côte d’Ivoire had created a roster of qualified women
who are eligible to work in the public administration.
13. The Vice-President informed the mission of collaboration with subregional
organizations, namely, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and the West African Economic and Monetary Union, as well as bilateral partners,
notably France, in the efforts to combat terrorism. He recalled the serious security
challenges in the Sahel and the Lake Chad Basin, as well as support given by Côte
d’Ivoire to security efforts, including through the deployment of 650 Ivoirian troops
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.
He called for effective support for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
14. The Minister for Foreign Affairs referred to the impact of the Libyan crisis on
Mali and other West African countries and called upon the international community
to redouble its efforts to achieve stability and lasting peace in Libya. He emphasized
that prevention was essential in the efforts to combat terrorism and noted the
establishment of regional and international intelligence-sharing mechanisms.
15. The Vice-President noted efforts to combat impunity, the establishment of a
national commission on human rights and the reform of the justice system. For his
part, the Minister for Foreign Affairs reiterated the commitment of Côte d’Ivoire to
respecting and promoting human rights.
16. In response to a question on how Côte d’Ivoire was dealing with the flows of
migrants from West Africa, the Minister for Foreign Affairs stated that 40 per ce nt of
the 22 million people living in Côte d’Ivoire were foreigners, emphasizing that such
diversity was an asset for the country. He recognized that Côte d ’Ivoire was also a

19-06087

3/26

S/2019/303

country of transit for illegal migration flows and stressed that it had adopted p olicies
to facilitate the return of Ivorian migrants who had crossed borders illegally.
17. With regard to Africa cooperation, the Vice-President reiterated the support
given by Côte d’Ivoire to the establishment of free trade areas and a single African
market. The Minister for Foreign Affairs said that Côte d ’Ivoire supported the
adoption of a single West African currency.
18. In response to questions by Security Council members about the role of Côte
d’Ivoire in the subregion, the Minister for Foreign Affairs highlighted the important
role played by President Ouattara, as ECOWAS Chair, from 2012 to 2014, to defuse
tensions in Mali. He also mentioned that the country was an important economic
power in the region.
19. The Vice-President stressed that the return of internally displaced persons and
refugees was a major priority for the Government, mentioning that 280,000 of
300,000 refugees had returned to date, with 250,000 coming from Liberia. He hoped
that all refugees would return to Côte d’Ivoire by 2020. He added that Côte d’Ivoire
had focused on education, with the establishment of new universities in Abidjan and
the main regions. He also called upon the Security Council to raise the awareness of
partners on the important economic role of Côte d ’Ivoire in the subregion. The
Minister for Foreign Affairs mentioned efforts to modernize the country through the
establishment of processing industries in the coming years and called upon investors
to support the country’s development efforts. He underlined the objective of Côte
d’Ivoire to become an emerging country by 2030.
Round-table discussion on the transition from peacekeeping to peace consolidation
in Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia
20. During the round-table discussion on the transition from peacekeeping to peace
consolidation, the resident coordinators of Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia shared their
experiences in those countries’ transitions.
21. The resident coordinator for Côte d’Ivoire stated that transition planning from
peacekeeping to peace consolidation had begun in 2015, two years before the closure
of UNOCI. He noted that the process had been the result of a coordinated approach
between UNOCI, the Government of Côte d’Ivoire, international partners and the
United Nations country team. Emphasis had been placed on the identification of
residual challenges, which were incorporated into the 2016–2020 national
development plan and the United Nations programmatic framework for Côte d ’Ivoire
for the period 2017–2020. The Government subsequently developed a national
programme and strategy for reconciliation and social cohesion for 2016–2020. He
underlined that the country team had identified social cohesion and national
reconciliation, rule of law, gender-based violence and community safety as priorities,
and explained that $500 million had been needed for the transition process, adding
that the country team had finalized a transition programme at a cost of $50 million.
He recognized the important financial contribution of the Peacebuilding Fund
($1.8 million), which had significantly contributed to a smooth transition in Côte
d’Ivoire. He also noted that additional funding for the transition programme had been
provided through the United Nations regular budget ($2.8 million), the Government
of Côte d’Ivoire ($10 million) and bilateral partners ($25 million). The resident
coordinator stated that the United Nations programme for the country had been
developed in cooperation with the Government. While noting the efforts of the
Government towards enhancing the condition of women, the resident coordinator
highlighted major challenges to gender equality, recalling that only 16 per cent of
members of Government and 9 per cent of members of Parliament were women. He
identified land conflicts and issues related to the management of natural resources as
4/26

19-06087

S/2019/303

remaining root causes of conflict in Côte d’Ivoire. Referring to the local and
provincial elections held in December 2018, the resident coordinator stressed that
difficulties had emerged because of a shift in political alliances and highlighted
United Nations efforts to defuse tensions.
22. The resident coordinator for Liberia noted the attention given by the
international community to Liberia and added that the new administration was trying
to build on the successful exit of the peacekeeping mission. He noted that Liberia had
not yet fully addressed the root causes of conflict, including issues of accountability
and reconciliation. He listed the political, security, social and economic fragilities of
the country. In that regard, he noted the low level of decentralization and the weak
economy, with a 1.4 per cent rate of economic growth. He added that Liberia was
vulnerable to security threats since the departure of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL), with increased criminal activities in the Gulf of Guinea, and stated
that the Government lacked the capacity to monitor the country’s long coastal line.
He highlighted the different steps followed by the United Nations country team in
Liberia to manage the transition process. The capacity mapping exercise of the
country team and the comprehensive review of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) office had resulted in the recalibration of the United Nations
presence in Liberia. He recalled the establishment, following the closure of UNMIL,
of a multi-partner trust fund focusing on peace consolidation and peacebuilding and
informed the mission that $19.3 million had been mobilized for the fund. He also
reported on the establishment of a political, peace and development unit in the office
of the resident coordinator and the establishment of a standalone office of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), and stressed
the need for a continued United Nations presence in countries making th e transition
from peacekeeping to peace consolidation in order to deal with residual issues
following the closure of peacekeeping operations. He confirmed that the work of the
President of Liberia was very much guided by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. He underlined the importance of the country team mapping exercise in
Liberia and agreed that it could be a good tool to lay the groundwork for the transition
from peacekeeping to peace consolidation. He highlighted the effective role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in support of Liberia and mentioned discussions with
UNOWAS to find ways to revive relations with the Mano River Union. Referring to
United Nations reforms, he said that the delinking of the resident coordinator and the
UNDP resident representative was not very visible in Liberia, given that the two had
close working relations. He identified three main drivers of conflict in the country,
namely, land issues, respect for human rights and the issue of accountability for
crimes committed during the civil war. With regard to regional cooperation, he
mentioned the good collaboration with the African Union and ECOWAS on
prevention and mediation. He called upon the Security Council to ensure that
decisions to close or draw down peacekeeping operations were carefully adopted,
effectively support United Nations operations before, during and after the closure of
peacekeeping missions, and be aware that the shift from assessed contributions to
voluntary support affected operations/programmes on the ground. Lastly, he called
upon members of the Council to continue to look at Liberia through “a lens of
prevention and not of celebration”.
Observations/key messages
23. The Security Council delegation welcomed the progress achieved by Côte
d’Ivoire in terms of stability and economic growth. They renewed their support to the
country and emphasized the need for national authorities to continue to consolidate
democracy through free, fair, credible and peaceful elections in 2020. They also called
upon the authorities to enhance national reconciliation and take the steps necessary
to engage all stakeholders.
19-06087

5/26

S/2019/303

24. The round table provided an opportunity to draw lessons from the transition
processes in Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia. It helped to identify potential areas in which
strengthened support was required from the Security Council, including in terms of
human and financial resources to address residual challenges following the departure
of peacekeeping missions. It also helped to identify some useful steps to successfully
manage the transition from peacekeeping to peace consolidation, including the
carrying out of capacity mapping exercises of the United Nations country teams and
the identification of residual tasks that would have to be addressed following th e
closure of a peacekeeping mission.

III. Guinea-Bissau
25. The Security Council visited Guinea-Bissau on 15 and 16 February 2019.
Council members held a number of meetings in Bissau with government officials, the
leadership of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), the Group of Five international organizations represented in Guinea Bissau (the African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
ECOWAS, the European Union and the United Nations), the United Nations country
team and the diplomatic community, among others. The focus of discussions was the
current political and security situation in the country ahead of the legislative elections
planned for 10 March 2019 and the progress made in the imple mentation of the
Conakry Agreement on the Implementation of the Economic Community of West
African States Road Map for the Resolution of the Political Crisis in Guinea -Bissau.
The visit provided an opportunity for the Council to stress the need for the leg islative
elections to be held on 10 March 2019 as scheduled and for the presidential election
to be held in 2019, in line with the legal framework.
Meeting with the Prime Minister and key Cabinet members
26. In the evening of 15 February, members of the Security Council met the Prime
Minister, Aristedes Gomes, and key Cabinet members, namely, the Minister of the
Presidency of the Council of Ministers and Parliamentary Affairs, Agnelo Regalla,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, João Ribeiro Butiam Có, the Permanent
Representative of Guinea-Bissau to the United Nations, Fernando Delfim Da Silva,
and the Director-General of External Policy at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, João
Soares Da Gama. At the outset of the meeting, Mr. Regalla expressed his appreci ation
to the United Nations, in particular the Council, for its continued attention, while
hoping for its continued support to help to break the cycle of constitutional crises
affecting the country. He then introduced the government delegation.
27. Mr. Ndong Mba explained that the visit came at a crucial time, as the country
prepared for the legislative elections, and on the eve of the start of the election
campaign period. He welcomed the signing of the Stability Pact on 14 February,
describing it as an important provision of the Conakry Agreement. He expressed the
hope that the Government would continue its efforts to promote unity and engage in
constructive dialogue for the full implementation of the Agreement. He concluded by
stressing that the visit was intended to demonstrate the full support of the Security
Council for the country, advocate political dialogue for the implementation of the
Agreement and encourage Guinea-Bissau to hold free and fair legislative elections on
10 March as a lead-up to the presidential election before the end of 2019. He noted
that the mission would hold several meetings in Bissau with various interlocutors to
obtain a better understanding of the situation in the country.
28. The Prime Minister thanked the Security Council for the visit, which was an
illustration of its close monitoring of developments in the country. He hoped that the

6/26

19-06087

S/2019/303

visit would help the Council to better assess and improve its understanding of the
situation in Guinea-Bissau. The Prime Minister stated that the Government had done
its best to create the conditions necessary and conducive for the holding of the
elections, adding that dialogue continued with the political parties and civil society
organizations concerned. He noted that, on 14 February, the competing political
parties had signed the Stability Pact, a framework that obliged its signatories to accept
the results and to implement institutional reforms following the elections, regardless
of its outcome.
29. The Prime Minister also explained that Guinea-Bissau had a good legal
framework on elections, which gave all the powers to the National Electoral
Commission, and that a biometric system had been used for voter registration. The
political parties had also signed the Code of Conduct on elections. He believed that
the Stability Pact and the Code of Conduct were two important instruments that could
ensure post-election stability, if respected by the signatory parties. He acknowledged
that some political parties did not agree with how the biometric voter registration had
been conducted.
30. The Prime Minister noted that there had been technical problems with the voter
registration, as some names of registered voters did not appear on the voter lists. To
address those issues, ECOWAS experts were helping the Technical Support Office for
the Electoral Process with the cleaning/audit of the electoral lists to address the
discrepancies and ensure the credibility of the electoral process and to avoid a
situation in which election results were contested. The audit was ongoing, and a final
list of registered voters would be made public to allow all those with a voter card to
vote. Once the process had been completed, the final voter lists were expected to be
submitted by the Technical Support Office to the National Electoral Commission on
19 February. He noted that the political parties had been part of the process and would
also partake in the deliberations within the framework of the Commission. He
explained that, during the vote, all political parties would have the right to have
representatives in the polling stations and would participate in the manual counting
of the votes. The vote counting would be done in public, with the results recorded at
the same time by representatives of political parties and national and international
observers. He noted that, according to the law, any citizen could challenge the
outcome of the elections.
31. Responding to comments and questions by Security Council members, the
Prime Minister noted that the elections would be held pursuant to the good
cooperation framework with the United Nations. With regard to the organization of
the elections, he stated that his Government had reached out to all partners concerned,
including ECOWAS, the African Union, the United Nations and the International
Organization of la Francophonie, highlighting the need for the deployment of
electoral observers, to give credibility to the process, given that it had become a
common concern. In that connection, he informed the Council members that the
European Union would probably send election experts, although he opined that
observers would be needed more. He stated that Guinea-Bissau also counted on
regional partners, including the Community of Portuguese -speaking Countries, to
assist in the electoral process. He reassured the mission that the Government had
carried out the preparations necessary for the elections to effectively be held on
10 March. He acknowledged, however, that there were some risks and chall enges to
the electoral process, such as the possibility of the resumption of protests by students,
which could have a negative impact on election security. He also said that there were
political actors that did not want the elections to be held and that we re manipulating
social unrest by agitating public opinion and trigger ing violence by infiltrating
student protests the previous week. Given the weakness of State institutions to counter
such risks, he noted that such unrest would reflect poorly on the election. He added
19-06087

7/26

S/2019/303

that his Government was facing pressure to simultaneously manage social grievances
and maintain a consensual electoral process. He explained that there would be a new
Minister of Interior imminently, filling a post that had been vacant for s ome time. The
appointment would come in time to ensure election security. Concerning the possible
impact of the teachers’ strike on the elections, the Prime Minister noted that they were
politically motivated. He further explained that, during their effort s to organize
elections, the Government was under pressure from civil society and civil servants
linked to the strikes and was faced with heightened tensions among political parties
during the drawing up of political districts. He explained that he had to juggle all
these issues, while walking a fine line with political parties during the voter
registration process to ensure their buy-in regarding the electoral process.
32. With regard to funding for the elections, the Prime Minister stated that the
Government had received strong international support, but that some donors had
failed to fulfil their commitments. That had an impact on the transport of election
materials, which had required the Government to deploy additional funding to ensure
a smooth process. He added that the Government was under pressure because it had
the responsibility for organizing the elections, while lacking the necessary funding in
the State budget. He noted that the deficit had been covered by the UNDP election
basket fund, adding that the funding provided to the fund for the legislative elections
did not equal contributions to previous elections.
33. The Prime Minister noted that questions were being raised about the
reconfiguration of UNIOGBIS at a time when the country was prepar ing for the
legislative elections. He mentioned that, during his briefing to the Security Council
in August 2018, he had emphasized the importance of the cooperation between the
Government and UNIOGBIS. He added that the reframing of that cooperation would
require dialogue and consultation and information-sharing between the Government
and UNIOGBIS. He believed that UNIOGBIS should be a tool to reinforce the efforts
of Guinea-Bissau to reform the State. He argued that a similar approach should be
applied to the cooperation between Guinea-Bissau, the African Union and ECOWAS,
and underscored that any plan to reconfigure UNIOGBIS should be discussed with
the Government and be done in a manner that would support national efforts to
undertake key reforms.
34. With regard to organized crime, the Prime Minister highlighted the need to help
with the surveillance abilities and capacity of the relevant State institutions that were
still weak. He also noted problems of infiltration within the State institutions, thus
making the efforts of the Government to combat drug trafficking and organized crime
a challenging task. He stated that, through the elections, the country would have new
authorities to help to combat organized crime. Some individuals, however, had their
own agenda and thus had no will to address the scourge. In calling for support to
resolve that issue, he noted that Guinea-Bissau needed a plan and to create the
political will to combat crime, in particular on the islands.
35. With regard to the gender parity law, the Prime Minister explained that the
Government could not impose it on the political parties, but that the Supreme Court
of Justice had notified all parties concerned, encouraging them to respect and apply
it to their candidate lists. He noted that the parties faced some difficulty, given that
many areas, in particular on the islands, did not have enough women willing and/or
able to run for the legislative elections.
36. The Security Council mission encouraged the Prime Minister and his
Government to continue efforts to organize the elections and address the technical
problems related to them, as well as to engage in dialogue with all stakeholders
concerned to ensure that the elections were conducted in an inclusive, free and
transparent manner.
8/26

19-06087

S/2019/303

Meeting with the diplomatic community
37. On the evening of 15 February, the Security Council mission exchanged views
on the upcoming elections and the overall situation in the country with representatives
of the Group of Five (with the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
represented by Cabo Verde), Angola, Brazil, Portugal and Senegal over a working
dinner in Bissau. The UNIOGBIS Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary General for Guinea-Bissau represented the United Nations at the meeting.
Responding to queries from the Security Council mission in reference to the
political/institutional crises, a representative of the diplomatic community
commented that the semi-presidential system was applied in other countries and that
it functioned well. It was therefore noted that the problem in Guinea-Bissau was
related to the Government’s interpretation or rather non-interpretation of the
Constitution. The member of the diplomatic community highlighted the need for the
people of Guinea-Bissau to decide on the matter through a constitutional referendum.
With regard to the legislative elections, representatives of the diplomatic community
stated that the elections would likely be held as scheduled, on 10 March, and would
bring about a new legislature and Government, with the expectation that the
presidential election would be completed afterwards. However, the representative of
the diplomatic community expressed concern that the same cycle of political crises
could persist should the country not establish industries to transform the country’s
fisheries and agricultural products in order to improve the economy. The member
further noted that the international community could play a crucial role in that regard
and stressed the need for reforms of the security sector and the economy to be
undertaken by the new legislative body and Government, and concluded by saying
that the continued presence of the United Nations would be crucial.
38. Another member of the diplomatic community underscored the importance of
the visit of the Security Council, adding that, while the legislative elections would
likely be held on 10 March, there had been some problems during the voter
registration process due to the lack of adequate registration kits. The member
remarked that those were problems also faced in other countries and that they should
be expected in Guinea-Bissau owing to its limited financial resources. The member
also noted that, had it not been for the international community ’s financial and inkind support, the elections would not have been possible.
39. The Deputy Special Representative described the remarkable support for the
elections provided by the Group of Five. He thanked the relevant donors for their
funding contributions, reporting that the UNDP election baske t fund had received
$9.9 million of the $7.7 million requested. He therefore stated that funding could not
be considered a hindrance to the holding of the elections.
Briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau to
the Security Council
40. On the evening of 15 February, the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, on behalf of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, briefed the Security Council on UNIOGBIS activities and r ecent
developments since the issuance of the report of the Secretary-General report
(S/2019/115) on 7 February 2019. The briefing, which was held on UNIOGBIS
premises, replaced the closed consultation session usually held in New York. The
briefing focused on the political and security environment amid preparations for the
legislative elections, as well as progress in the implementation of key institutional
reforms outlined under the Conakry Agreement.
41. The Deputy Special Representative noted that the arrival of the Security Council
mission coincided with the launch of the campaign period for the legislative elections
19-06087

9/26

S/2019/303

and that all preparations necessary for the elections had been put in place by the
Government with the support of international partners, including the Group of Five.
The key milestones achieved to date included the release of the pro visional voter list
of 733,000 individuals for verification, with the final publication expected by
19 February, and the publication on 8 February of the list of candidates of 21 political
parties, validated by the Supreme Court of Justice, to compete in t he elections.
42. The Deputy Special Representative noted that the elections would be held in a
tense environment marked by the student demonstration of 8 February and the threat
of the resumption of strikes by the teachers’ association and other labour unions,
which was resolved when the Government agreed to honour the demands of students,
including the payment of teachers’ salary arrears within 10 days. He mentioned that
some political parties (the Party for Social Renewal, the Movimento Alternância
Democrática and the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde)
had reacted publicly to the tense political environment by expressing concern about
the negative impact that the student demonstration could have on the electoral
process.
43. The Deputy Special Representative reported that political parties, beginning on
16 February, would be in pre-election campaign mode, with some committing to
forming alliances. In that context, he noted that an agreement had been signed on
1 February among four political parties (the African Party for the Independence of
Guinea and Cape Verde, the Democratic Convergence Party, the National Unity Party
and the Union for Change). In addition, newly formed political parties (the Mov ement
for Democratic Change, the United People’s Assembly – Democratic Party of GuineaBissau and the Patriotic Front for National Salvation (FREPASNA)) were also
participating in the election. He also reported that, on 14 February, the political parties
had signed the Stability Pact and Code of Conduct for the elections, in compliance
with the Conakry Agreement.
44. In anticipation of the new UNIOGBIS mandate, to be adopted by the Security
Council on 28 February, which would consider the recommendation of the Secretary General for the drawdown and exit of UNIOGBIS by the end of 2020, the Deputy
Special Representative informed Council members that, subject to the new mandate,
full-scale transition planning, implementation and monitoring would be launched by
the Office in close collaboration with relevant partners, including the national
authorities. He appealed for the future mandate to enable the Office to support the
implementation of necessary institutional reforms and foster dialogue and
reconciliation among political actors and civil society.
45. The Deputy Special Representative stated that the forthcoming legislative
elections would be an important political milestone, adding that they had never been
a challenge in the country, but that problems had arisen in the past during the post election period. He also stated that, while the signing of the Stability Pact was
important, the timely implementation of its provisions into legislation and policies by
the future parliament and Government would be critical to realizing the urgent
reforms needed in the country.
46. The Deputy Special Representative concluded by expressing his gratitude to the
Group of Five for their invaluable support for and contributions to the stabilization
and peacebuilding process. He added that the achievements mad e would not have
been possible without the support of the Security Council for sustainable peace in
Guinea-Bissau.
Meeting with the Group of Five
47. Over breakfast on 16 February, the Security Council mission exchanged views
with the representatives of the Group of Five on the current political environment,
10/26

19-06087

S/2019/303

their forecasts for the legislative and presidential elections, the renewal of the
UNIOGBIS mandate and the role of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau, as well
as the reforms expected to follow the elections. Mr. Ndong Mba commended the
group for their sustained efforts in support of the political process in the country.
48. The Group of Five highlighted the key issues of importance to them. They
mentioned that the recurring political crises facing Guinea Bissau were a result of a
number of issues, including the deep mistrust among national actors and the fragility
of State institutions. They noted that the electoral process had begun well but had
encountered technical and financial challenges. The elections would nevertheless be
held as scheduled. They added that the elections would not resolve the political crisis
that affected the country without the necessary reforms being undertaken.
49. A member of the Group of Five noted that the main problem facing Guinea
Bissau was rampant corruption, the divergence of political opinions and constitutional
interpretations/reform. The member noted the divergent views/interpretation of the
Constitution among the political stakeholders. Another member of the group
described the current situation in the country as calm owing to the presence of
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau forces, noting that the troop-contributing
countries were facing funding challenges. The group welcomed the clear message of
the Security Council to Guinea Bissau actors, underscoring the need for the continued
support of the international community.
50. In response to queries, a member of the Group of Five reported on the challenges
related to the quality of the information published by official and private media and
social networks ahead of the legislative elections, with some questioning the
credibility of the electoral process. To address that, the member mentioned that the
Code of Conduct required the media networks and radio channels to support the
elections and not spread negative rhetoric. On that issue, the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General informed the Security Council mission that,
through the Peacebuilding Fund, UNIOGBIS was implementing several projects
related to building the capacity of media personnel. A member noted that, of the
50 political parties in the country, only 21 were running in the legislative ele ctions,
of which some were not competing nationally. With regard to international
observation, the group reported that the African Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and ECOWAS intended to deploy missions, while the
European Union would send two experts.
Meeting with the Speaker of the National Assembly and the heads of political parties
in parliament
51. On 16 February, the mission met the President of the National Assembly,
Cipriano Cassamá, accompanied by the Director of Cabinet, Assoumane Sanha, and
heads of the political parties with representation in Parliament, namely, the African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde, the Party for Social Renewal,
the Democratic Convergence Party, the New Democracy Party and the Union for
Change.
52. In his opening remarks, Mr. Ndong Mba stated that 2019 was a critical year for
Guinea-Bissau. He stated that the Security Council was in the country to make sure
that the legislative elections would be held on 10 March and the presid ential election
later in 2019, and hoped that the recently signed Code of Conduct and Stability Pact
would be respected. He also said that the Council was closely monitoring the situation
and would exchange views with national stakeholders.
53. The Speaker of Parliament welcomed the delegation, noting that it was the
second visit of the Security Council to the country during the current legislature. He
described the political developments that had ended the political crisis, with the
19-06087

11/26

S/2019/303

resumption of the National Assembly, and the appointment of the consensual Prime
Minister whose main task was to organize fair and transparent legislative elections.
He noted that the electoral process faced several problems, in particular with regard
to the voter registration process. He informed the mission that the electoral database
experienced those problems following the decision of the Prosecutor General to
suspend the activities of the Technical Support Office for the Electoral Process and
expel the Nigerian experts associated with the registration. Following a decision by
the Supreme Court of Justice that allowed for the resumption of the activities of the
Technical Support Office, the experts could no longer retrieve the work already done,
including the data of some registered voters. Notwithstanding that setback, the voter
registration had been completed and the anomalies identified were being rectified. He
appealed to the Council to assist the country in mobilizing financial resources for the
elections. He stated that the list of 21 political parties competing in the legislative
elections had been approved by the Court.
54. With regard to the recent student protests, the Speaker of Parliament stated that
some political parties had taken advantage of the situation, infiltrating the protests
with individuals who barricaded roads, vandalized vehicles and committed other
violent acts against civilians. He added that, as a result, the city had been paralyzed
until the police took action. He described those acts as attempts to obstruct the holding
of the legislative elections. In that regard, he lamented the absence of a Minister of
Interior, a position of utmost importance to ensure election security. He also noted the
importance for the international community to remain vigilant, given that some actors
did not want the elections on 10 March to be held.
55. Concerning the drawdown of UNIOGBIS, the Speaker hoped that its
reconfiguration would be done after the conclusion of the elections, adding that Office
should be strengthened to enable it to continue to work to combat drug trafficking and
to help to address the root causes of instability in Guinea -Bissau.
56. In response to questions by members of the Security Council mission, the
Speaker noted that the gender parity law had been debated for a month before being
passed. He said that, in the National Assembly at present, only 14 per cent of
representatives were women, expressing the hope that, with the next makeup of the
legislature, the rate would be 40 per cent. He also in formed the mission that, in
Guinea-Bissau, women played an important role in achieving peace. He described a
delegation of women parliamentarians that had travelled throughout the country to
help to attract and include women in the political/legislative pr ocess. Concerning the
political and economic nexus, he noted that, while Parliament was the institution in
which laws were drafted and passed, it was the mandate of the Government to govern
the country and create the conditions necessary to provide basic s ervices to the
population and to address development needs. He stated, however, that, in four years,
the country had seen seven Governments and, accordingly, political instability could
not allow the Government to make progress. With regard to the Stability Pact and the
Code of Conduct, he expressed the hope that those would be fulfilled and respected
by the political parties. He expressed his concern, however, that some political parties
might not fulfil their obligations, adding that that would not be the first time.
57. After the leaders of the political parties had joined the discussions, Mr. Ndong
Mba reiterated that 2019 was a critical year for Guinea-Bissau, stressing that the
10 March polling date should be respected and followed by the presidential elections
in the same year, in accordance with the legal framework. He called upon the political
parties to uphold their commitments and avoid further institutional instability. He
concluded by saying that the Security Council would continue to follow deve lopments
in the country closely.

12/26

19-06087

S/2019/303

58. The leader of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde,
Domingos Pereira, welcomed the delegation and expressed his appreciation for its
regular visits. He expressed the hope that the Security Cou ncil would return soon to
witness the positive advancements made in Guinea-Bissau and not to remind them to
implement and fulfil their constitutional obligations. He noted that recent events had
shown that some actors aimed to compromise the holding of the legislative elections.
He reassured the Council of the readiness of his party to do its part to ensure that
democracy prevailed, noting that his party had been falsely accused of being the
organizer of the problems encountered during the electoral process and of controlling
the Government.
59. The Party for Social Renewal representative, Jorge Malu stated that the country
was at the last stage of the process leading up to the legislative elections. The current
Government was the product of an agreement between the African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde and his party. He clarified that his party did
not accuse the African Party of controlling the Government but noted that the Prime
Minister and the Minister of Territorial Administration in charge of the contested
voter registration were both from it. He added that his party was only requesting an
explanation on the discrepancies (200,000) in the number of voters registered in 2018,
which was much less than that of 2014. With regard to the date of the elections, the
representative informed the mission that no political party was responsible for setting
the date, adding that that was done by presidential decree in consultation with the
parties. The representative added that his party was ready to compete in the upcoming
elections, notwithstanding the irregularities, noting that it had signed the Stability
Pact after it was amended to include a condition on the need to publish the audit report
and correct the missing voters in the list of registered voters. Lastly, he said that it
was not in the interest of his party to have the President sack the current Government
because of those irregularities.
60. The leader of the New Democracy Party, Mamadú Iaia Djaló, said that there was
no perfect election, highlighting that the date of 10 March for the legislative elections
was not consistent with the electoral law, adding that the date had been reached by
consensus among the political parties. He stated that his party would be ready to
compete in the election should the problems with the list of registered voters be
rectified. He underscored the importance of holding free, fair and transparent
elections that would, he hoped, result in a more representative legislature that did not
bend to external influence. He noted that, following elections, the new legislators
would be able to review all laws of governance, in particular the electoral law and the
Constitution, which give the President, who is not elected by the people, the right to
dismiss the Prime Minister. He concluded by saying that the problems that faced
Guinea-Bissau had begun soon after the Terra Ranka round table that had mobilized
funding for the Government. He concluded by appealing to the international
community to respect the outcome of the round table and disburse the funds pledged.
61. The leader of the Union for Change, Mr. Regalla, informed the Security Council
mission that his party had signed the Stability Pact and the Code of Conduct and was
committed to fully respecting them. He highlighted the need for the country to hold
the legislative elections on time, notwithstanding the challenges faced during the
voter registration process, and expressed concern that there were some hidden hands
attempting to obstruct the holding of the elections. With regard to the semi presidential system in place, he stated that, while the President had the right to dismiss
the Government, he should have reverted to the political party that held a majority in
Parliament for a proposed candidate for the position of Prime Minister, adding that,
should the individual chosen to be Prime Minister not be from the majority party, it
would be considered a non-constitutional Government. With regard to UNIOGBIS,
he expressed the view that it should remain to avoid losing the gains achieved to date,
19-06087

13/26

S/2019/303

advising that the reconfiguration should be done in a manner that helped the
Government to address the necessary reforms. He prop osed that the reconfiguration
take place after the installation of a new Government. He added that the United
Nations should pay much attention to addressing the scourge of drug trafficking and
organized crime in a fragile State such as Guinea-Bissau. He mentioned that any
Government that aimed to combat corruption would face resistance.
Meeting with the President of the National Electoral Commission
62. The President of the National Electoral Commission, José Pedro Sambú, noted
that 16 February was the date for the start of the election campaign. He informed the
Security Council mission that sensitive electoral materials, such as ballot papers and
results forms, would arrive in Bissau on 23 February. The Commission plenary, which
included representatives of the political parties, the National Media Council, the
Presidency and the Government, had met and completed the draw for the order of
parties on the ballot papers, decided on the allocation of radio airtime for the parties
and approved the design of the ballot paper.
63. Mr. Sambú also pointed out that a civic education campaign had been launched
on 9 February, with 1,000 civic animators in the field, and that National Electoral
Commission radio spots were being aired on community radio stations. The two -day
training for the presidents and secretaries of the polling stations had begun on
16 February and would continue until 2 March, at which point the cl erks and
protection agents would be trained. He expressed concern with regard to the status of
the security arrangements but acknowledged that a new Minister of Interior had been
appointed the previous day, who would be the direct interlocutor of the Commi ssion.
64. In response to various questions posed by Security Council members,
Mr. Sambú stated that the Technical Support Office for the Electoral Process, which
was responsible for voter registration, was working on the issues related to the voter
list. Given that there was a legal period for corrections and claims regarding the voter
list, the list was therefore subject to change during that period. Those changes would
likely lead to an increase in the number of registered voters on the list. After the
corrections were made, the final list would then be handed over to the National
Electoral Commission. He stated that the Commission did not have any logistical
problems. The remaining sensitive materials were being produced by Portugal and
would arrive on schedule. With regard to finances, he stated that there was a financial
gap for several electoral activities that the Government should fund, but that it was
currently experiencing financial difficulties in order to do so.
65. Mr. Sambú noted that the electoral reforms should have taken place following
the signing of the Conakry Agreement and prior to the elections. Given that that was
not the case, however, the reforms would have to take place in the future. There was
a need to update the number of seats in each constituency, in accordance with the
population, citing the example of two constituencies, 1 and 29, with voter populations
of 60,000 and 17,000, respectively, which both had three seats in the National
Assembly. He added that that would not affect the credibility of the current election.
Regarding the gender parity law, he also noted that it would not have direct
consequence for the parties’ participation, but that there would be fiscal penalties. He
stated that the Supreme Court of Justice had sent to the Commission the names of the
parties that did comply with the law and that, on 18 February, the Commission would
publish those names in the media. He added that the Commission met regularly with
the political parties that had been allowed by the Court to contest the election. He also
added that, of the legally registered parties, 24 submitted their lists to the Court, of
which 21 were validated. He did not expect any challenges in that regard. Lastly, he
said that the (provisional) election results wo uld be published 48 hours after the close
of the polls.
14/26

19-06087

S/2019/303

Meeting with the Vice-President of the Supreme Court
66. Following the meeting with the President of the National Electoral Commission,
the Security Council mission met the Vice-President of the Supreme Court of Justice,
Rui Nene, in the absence of the President of the Court, who was away on official
business.
67. Mr. Nene welcomed the delegation and reaffirmed his readiness to accept any
advice that could advance the peace process in Guinea -Bissau. He called upon the
members of the delegation to continue to support the country during the electoral
period and beyond, noting that elections had never resolved the institutional crises in
the country. He informed the mission that the judiciary was an independent institution,
adding that, given that Guinea-Bissau did not have a Constitutional Court, the
Supreme Court of Justice was undertaking that role. He explained that the Supreme
Court had administrative jurisdiction over the electoral process, adding that all
political parties that intended to compete in the elections were required to present
their candidacy to the Supreme Court for verification. Should there be any
irregularities, the Supreme Court would inform the head of the political party
concerned and request the party to provide the missing information. Once the plenary
of the Supreme Court completed the verification process, a provisional list of
candidates would be established. The purpose of the provisional list was to allow the
candidates to know whether they were in conformity with the law. The plenary of the
Supreme Court would then publish the definitive list and send it to the National
Electoral Commission for its inclusion in the election. No claim could be received
once the final list was published.
68. Mr. Nene recalled that the Supreme Court of Guinea-Bissau was the ultimate
appellate court in the Bissau-Guinean judicial system. He added that the Chief Justice
(of the Supreme Court) and the Deputy Chief Justice were elected by the High er
Council of the Judiciary, which is one of the executive -administrative organs of the
Supreme Court, composed of advisory judges and presided over by the Chief Justice.
He also indicated that there were three chambers: criminal, civil and social and
administrative. With regard to the role of the Court in verifying political party
candidates for any elections or its intervention following a dispute over election
results, he informed the mission that candidates could contest results first, through
the regional commissions. Should an agreement not be reached, affected candidates
could proceed to the National Electoral Commission, which was expected to verify
whether the claims were in line with the law. If the candidates were unsatisfied with
the resolution at that level, they could then appeal to the Court, making sure that they
met the set deadline for appeals. He explained that the decision of the Court was final.
Regarding the intervention of the Court on the interruption of the voter registration
process, the case was referred to the Court by the Commission, given the
disagreement among the political parties. The Court, which as an independent
institution, took a decision in an impartial manner.
69. With regard to the issue of respecting the gender parity law by the political
parties, Mr. Nene noted that the Supreme Court of Justice had called upon the political
parties to include women in their lists of candidates on the basis of the 36 per cent
quota. He acknowledged that few women were engaged in politic s in Guinea-Bissau,
thus making it difficult for political parties to meet the requirement. Some parties had,
however, deliberately disregarded it. He stated that the Court would be firm with the
political parties on the parity issue for the next elections, given that they would have
enough time by then to encourage women to participate in political parties.
70. With regard to drug trafficking and transnational organized crime, he reassured
the delegation that the courts in Guinea-Bissau had the necessary competencies,
adding that measures were in place to combat the issue. He stressed that each time a
19-06087

15/26

S/2019/303

case was opened, the public ministry would investigate, following which the case
would be referred to a judge for prosecution. The case could also be brought before
the Criminal Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice.
Meeting with heads of political parties not represented in Parliament
71. Following the meeting with the Vice-President of the Supreme Court of Justice,
the Security Council mission met representatives of political parties not represented
in the National Assembly, including the Movimento Alternância Democrática, the
Guinean Democratic Movement, the Democratic Guinean Movement, the African
National Congress of Guinea-Bissau, the Guinea-Bissau Resistance-Bafatá
Movement, the Social Democratic Party, the Patriotic Movement, the Democratic
Centre Party and the Democratic Party for Development.
72. At the outset of the meeting, Mr. Ndong Mba noted that the visit of the Security
Council members was aimed at delivering a message of support and encouragement
to political parties and the authorities for the timely holding of the parliamentary
elections on 10 March and the presidential election in 2019, as well as to urge them
to respect the recently signed Stability Pact and Code of Conduct. Several party
representatives denounced the irregularities encountered during the voter registration
process, noting the large discrepancy of registered voters for 2019, compared with
2014. Some appealed to the Council to support their request for the publication of the
ECOWAS audit report on the voter registration process and some called upon the
Council to help to ensure that the elections were inclusive and met international
standards, adding that, if those standards were not followed, smaller political parties
would be negatively affected. The issues of candidate security, campaign resources
and media coverage of campaigns were also discussed. Several representatives
pointed to possible challenges during the post-electoral period.
73. Mr. Ndong Mba noted the issues raised and stated that the one concerning the
discrepancy in the number of voters had been raised in several of the mission ’s
meetings in Bissau, and he made the views of the Security Council clear in that the
list of registered voters should reflect reality and that measures be taken to rectify any
anomalies. He urged the political parties to wait until the ECOWAS audit had been
completed. Lastly, he urged all political parties to fully participate in the upcoming
elections on 10 March and in the presidential election later in 2019, expressing the
hope that those elections would help to usher in a new chapter of stability for the
country.
Meeting with civil society organizations and the organizing commission of the
national conference
74. The Security Council mission met civil society representatives. Several
representatives noted that Bissau-Guineans were yearning for change. Recognizing
that it was for Bissau-Guineans to change their country, several representatives urged
the United Nations “not to abandon” Guinea-Bissau. With regard to the elections,
several representatives expressed the desire for peaceful elections, with some noting
the signing of the Stability Pact and the Code of Conduct as positive steps. Some
representatives voiced concern over irregularities regarding the voter registration
process and called for continued United Nations support for a successful election.
Several civil society representatives called for the support of the international
community to ensure that a stable Government would be installed after the election.
Some appealed to the international community to support Guinea -Bissau in
strengthening its maritime border control. Several speakers noted the need for reform
of public services, political party laws and the security and defence and the justice
sectors, with some calling upon the United Nations to consider facilitating the reform
processes. The public demonstration of 15 February 2019, which had turned violent,
16/26

19-06087

S/2019/303

the current political climate, national reconciliation efforts and the role for women
and young people going forward were also discussed. Some civil society
representatives appealed to the Council to consider reviewing and lifting the sanctions
against 10 military officers after the conclusion of the elections.
75. The Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire to the United Nations and
mission co-lead, Kacou Léon Adom, thanked the civil society organizations for their
various roles in the social and political discourse and their contributions to the
democratic process, and encouraged them to continue their engagement, saying that
Bissau-Guineans had the primary role in helping to bring about change and overcome
the political crisis. He encouraged the participation of women and young people in
the political discourse.
Meeting with the United Nations country team and international partners
76. Over a working lunch, the mission exchanged views with the United Nations
country team, in a meeting chaired by the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Equatorial Guinea, in his capacity as the resident coordinator.
Representatives of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), UNDP, the United
Nations Office for Project Services, the World Food Programme (WFP), the World
Health Organization (WHO), the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), OHCHR and
the World Bank were present. The offices of OHCHR and the United Nation s Office
on Drugs and Crime are integrated into UNIOGBIS.
77. The resident coordinator mentioned that the purpose of the meeting was to have
a conversation on the developments in Guinea-Bissau. He reported that there were 10
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes working in Guinea -Bissau and that
their programmes were reflected in the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework for the period 2016–2020, adding that the planning of the next phase of
the United Nations Partnership Assistance Framework was expected to commence in
2020. He added that now was the time to redefine the priorities of Guinea -Bissau and
to adapt the future interventions of the United Nations. He said that the post -election
period was expected to usher in stability, thereby enabling the United Nations to
establish a partnership with the new Government when it reviewed the country ’s
priorities areas, especially the critical reforms needed in public services.
78. The resident coordinator explained that the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework was anchored to four pillars: (a) support for State institutions
to consolidate stability, the rule of law and democratic participation; (b) economic
growth and sustainably promoting poverty reduction, decent jobs, food security and
the structural transformation of the economy; (c) ensuring that marginalized and
vulnerable groups had equitable, sustainable access to and use of basic services
(health, nutrition, HIV/AIDS, water, sanitation and hygiene, education and quality
protection services); and (d) support for public institutions, civil society organizations
and the private sector in the promotion of the sustainable development of the
environment and natural resources, risk management and disaster prevention.
79. UNICEF reported that it had provided interventions in basic services, including
health, nutrition, water and sanitation, HIV and education, and were collaborating
with six other United Nations agencies for the implementation of their pro grammes.
The representative noted that the recurrence of the teachers’ strike had reportedly
posed considerable challenges in UNICEF support for and interventions in the
education sector. The agency had nevertheless provided and facilitated the
distribution of textbooks and the building of new schools. With regard to health,
UNICEF supported the immunization of children, recording an 80 per cent coverage
of the targeted population. It also provided support to reduce the number neonatal
19-06087

17/26

S/2019/303

deaths, given that child mortality was notably high in Guinea-Bissau. The agency also
supported 4,000 community health workers in the provision of health -care services in
remote areas. It had also rehabilitated 64 health-care centres over the past two years
and continued to provide community services for HIV-affected persons and attend to
child protection issues, including female genital mutilation. UNICEF also facilitated
the collection of household data in relation to human development in the context of
the Sustainable Development Goals.
80. The World Bank informed the Security Council mission that its office had
opened in Bissau approximately two and half years ago, noting that operations
focused on public sector interventions, namely, budget support, energy services,
health care and information and communications technology. The representative
stated that some $215 million had been invested to date. He mentioned that the
economy of Guinea-Bissau had declined in 2018 to 3.8 per cent, down from 5.9 per
cent in 2017. The decline was a result of the considerable low cashew production and
a drop in the global price of cashews. Tax revenue had also declined by 1.7 per cent
of gross domestic product, while inflation averaged 1.2 per cent annually. He added
that the fiscal position of the Government was generally weak and that the World
Bank was supporting reforms in public finance management, customs registration,
tax collection and budget preparations. He also mentioned that support was being
provided for reforms in the energy sector to improve its generation capacity and
ensure the efficient management and sustainability of the sector.
81. WFP highlighted the need for stability in the country. State institutions remained
very weak and required support to be operationally effective and efficient. WFP was
providing interventions in nutrition, given that nutrition was said to be low in the
country. In this regard, WFP was supporting efforts to improve nutrition and food
security through enhancing the capacity of national institutions and through its school
feeding programme with public schools, which has increased enrolment by 55 to 60
per cent. In total, 800 schools were covered and some 180,000 children benefited
under the programme. Cumulatively, approximately 18 per cent of the popu lation of
Guinea-Bissau benefited from the nutrition support. WFP noted the nutrition -related
diseases (e.g., diabetes and malnutrition) that were reported to be prevalent in the
country. It had therefore embarked on developing mechanisms to promote
sustainability in some intervention areas through training and changes in policies and
in eating behaviour.
82. UNHCR noted its work on the protection and acceptance of refugees in GuineaBissau. The agency had worked on a durable solution to the approximately 10,000
Senegalese refugees in the country. In December 2018, 7,000 of those refugees had
been granted citizenship in Guinea-Bissau following the signing of a presidential
decree. Work was under way to process the other refugees. For its part, WFP was
working to provide livelihoods to the refugees, a primary focus of UNHCR, which
was also working to eradicate statelessness by 2020. A policy document on
statelessness was completed, and its implementation was pending. Some 3,700
identity cards had been given to the naturalized refugees, while efforts were under
way to facilitate their reintegration into society.
83. UNFPA informed the Security Council mission that it had commenced
operations in 1987, focusing on preventable maternal deaths, family planning and
zero gender-based violence. UNFPA collaborated with other agencies in those areas
and worked towards decreasing the impact and prevalence of HIV.
84. UNDP mentioned that, since it had begun operations in 1974, it was focusing
primarily on matters of governance, the environment and poverty reduction. With
regard to the former, UNDP worked to improve access to justice and the provision of
infrastructure towards the enhancement of justice systems. UNDP also had overseen
18/26

19-06087

S/2019/303

interventions regarding specialized institutions such as Parliament and worked with
civil society organizations to enhance their capacities on matte rs of decentralization
and local government functions. With regard to the environment, Guinea -Bissau was
said to be vulnerable to climate change. UNDP was supporting the Government in its
work regarding the Sustainable Development Goals, which offer an opp ortunity to
promote a peaceful environment, especially in the context of Goal 16.
85. The UNIOGBIS human rights unit representative, speaking on behalf of
OHCHR, mentioned three areas of its mandate: coordination and assistance to
promote human rights, monitoring and reporting on human rights issues and the
development of a human rights approach in its programmes. The unit collaborated
with various groups, including civil society organizations and State organs, to
promote human rights values in civil discourse and the provision of social services.
It reported that challenges/issues of human rights in Guinea -Bissau related to acts of
impunity, limited access to justice and basic services, sexual violence, human
trafficking and poor-quality detention centres. The capacities of civil society
organizations to monitor and report on human rights issues were also noted as a
serious challenge.
86. WHO informed the Security Council mission that it had been in Guinea -Bissau
since 1974 and was the lead actor in the health sector. The representative noted some
operational challenges, including the capacity for coordination by national actors,
especially in remote locations, the prevalence of and increase in non -communicable
disease and weak health infrastructure. The representative noted that the contribution
of the Government to the health sector was only 8 per cent by way of salaries, while
47 per cent of funding came from external sources and 46 per cent came through paid
services accessed by the local population. The third national development plan had
just been completed, and the need for a resilient health system had been its primary
focus.
87. Responding to comments and questions by Security Council members, the
resident coordinator underscored the limited number of donors to the United Nations
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in Guinea-Bissau, which posed a
considerable challenge to resource mobilization. Political instability had caused
frustrations for donors, which appeared to result in limited funding for programmes.
The possibility of a donor conference could be envisaged if a successful election were
held and the environment remained promising. For its part, UNDP also noted that the
capacity existed to fill the gap after the departure of UNIOGBIS, st ressing that there
was a need for resources and a transition plan for implementation. He explained that
the United Nations Development Assistance Framework was also fully aligned with
the Terra Ranka round table outcome in its four outreach areas, which co rresponded
to the four outcomes of the Framework. WFP stressed that a transition plan was
critical for a smooth takeover of residual tasks.
88. In response to the query whether WHO was preparing the country for possible
health events such as Ebola, WHO informed the Security Council mission of its
efforts to support the country’s preparedness, surveillance and response to public
health emergencies. The representative noted that, in support of the emergency
operations centres that had been created by the Ministry of Health, WHO had set up
four regional offices located in the four regional centres identified by the
Government. Those offices were staffed by WHO medical personnel and one driver
to provide continuous support to the Ministry and they strengthened surveillance
capacities and rapid response teams for any health event. WHO had also strengthened
laboratory capacities through the provision of training to all laboratory personnel in
the country, the provision of entomological training, the development of standard
operating procedures, protocols, manuals and plans related to emergency
preparedness and response, and the provision of personal protective equipment to all
19-06087

19/26

S/2019/303

health centres in the country. Under the “One Health” approach, WHO also continued
to provide expertise and experience in the country through its work with the Ministry
and other United Nations partners, including NGOs in the country. It continued to
provide capacity development opportunities for Ministry staff. Lastly, it informed the
mission that, with its support, Guinea-Bissau was in the final process of achieving a
polio-free certification and that the Certification Committee would arrive in the
country by the end of February for a field assessment.
Meeting with the President of Guinea-Bissau
89. On 16 February, members of the Security Council held a meeting with the
President of Guinea-Bissau, José Mário Vaz, at the Presidential Palace. In his opening
remarks, the mission co-lead, Mr. Adom, thanked the President for meeting with the
Council and reiterated the purpose of the visit, stressing the importance of the
legislative elections being held on time, on 10 March, and the presidential elections
thereafter, in 2019. He sought the President’s views on the current situation in GuineaBissau, including preparations for the legislative elections, as well as his preliminary
advice on the date of the presidential election in 2019.
90. President Vaz welcomed the Security Council to Bissau, adding that it was
important for the Council to obtain its information on the situation directly on the
ground through their meetings with the Bissau-Guineans. He encouraged the mission
to pose questions. He explained that Guinea-Bissau was currently in a difficult
situation and welcomed the Council’s efforts to help the country to find a way out of
the crisis. He noted that the country had not faced any issues with its voter registration
during past elections. Notwithstanding the challenges encountered, he reassured the
Council that all the conditions were in place for the holding of the legislative elections
on 10 March. He observed that, from outside the country, the Council might have
heard some misguided reports about Guinea-Bissau, adding that the short visit would
not give the mission the opportunity to become fully acquainted with the country. He
said that the situation in Guinea-Bissau was calm ahead of the elections, noting that
the military continued to remain in the barracks. He also explained that he had been
able to keep them in the barracks by respecting the armed forces and their chain of
command, and that was the reason why the country remained calm. He added that he
communicated only with the General Chief of Staff of the Army. He pointed out that,
since 1994, this would be the first time that the leaders in Guinea-Bissau would
remain in power until the end of their term. He observed that the Council visited
Guinea-Bissau only when there were crises.
91. In response to questions posed by the mission, President Vaz stated that he
would prefer not to discuss the date for the presidential election at the present time,
given that the focus was on the legislative elections. He added that there would be a
programme for reforms following the conclusion of those elections. He added that
Guinea-Bissau was mobilized for the 10 March legislative elections that would lead
to peace and stability. He mentioned that the entire defence and security forces would
ensure that the elections were peaceful. He explained that he used his influence to
defend young people. According to the Constitution, however, he did not have
executive powers. He explained that he was the Head of State and not of the
Government and was therefore not responsible for the public treasury. He informed
the mission of his programme called “Mona Lama” and mentioned that more than
80 per cent of the population lived in rural areas. He believed that development in
Guinea-Bissau had to begin in rural areas and that the country needed to support
young people in those areas. He added that he also had an anti-corruption programme
and that Guinea-Bissau could not move forward if State resources were not managed
well. He said that State money must go to the public treasury. He said that his battle

20/26

19-06087

S/2019/303

was to combat corruption and that Guinea-Bissau was facing problems in the health,
infrastructure and transportation sectors.
92. President Vaz recalled his speech to the General Assembly in September 2018
and his meeting with the Secretary-General, when he had talked about the reforms in
Guinea-Bissau. He said that he was supportive of any reforms of UNIOGBIS as
envisaged by the Secretary-General. Concerning the funding of the elections, he said
that, during the most recent summit of the Community of Portuguese -speaking
Countries, he had raised this issue with the Heads of State and Government of the
lusophone community. He also raised the issue during the ECOWAS Summit, noting
that the President of Côte d’Ivoire had played a crucial role in helping to mobilize
funds for the elections in Guinea-Bissau. He concluded by saying that the Prime
Minister was best placed to respond to issues pertaining to election funding.
93. President Vaz raised concerns regarding the military. He explained that, during
his tenure, the military had displayed good behaviour and that t he “former freedom
fighters” needed to be compensated in order to leave the barracks. He appealed for
the lifting of the sanctions against the military and regretted that the Security Council
was not able to visit the army headquarters in Bissau. He stress ed that the military
needed the support of the international community. He said that he would send
instructions to the Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau to the United Nations,
requesting him to find out why the United Nations sanctions had not been lifted.
94. With regard to the issues with the voter lists and funding gaps, President Vaz
said that he would convey those concerns to the Government. He indicated that UNDP
was managing the electoral basket fund and that the Bissau-Guinean authorities were
working to resolve the cases of those citizens who had voter cards, but whose names
were omitted from the voter lists. He said that he was working with the Prime Minister
on the matter. He said that Guinea-Bissau needed to move forward and that the
country was counting on the support of the Security Council. He reiterated his call
for the Council to lift the sanctions against the relevant members of the Guinea Bissauan military.
95. Towards the end of the meeting, Mr. Ndong Mba made a final appeal, ref erring
to the opportunity for President Vaz to set the country on the path of peace and
stability by holding the elections on time. He added that, should the country invest in
its agriculture, Guinea-Bissau could feed all of West Africa, but that it would require
political stability to attract foreign investment. President Vaz responded that the
country no longer suffered from war, beatings and arbitrary detentions, and that that
was his legacy.
96. Following the meeting with President Vaz, the co-leads of the Security Council
mission briefed the media on the main purpose of the Council ’s visit, the meetings
held with various interlocutors and the key messages conveyed to all political
stakeholders, including the Government, civil society and women’s and youth groups.
Observations/key messages
97. In their engagements with key national and international stakeholders, members
of the Security Council strongly advocated continued political dialogue towards the
full implementation of the Conakry Agreement and the ECOWAS Road Map within
the agreed timelines. They made specific reference to the need to hold free, fair and
transparent legislative elections on 10 March and for presidential elections to be held
thereafter in 2019, in line with the legal framework. The mission noted the concerns
voiced by some political parties and civil society representatives regarding the voter
registration process, in particular the discrepancies in the number of registered voters
in the voter lists for 2019, compared with those of 2014. The mission urged the bodies
concerned to address the irregularities identified in order to enable disenfranchised
19-06087

21/26

S/2019/303

citizens to exercise their right to vote. In that context, members of the Council
welcomed the signing of the Stability Pact and the Code of Conduct on 14 February
2019, encouraging parties to meet their obligations as outlined in the two documents.
The mission also urged the parties to continue efforts towards constitutional reform
in order to mitigate a renewed political crisis, with the aim of having a clear division
of labour/functions of the executive, legislative and judicial arms.

22/26

19-06087

S/2019/303

Annex I
Terms of reference of the Security Council mission to West Africa
Mission to Côte d’Ivoire (14 and 15 February 2019), co-led by Equatorial
Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire
1.
The Security Council will undertake a mission to Côte d ’Ivoire in accordance
with the statements by the President of the Security Council of 30 June 2017
(S/PRST/2017/8) and 24 July 2017 (S/PRST/2017/10 and S/PRST/2017/11). The
purpose of the visit is to take stock of the ongoing transition in Côte d ’Ivoire, as well
as in Liberia and Sierra Leone, and to support the work of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) for conflict prevention and peacebuilding
in the Mano River subregion and the respective United Nations country teams in those
three countries.
2.
The Security Council will meet with the Vice-President and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire and take part in a round-table discussion on transitions from
peacekeeping to peace consolidation in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone, with
the participation of experts from the relevant United Nations country teams and
UNOWAS.
3.
In accordance with the framework established in paragraph 1 above and the
areas of interest to the Security Council, the Council will:
(a) Review the state of play of the political, economic and security situation
in the Mano River Union subregion, in particular in Côte d ’Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra
Leone. In that regard, the mission will:
(i) Discuss the overall situation of the political, economic and social
environment in the subregion, specifically in the countries concerned;
(ii) Review the security situation in the Mano River Union subregion, in
particular in the countries concerned;
(iii) Identify current challenges to peace and stability in the subregion;
(b) Welcome and support the strategies put in place by the Mano River Union
to promote peace, stability and economic development in the subregion. In that
connection, the mission will:
(i) Learn about regional strategies for strengthening States’ resilience to
crises and the cooperation between the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and UNOWAS, in the framework of support for States in
post-crisis situations;
(ii) Assess the progress made by the Government in stabilizing the security
situation in Abidjan and the rest of the country, in particular in the border region
between Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia;
(iii) Encourage the Government to continue to improve inclusive political and
democratic governance and to promote human rights;
(c) Review the transition of United Nations peacekeeping operations in Côte
d’Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone. In that regard, the mission will:
(i)

Evaluate national strategies for crisis resolution and peacebuilding;

(ii) Create an opportunity for exchanges with United Nations country teams
and sharing experiences and best practices on the transition from United Nations
operations to peacebuilding in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone;

19-06087

23/26

S/2019/303

(iii) Identify persistent structural vulnerabilities, which could be factors in the
resurgence of instability and conflict in the States concerned;
(iv) Evaluate national and country team capacity to develop and coordinate
long-term financing strategies for peace and stability, taking into account the
role of international financial institutions and the private sector;
(v) Identify lessons from the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in setting
the scene for longer-term peacebuilding efforts, and recommendations for the
role the Commission can play in transitions more broadly;
(vi) Encourage cross-border cooperation between the countries concerned to
combat cross-border organized crime and community violence;
(d) Express support for the role of civil society and women in prevention and
post-crisis processes. In that regard, the mission will:
(i) Emphasize the role of civil society organizations in conflict prevention
and resolution;
(ii) Share experiences and good practices in social cohesion and national
reconciliation and reinforce the gender dimension in prevention and in the
process of ending the crisis;
(e) Reaffirm the continued support of the Security Council for the subregion.
In that regard, the mission will:
(i) Reaffirm the commitment of the United Nations to continue supporting
Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone, through their respective United Nations
country teams and through UNOWAS;
(ii) Emphasize that Côte d’Ivoire is an important country in the subregion,
which should remain a model of stability and development, and reiterate the
support of the United Nations in pursuit of its peacebuilding policy;
(iii) Reaffirm the support of the Security Council for enhancing the capacity of
UNOWAS to support the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in
United Nations engagements in West Africa.
Mission to Guinea-Bissau (15 and 16 February 2019), co-led by Equatorial
Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire
4.
The Security Council will carry out a mission to Guinea -Bissau within the
framework of Council resolution 2404 (2018) and the press statements dated
21 February, 7 September and 27 December 2018.
5.
The Security Council will meet with the President of Guinea -Bissau, the Prime
Minister and his Government, the President of the Parliament, the President of the
Supreme Court of Justice, the President of the National Electoral Commission and
the heads of the political parties represented in the Parliament and of those not
represented in the Parliament. The Council will also meet the representatives of civil
society organizations, including women’s and youth groups, the members of the group
of five international organizations represented in Guinea -Bissau (African Union,
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS, European Union and
United Nations), the diplomatic community, the United Nations country team and the
leadership of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea -Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), among others.
6.

The members of the Council will fulfil the following tasks:

(a) Engage with key stakeholders involved in the political crisis in GuineaBissau and advocate strongly for: (i) political dialogue towards the implementation
24/26

19-06087

S/2019/303

of the Conakry Agreement and the ECOWAS road map within the agreed timelines;
(ii) preparing for and conducting free and fair elections; (iii) holding the legislative
elections on 10 March and presidential elections thereafter in 2019, in line with the
legal framework; (iv) constitutional reforms to mitigate the risk of renewed political
crisis among the political leaders with the aim of having a clear division of labour
and functions of the executive, legislative and judicial branches; and (v) the
commitment by the Government and/or legislature to administer funding and continue
implementation of development programmes for the benefit of t he people of GuineaBissau throughout the political deliberations and elections planning;
(b) Analyse the consequences of political tensions for the living conditions of
the populations in Guinea-Bissau;
(c) Evaluate the progress made in reform processes, such as the reform of the
security and justice sectors, as well as progress made in addressing impunity for past
violations and crimes;
(d) Evaluate the compliance of UNIOGBIS with its mandate, in support of the
Guinea-Bissau authorities, to contribute to lasting peace and stability in the country,
including through support for strengthening democratic institutions and assistance to
national authorities and stakeholders to promote and protect human rights;
(e) Evaluate the efforts made by the Guinea-Bissau authorities to implement
and review national laws and mechanisms to more effectively combat transnational
organized crime, in particular drug trafficking and money-laundering, which threaten
security and the stability of Guinea-Bissau and the subregion (resolution 2404 (2018),
para. 20);
(f) Reiterate the Council’s support for the fundamental role and active
participation of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for GuineaBissau and Head of UNIOGBIS, José Viegas Filho, including his good offices and
close coordination and cooperation with the international community, especially the
African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS and the
European Union;
(g) Reiterate the Council’s support for the subregional, regional and
international organizations that actively participate in the stabilization of Guinea Bissau.

19-06087

25/26

S/2019/303

Annex II
Composition of the Security Council mission to Côte d’Ivoire and
Guinea-Bissau
Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium)
Ambassador Wu Haitao (China)
Ambassador Kacou Houadja Léon Adom (Côte d’Ivoire)
Mr. Josué Fiallo (Dominican Republic)
Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea)
Mr. Antoine Michon (France)
Ambassador Juergen Schulz (Germany)
Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani (Indonesia)
Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi (Kuwait)
Mr. Paul Duclos (Peru)
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka (Poland)
Mr. Dmitry A. Polyanskiy (The Russian Federation)
Ambassador Jerry Matthews Matjila (South Africa)
Ambassador Jonathan Allen (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland)
Ms. Elaine French (United States of America)

26/26

19-06087
