S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6816th meeting

Wednesday, 25 July 2012, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alzate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Jafarova
Mr. Zhang Changwei
Ms. Legendre
Mr. Selle
Ms. Bolaños Pérez
Mr. Vinay Kumar
Mr. El Mkhantar
Mr. Munir
Ms. Teixeira Coelho
Mrs. Evstigneeva
Mr. Crowley
Mr. Akpoto Komlagan
Mr. Rhodes
Mr. Grant

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

12-43962 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1243962*

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.35 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out
its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this open debate.
I also thank Special Coordinator Robert Serry for his
briefing.
These are particularly difficult and challenging
times. While the international community still faces
unfulfilled mandates in the Middle East, new demands
unfold. Renewed and strengthened commitment to
diplomacy is required of the Council.
We follow with distress and extreme concern the
escalation of the crisis in Syria. We are deeply worried
over the difficulties the Council has encountered in
sending a unified message in response to the latest
developments. An urgent ceasefire is imperative
and requires determined support for Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan, his six-point plan and the
Final Communiqué of the Action Group for Syria
(S/2012/522, annex). The Council must work harder
to discharge its responsibilities in that regard. Brazil
supports the approach taken by the Action Group and
strongly encourages the Security Council to endorse the
Communiqué.
Mr. Annan’s efforts towards a negotiated solution
and a Syrian-led political transition continue to be
supported by the international community. They are
the best, if not the only chance to avoid further descent
into a spiral of destruction that will only bring greater
suffering to the Syrian population, generate increasing
flows of refugees and risk affecting the whole region,
with unpredictable consequences for the Middle East
and international peace and security.
Unfortunately, as the International Committee
of the Red Cross has indicated, we are facing dire
symptoms and consequences of what can now be
characterized as a non-international armed conflict.
All of the parties must fulfil their obligations to halt the
violence, but the primary responsibility in that regard
lies with the Government of Syria. We also repudiate
terrorist attacks against the civilian infrastructure.
The extension of the United Nations monitoring
mission for 30 days is welcome. We must ensure that it
2

contributes to changing the dynamic on the ground in
a way that brings the parties urgently to the negotiating
table. Eleven Brazilian observers have served with the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria for the
past three months. Their work has unfortunately been
limited by a lack of minimum security conditions. We
reiterate that all parties must ensure the observers’
safety and freedom of movement and cooperate with
the Mission.
With great concern, we took note of recent
declarations concerning chemical weapons that directly
contradicted long-established international norms and
basic principles enshrined not only in the Chemical
Weapons Convention, but also in the 1925 Geneva
Protocol, to which Syria has been party since 1968.
We have yet to see meaningful developments in
the long-stalled peace process between Israel and
Palestine. We regret that recent attempts to revamp
direct negotiations did not bear fruit. The paralysis of
the peace process has pushed the question of Israeli
settlements even further to the fore. Settlements are
illegal under international law, contrary to peace,
detrimental to Israel’s own security concerns and
a threat to the two-State solution. We are troubled
by attempts to affirm the legality of settlements and
outposts. They support a logic that runs counter to the
two-State solution and the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people.
In the face of those actions, recognition of the
Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders and
its admission as a Member of the Organization are
fully warranted, as President Dilma Rousseff recalled
before the General Assembly in September 2011 (see
A/66/PV.11).
We should be supportive of an enhanced role for
the Council in the Middle East peace process. The
Council should exercise its responsibilities and renew
efforts to deal with the Israeli-Palestinian question,
which is undeniably one of the main challenges on the
international peace and security agenda today. It should
be regularly reported to by the Quartet and have the
necessary elements to evaluate progress or the lack
thereof. In the absence of progress, the Council should
fulfil its role by providing guidance.
We believe that the support of other actors could
contribute to the urgent resumption of negotiations.
A renewed, collective effort towards changing the
dynamics and overcoming political inertia should be

12-43962

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

seriously considered. Peace will not be served by an
inoperative Quartet and a silent Security Council.

A united Palestinian front will draw wider support
from the international community.

We commend the Egyptian people for having
realized free and fair elections that will further
consolidate Egypt’s peaceful path towards democracy.
Brazil also welcomes the holding of legislative
elections in Libya with broad popular participation, and
congratulates the people and Government of Libya on
that important step forward in its democratic transition
process. We likewise acknowledge the positive
developments in Tunisia, where vibrant public debates
about the country’s future have been taking place in
a democratic environment. Brazil also commends the
Government of Lebanon for reconvening its national
dialogue in such challenging times. The importance of
stability and progress in Lebanon today can hardly be
overstressed.

Turkey also respects the right of all peoples to
live in peace and security and rejects the use of force
and means of terror. In that context, we condemn the
suicide bombing targeting Israeli tourists in Bulgaria
on 18 July.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): The Israeli-Palestinian
dispute continues to imperil prospects for peace and
stability in the Middle East. At a time when we need
a spirit of reconciliation and political resolve, Israel’s
practices in the occupied Palestinian territory are
undermining the two-State solution and the established
parameters for a just and durable peace. That situation
is neither viable nor acceptable.
The settlement activities of Israel continue
unabated. With unprecedented indifference, Israel not
only persists in its illegal practices, but also attempts
to legitimize them. The report issued by the former
Israeli Supreme Court Justice Edmond Levy is yet
another example. The Israeli actions unfortunately defy
all moral value systems. The recent news about the
intention of the Israeli Ministry of Defence to demolish
eight Palestinian villages in the South Hebron Hills,
to use the territory as a military exercise area and to
resettle its inhabitants elsewhere is also worrisome.
Turkey supports the rightful aspirations of the
Palestinian people to internationally recognized
statehood. The Palestinians should be able to exercise
their rights in accordance with United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the road map and
the Arab Peace Initiative. Turkey thus welcomes the
Palestinian application for membership to the United
Nations, submitted by President Mahmoud Abbas on
23 September 2011 (S/2011/592, annex I), and praises
the Palestinian reconciliation efforts fostered by Egypt.

The illegal blockade on Gaza is now in its sixth year.
The grave situation in housing, health care and other
primary services in Gaza is, no doubt, an embarrassment
to the international community, but responsibility lies
first and foremost with its perpetrator.
Let me quote the statistics of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which may help
to visualize the level of suffering in Gaza. Eighty per
cent of people in Gaza are aid recipients. Forty-four per
cent of them are food insecure. Seventy-one thousand
new housing units are required to meet urgent demand.
There are electricity outages for up to 12 hours a day.
More than 90 per cent of the Gaza aquifer is unsafe
for human consumption. Such collective punishment
should come to an end without further delay. Israel has
yet to shoulder its responsibilities regarding the attack
on the civilian humanitarian aid convoy in high seas,
which resulted in the death of nine civilians.
Before I conclude my statement, I would also like
to mention the situation in Syria. With the continuous
assaults by Government forces, the number of
casualties reportedly only last week exceeded 1,200,
which was the highest since the beginning of the crisis.
The total number of deaths has reached more than
19,000. We are deeply concerned about the reports that
the Government of Syria is using fighter jets to attack
population centres.
As the number of Syrians seeking shelter in Turkey
exceeds 40,000, Turkey will continue to support
the people of Syria at this dire time. We once again
call for an end to the violence in Syria and for the
implementation of the six-point plan of the Special
Envoy to Syria, Mr. Kofi Annan, with immediate
effect. As the shooting down of the Turkish military
aircraft in international airspace showed, the crisis in
Syria increasingly poses a threat to regional peace and
security.
The socio-political transformation in the Middle
East, triggered by the rightful aspirations of its peoples
to a better life, exposes us to a volatile situation,

12-439623

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

in which strong commitment to the principles of
democracy, respect for human rights and the rule of
law are essential. Such principles also apply to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, where the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people are threatened. Thus, while
welcoming the efforts of the Secretary-General and
Special Coordinator Serry, we call on the international
community to give its decisive support to a just and
lasting solution based on international recognition of
Palestine, with the 1967 borders and East Jerusalem at
its capital and living side by side in peace with Israel.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate and I thank Special
Coordinator Robert Serry for his report.
I would first like to join others in expressing
Australia’s strong condemnation of the appalling
bombing in Bulgaria on 18 July. As we know,
such terrorist attacks are not acceptable under any
circumstances, and we express our condolences to the
people of Israel and Bulgaria.
Like many countries, Australia is greatly concerned
about the current standstill in the Middle East peace
process. The world has repeatedly called for a two-State
solution, which allows for a secure Israel and a viable
and independent Palestinian State living side by side.
But the mere repetition of that essential goal, which
remains the only credible solution to the conflict, will
not achieve results on the ground.
The year 2012 has seen some modest progress
towards negotiations, led first by Jordan’s King
Al Hussein and Foreign Minister Judeh, and then
by the parties themselves, through an exchange of
letters between President Abbas and Prime Minister
Netanyahu. However, those encouraging signs have
not been followed by what is the only path to realizing
a just solution to the conflict, namely, an immediate
resumption of direct negotiations on the basis of the
1967 boundaries, with agreed land swaps.
To achieve that, both sides must refrain from
actions that are damaging to the peace process. In
particular — and as nearly all who participate in
these debates, including Australia, have consistently
said — the expansion of Israeli settlements must end.
Australia is also especially concerned that all violence
against civilians, including rocket attacks from Gaza
that target Israeli civilians, must cease immediately.
4

We must also continue to support Palestinian
efforts to build their institutions and to enhance their
governance capacity. The progress made in that area
must not be wound back. To that end, my own country
signed a five-year multi- million-dollar partnership
agreement with the Palestinian Authority as a means of
promoting a degree of certainty to Palestinian finances.
In May, we signed an Australian $90-million multi-year
partnership with the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency (UNRWA). UNRWA’s focus on education
and health-care programmes, in particular, is a vital
investment in the human capital essential to building a
successful Palestinian State. The final realization of the
two-State solution is in the long-term interest of both
parties in that it enables the Palestinians to achieve their
inalienable right to self-determination and provides for
Israel’s long-term security.
The terrible and worsening situation in Syria is,
obviously, of grave concern to us all. The violence has
moved to a new level of brutality. It is Syrian civilians,
including women and children, who have borne the
brunt of that violence and who must remain at the
forefront of our collective efforts to find a peaceful
solution.
Like others, Australia was greatly disappointed by
the Council’s failure to adopt a Chapter VII resolution,
which would have fulfilled the call of the Joint Special
Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States to Syria, Mr. Kofi Annan, to ensure that there
were real consequences for non-compliance with
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). It is incumbent
on all of us not to protect a brutal regime that has lost
all legitimacy. President Al-Assad must reverse course,
must live up to his obligations under Mr. Annan’s peace
plan, and must end the violence immediately, including
the use of heavy weapons against civilians.
The humanitarian dimension of the conflict looms
particularly large, including for the hundreds of thousands
who have been displaced. The regional implications
of this conflict are serious, and we acknowledge the
heavy burden borne by Lebanon, Turkey and Jordan
in providing assistance. To help alleviate this burden,
we will continue to provide humanitarian assistance to
agencies and non-governmental organizations.
To conclude, we have seen elsewhere in the
region — including, most recently, in Libya — that
the most effective means for balancing the competing
interests inherent in any society is the establishment of
fair and inclusive democratic processes that enable all
12-43962

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

citizens and groups to give voice to their views and to
select a Government that can represent them. Similarly,
our collective efforts on Syria must be directed towards
an immediate end to violence and the realization of a
political solution that meets the legitimate aspirations
of all of Syria’s citizens.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor to
the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this timely open debate. Before I continue,
I wish to express the appreciation of my delegation to
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for his briefing on this important
issue.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, and with the statement to
be delivered later by the representative of Kazakhstan
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
The absence of progress in the peace process
between Israel and Palestine has been a matter of
utmost concern to my delegation. Efforts to help
resume dialogue and substantive negotiations between
the two parties have been made to no avail. Indeed,
the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, as asserted by
the Secretary-General at the Asia-Pacific Meeting in
Support of Israeli-Palestinian Peace held in Bangkok
recently, has been at a dangerous standstill for some
time.
Like many other members of the international
community, my delegation is very clear on one
thing — the issue of settlements is the most potent
obstacle to the prospects of peace in the Middle East,
with particular reference to the two-State solution. This
does not mean that we do not consider the other final
status issues, such as borders, security, refugees and the
status of Jerusalem, to be important.
Without doubt, each of these issues is significant,
but the challenge of settlements has emerged as the key
puzzle. Regrettably, it is also one that is now continuously
manipulated by Israel. Thus, each time there seems to
be a prospect for progress of any kind, a sudden twist
emerges — such as settler violence and extremism;
the eviction of Palestinians and the demolition of their
homes; or some kind of new acceleration in settlement
construction and expansion — which then beats
back that effort or hope. Only two years ago, Israel’s
manipulation of the settlement question resulted in the

collapse of the proximity talks sponsored by the United
States, following its failure to extend the moratorium
on settlement construction.
It must also be remembered that, along with the
settlement policy, Israel has also continued the illegal
construction of the separation wall in the West Bank, in
clear defiance of the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice. Similarly, following the Israeli
military assault on Gaza a couple of years ago, Israel
has maintained its blockade on the territory, making
recovery almost impossible. Therefore, unless Israel
resolves its settlement policy and halts the evictions of
Palestinians, the demolition of their property and the
expansion of settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, it will be impossible
to conceive of any progress towards peace negotiations.
It is in consideration of this that my delegation
reiterates that Israel must fully abide by the resolutions
of the Council in respect of settlements. We call on Israel
to dismantle the settlements it has built in violation of
those resolutions, and place a complete freeze on all
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. There is no other approach
that can give the Palestinians and the international
community the confidence that Israel is serious when
it speaks about peace or the resolution of the conflict.
It remains Indonesia’s view and commitment that the
conflict between Israel and Palestine must be resolved
through the two-State solution, but that cannot be done
if Israel sponsors a settlement menace that frustrates
every effort and imperils every hope.
Furthermore, we would like to reiterate that we
remain committed to the two-State solution of Israel
and a viable and independent Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side in peace and
security on the basis of the principle of land for peace
and a just and comprehensive regional peace consistent
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, the road
map of the Quartet, and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The two-State solution, however, will be
meaningful only if it is comprehensive and embraces
other relevant political tracks, such as the Israel-Syria
and Israel-Lebanon tracks. Thus, Israel must withdraw
completely from the remaining occupied Lebanese land,
as well as from the occupied Syrian Golan, and comply
fully with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Finally, we call on members of the international
community not to relent in their support of the cause of
Palestinian statehood on the basis of the 1967 borders,

12-439625

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

with East Jerusalem as its capital. Only that outcome can
be the basis of a just solution to all other aspects of the
question of Palestine in accordance with international
law and United Nations resolutions.
To conclude, allow me to address the dire situation
in Syria. In that regard, President Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono has underlined that “the responsibility to
put an end to this situation is in the hands not only
of the Syrian people and Government, but also of
the international community”. Therefore, Indonesia
sincerely hopes that the world, including the Security
Council, will now be united in ending the violence in
Syria.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor to
the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): In line with the time limit,
I shall deliver a condensed version of my statement,
while the full text will be circulated in the Chamber.
I wish to thank Mr. Robert Serry, United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his briefing. Malaysia also wishes to associate itself
with the statement made by the representative Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and that to be
delivered later by the representative of Kazakhstan on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
The situation in the Middle East and North Africa
has shown some encouraging signs of stability, with the
political aspirations of the region’s peoples manifesting
themselves in political reality. We continue to witness
democratic processes and the participation of people in
politics and political institutions is promising. Malaysia
would like to highlight these positive developments as
the appearance of normalcy and recovery has attracted
the interest of many countries across the globe,
including in the Council.
Malaysia welcomes the recent political developments
in Egypt, Libya and Tunisia, which have held elections
in recent months. Malaysia believes that the transition
to democratic processes in Egypt, Libya and Tunisia
has shown that the people are at the forefront of
political developments and will undoubtedly contribute
to regional peace and stability.
While the situation in those countries has improved,
the same cannot be said for what we are witnessing in
Syria. The violence that we have witnessed over the
past months has left thousands of civilians maimed and

6

dead, despite the six-point plan and presence of United
Nations observers.
Malaysia is appalled by the civilian losses in
Syria. Malaysia calls for all parties to the conflict to
cease their violent activities immediately. Malaysia
believes that the Syrian Government and opposition
should commit themselves fully to the six-point plan,
which would contribute to peace in the country. We
further call on the international community, the Syrian
Government and all other parties to work together to
find an amicable solution for the people of Syria.
The question of Palestine and the Middle East cannot
be separated, nor be overlooked or ignored. In order
to achieve peace in the Middle East, the plight of the
Palestinian people should be resolved with international
determination. The suffering of the Palestinians and
the predicament of its people are currently the longest
global tragedy of modern times. The solution has
always been in sight, but it has been almost 20 years
since the Oslo Agreement, which was endorsed by the
two sides but never took off. Additionally, the Arab
Peace Initiative of 2002 also never materialized. The
long-standing two-State solution remains a vision, but
nothing more. Peace in the Middle East once seemed so
close, and yet today that solution is as far off as when it
was first envisaged.
The continued occupation by Israel of Palestinian
land and territory are as unlawful today as it was in
1967. Israel’s continued occupation of the occupied
Palestinian territory has stood as a sustained violation
to international humanitarian and human rights law.
The regime has displaced thousands of Palestinian
people and killed innocent civilians. In short, Israel has
failed in its obligation as an occupying Power to protect
civilians, instead committing extrajudicial killings
and oppression. The regime has continued along that
degrading trajectory with impunity. Its persistent
blockade of the Gaza Strip has further translated into
misery for more than 1.6 million Palestinian people.
I have just returned from Gaza, where I was on
a United Nations mission under the auspices of the
Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People
and Other Arabs of the Territories Occupied since 1967.
While in Gaza, we had the opportunity to observe the
actual situation on the ground and to meet directly with
witnesses and victims affected by Israel’s blockade.
The blockade continues to have a devastating impact
on the people of Gaza.
12-43962

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

The principal result of Israel’s blockade has
been to make 80 per cent of the Palestinians in Gaza
dependent upon international humanitarian aid. I
have to admire the resilience of Gazans for being able
to survive on so little, especially in the face of the
inadequate health care, frequent power outages and not
infrequent incidents of violence that mark their daily
lives. The blockade on Gaza is illegal. It amounts to the
collective punishment of 1.6 million Palestinians. The
international community must bring pressure to bear on
Israel until it is fully lifted.
The mass imprisonment of Palestinians, the
routine demolition of homes and the displacement of
Palestinians, the widespread violence by Israeli settlers
against Palestinians, and the blockade and resulting
reliance upon illegal smuggling to survive are practices
that amount to a strategy to either force the Palestinian
people off their land or so severely marginalize them
as to establish and maintain a system of permanent
oppression.
Those Israeli practices are systematic. They are
aimed at moving Palestinians off their land. Working
together, they increasingly discredit Israel’s claim of a
commitment to two states living side by side in peace
and security.
Malaysia calls for the immediate cessation of Israeli
military activity and the withdrawal from all occupied
territory, including East Jerusalem and the Syrian
Golan, to the 1967 borders. Malaysia also calls for an
immediate stop to the annexation of Palestinian lands
through Israeli settler activities, as well as for Israel to
rightly return those lands to people of Palestine.
Malaysia shall continue to support the aspirations of
the Palestinian people for self-determination and for the
return of their inalienable rights. We shall also continue
to support the two-State solution so that it achieves the
intended outcome, namely, the establishment of the
State of Palestine on the basis of the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and the State of Israel,
both living in peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
country Croatia; the candidate countries the former

Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.
Let me begin by thanking the Special Coordinator
for the briefing he provided to the Council today.
The European Union strongly condemns the deadly
terrorist attack on a bus carrying Israeli citizens that took
place in Bulgaria on 18 July. Those responsible for that
horrible and barbaric act of terrorism, which claimed
the lives of Israeli and Bulgarian civilians, should be
prosecuted and brought to justice. The European Union
expresses its solidarity with the Bulgarian and Israeli
people and its deepest sympathy with the families
of the victims and all affected as a consequence of
that appalling act of violence. The European Union
reiterates its strong and unequivocal condemnation of
all forms and acts of terrorism, irrespective of origin,
cause or motive, as well as its unwavering commitment
to the fight against terrorism.
The European Union remains deeply concerned
by the deteriorating situation in Syria. The European
Union strongly condemns the ever increasing use
of force by the regime, including the use of heavy
artillery and shelling against populated areas, in blatant
violation of its obligations under the Annan plan and
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). It is appalled
by the horrific killings in the village of Tremseh on
12 July. The Union calls for an immediate international
independent investigation. The EU urges the Syrian
regime to end immediately the killing of civilians,
withdraw the Syrian army from besieged towns and
cities and allow for a peaceful transition, for the sake
of the country.
International humanitarian law must be respected
by all. The European Union is deeply concerned
about the recent intensification of violence, including
in Damascus, which demonstrates the urgent need
for a political transition that meets the democratic
aspirations of the Syrian people and bring back stability
in Syria. The European Union remains committed to
the sovereignty, independence, national unity and
territorial integrity of Syria.
The EU recalls its full support for Joint United
Nations-League of Arab States Special Envoy Kofi
Annan’s mission and for his six point plan, which must
be implemented. It welcomes the outcome of the Action

12-439627

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

Group meeting held in Geneva on 30 June, in particular
the call for the establishment of a transitional governing
body with full executive powers made up of opposition
and Government representatives and formed by mutual
consent. The EU encourages Kofi Annan to continue
working on the implementation of that transition plan
and urges all parties to support those efforts.
The European Union deeply regrets that the Security
Council was not able to agree to a draft resolution that
would have endorsed the communiqué of the Action
Group and foreseen measures to enforce compliance
with the Annan plan under Article 41 of the Charter
of the United Nations. The EU regrets that the Council
has thus failed to uphold its responsibilities and to back
the Joint Special Envoy’s efforts. The European Union
calls for united action by all members of the Security
Council, including Russia and China, to add more
robust and effective pressure and ensure that there will
be serious consequences for continued non-compliance
with the Council’s previous decisions.
The European Union welcomes the decision to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria for a final period of 30 days, taking
into account the Secretary-General’s recommendations
to reconfigure the Mission as well as the operational
implications of the increasingly dangerous security
situation in Syria. The EU recalls that the Syrian
authorities are responsible for ensuring the security and
safety of the Mission. The European Union is ready to
provide the needed support to guarantee the success of
the Supervision Mission.
The European Union welcomes the national pact and
the common political vision for the transition in Syria
issued following the Syrian opposition conference held
under the auspices of the Arab League in Cairo on 2 and
3 July, and encourages all groups to continue engaging
in that process. The European Union continues to urge
all opposition groups to put aside their differences and
to agree on a set of shared principles and start working
towards an inclusive, orderly and peaceful transition in
Syria. The European Union urges all opposition groups
to continue to support Mr. Annan’s efforts and to be
ready to provide leadership and to engage with the
transition plan designed by the Action Group for Syria
on 30 June. All Syrians must have a place in the new
Syria and enjoy equal rights, regardless of their origin,
affiliations, religion, beliefs or gender.
On Monday, the European Union agreed on
measures to strengthen the enforcement of its arms
8

embargo. It will continue to urge the international
community to join its efforts by taking steps to apply
and enforce restrictive measures on the Syrian regime
and its supporters.
With respect to the Middle East peace process,
our objective remains the same. Changes across the
Arab world point to the urgent need for progress.
The resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is of
strategic importance to the entire region and beyond.
The European Union is convinced that heeding the
aspirations of the people of the region, including those
of Palestinians to statehood and those of Israelis to
security, is a crucial element for lasting peace, stability
and prosperity in the region. It is in the fundamental
interest of the European Union, of the parties and of
the wider region to resolve the conflict, which can be
achieved through a comprehensive peace agreement
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the Road Map, the agreements
previously reached by the parties, and the Arab Peace
Initiative.
The European Union stresses once again the
central role of the Quartet in that context, and has
redoubled its efforts with Quartet partners to facilitate
contacts between the parties in order to resume
direct and substantive negotiations. Our position is
clear — negotiations are the best way forward. The
European Union reiterates its call on the parties to
demonstrate their commitment to a peaceful solution by
taking actions that can create the environment of trust
required to ensure meaningful negotiations leading
to a comprehensive and lasting peace. The European
Union will continue contributing, including within the
Quartet, to a negotiated solution.
The European Union remains unequivocally
committed to the security of Israel, including with
regard to vital threats in the region. The European Union
is appalled by recurring rocket attacks from Gaza and
condemns in the strongest terms violence deliberately
targeting civilians. The European Union also recalls
its commitment towards Israel’s full integration in the
region.
The viability of a two-State solution must be
maintained. The European Union expresses great
concern about developments on the ground, which
threaten to make a two-State solution impossible.
Those include the marked acceleration of settlement
construction, which remains illegal under international
law, ongoing evictions and house demolitions in East
12-43962

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

Jerusalem, serious limitations on the Palestinian
Authority’s ability to promote the development of
Palestinian communities in Area C, and the Palestinian
Authority’s current financial difficulties.
At the Foreign Affairs Council in May, European
Union Foreign Ministers expressed a clear and strong
position on these issues, forging a common European
Union approach to developments on the ground. They
reiterated that a way must be found through negotiations
to resolve the status of Jerusalem as the future capital
of two States. The EU also recalled the applicability
of international humanitarian law in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including the applicability of the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Times of War.
On the humanitarian front, the most pressing
situation is in Gaza. The EU recalls that the situation
in the Gaza Strip will be unsustainable as long as it
remains politically separated from the West Bank.
While fully recognizing Israel’s legitimate security
needs, the EU urges Israel to take further meaningful
and far-reaching steps allowing for the reconstruction
and recovery of the Gaza Strip. On this occasion, the
European Union underlines its strong support for the
work of all relevant United Nations agencies working
across the occupied Palestinian territory, including the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The European Union continues to call for
intra-Palestinian reconciliation behind President
Mahmoud Abbas, in line with the principles set out in
his speech of 4 May 2011, as an important element for
the unity of a future Palestinian State and for reaching a
two-State solution. The European Union looks forward
to the holding of elections as an important contribution
to Palestinian State-building.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Tilegen (Kazakhstan): I have the honour
to address the Security Council on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) group in
New York.
Our open debate today comes at a time when
the situation in the Middle East, and the occupied
Palestinian territory in particular, is becoming
increasingly unstable. Israel’s military occupation of
Arab lands, its flagrant violations of international law

and its denial of the national rights and aspirations of
the Palestinian people remain major causes of unrest in
the region and pose a serious challenge for this body.
The OIC group affirms that the establishment of a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East requires firm
and prompt action by the Security Council to ensure the
full compliance of Israel, the occupying Power, with
its legal obligations and commitments, and to end its
military occupation. At the same time, the international
community has a special responsibility to assist the
Palestinian people in realizing their national rights
to self-determination, sovereignty and independent
statehood in the territory occupied by Israel since 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as to help find
a just solution for the plight of Palestinian refugees, in
line with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
Prospects for peace and justice in the region are
challenged by Israel’s colonial and discriminatory
policies in Arab-occupied lands. Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to illegally build settlements in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, construct the
apartheid wall, restrict Palestinians’ access to places
of worship, escalate acts of violence by fanatic settlers
against civilian Palestinians, deny the free movement
of people and goods, and confiscate Palestinian homes
and lands. Such violations of international law have
become a daily practice that systematically undermines
prospects for the two-State solution and destabilizes
the region.
Similarly, Israeli illegal practices in East
Jerusalem — including settlement construction,
excavations underneath the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the
depopulation of East Jerusalem of its indigenous
Palestinian citizens, the illegal confiscation of
Palestinian properties, the isolation of East Jerusalem
from its Palestinian environs and the alteration of its
demographic fabric and character — have reached
alarming rates. These illegal Israeli practices are
flagrant violations of international law and pose a
challenge to the international community.
The OIC group reaffirms the centrality of the cause
of Palestine for the entire Islamic world, and stresses
the Palestinian, Arab and Islamic character of occupied
East Jerusalem, as well as the need to fully respect the
sanctity of Islamic and Christian holy places therein. The
OIC group also reaffirms that East Jerusalem remains
an integral part of the Palestinian territory occupied
by Israel since 1967, and that its illegal annexation by

12-439629

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

Israel continues to be rejected and unrecognized by the
international community.
Muslims will never tolerate Israel’s aggressions
against the Al-Aqsa Mosque, one of the most sacred
Islamic sites. Israel’s continuing acts of aggression
against Muslim and Christian holy sites in East
Jerusalem could have serious repercussions on regional
and international peace and security. The United
Nations therefore has a special responsibility to pressure
Israel to put an end to those aggressions and to respect
international law and the Fourth Geneva Convention.
We wish to affirm that an international consensus to
achieve a just and comprehensive solution to the Middle
East conflict requires the enforcement of international
law and the implementation of international legal
resolutions. At this important juncture, acknowledging
and fully supporting Palestinian State-building efforts,
meeting our obligations and maintaining our political
will and financial commitments to the Palestinian
Authority are therefore of special significance.
I wish to reaffirm the full support and solidarity of
the OIC with the Palestinian people in their endeavour
to regain their legitimate and inalienable national rights,
including the rights of return, self-determination and
the establishment of the independent Palestinian State
on their national soil, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Mr. President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor to
the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): I am making this statement on behalf of the
group of Arab States, which endorses the statements
delivered by the representative of Egypt, on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, and the representative of the
Republic of Kazakhstan, on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.
I would like to offer you, Mr. President, our sincere
congratulations on your friendly country’s assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of July
and to thank you for your tireless work during your
presidency.
The topic of this meeting, the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine, is not a new
item on the Security Council’s agenda. This issue has
been with the United Nations since its founding. When
we consider the issues of occupation and colonialism
in the world, which the Organization has discussed
for many years and in many cases has successfully

10

resolved, we cannot help but wonder about the inability
of the Council and the wider international community
to find a solution to the question of Palestine and other
occupied Arab territories. Hope for finding a resolution
is starting to dwindle and has gone through many ups
and downs over the past 60 years. Whenever a ray of
hope appears on the horizon, it is quickly extinguished
by Israel’s intransigence and refusal to abide by the will
of the international community. The human conscience
demands that a solution to the Palestinian question
be found, calling on the political will of the entire
international community to take the most courageous
steps towards that goal.
My first point concerns the stalled negotiations
between the Palestinians and the Israelis, which have
always been and remain the result of Israel’s continued
and accelerating settlement activities, especially its
Judaization of Holy Jerusalem and the surrounding
areas. According to Israeli media reports, on 14 July
Israel decided to construct 130 new housing units in
the Har Homa settlement in Jabal Abu Ghneim on the
road leading south-east from occupied Jerusalem to
Bethlehem. This is part of a wider plan, endorsed by
Israeli authorities, to build over 1,000 housing units
in Jerusalem and Ramallah in the heart of the West
Bank. The continued settlement activity undermines
the peace process, destroys the two-State solution and
remains the main obstacle to any just solution.
The position of the international community
and the Council on the Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories is clear. However, it
needs a strong international political mechanism to
implement it, because the settlements clearly violate
the Fourth Geneva Convention, which considers Israel
an occupying State that may not alter the demographic
character of the area it occupies or confiscate occupied
territories. Moreover, the sixth paragraph of article
49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention states that ”[t]he
Occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts of its
own civilian population into the territory it occupies”.
Israel has not only ignored that article, but has
violated it by providing political and economic
incentives to its residents to move to and live in the
occupied Palestinian territories, thereby changing their
geographic and demographic nature. The establishment
of the settlements has imposed limitations on the
daily lives of Palestinians in the occupied territories
and has left no reasonable room for the long-awaited
establishment of a Palestinian State.

12-43962

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

The second issue which is of equal importance is
the situation of Holy Jerusalem, the first of the two
prayer points and the third holiest shrine for more than
1.5 billion Muslims throughout the world. The Israeli
occupation authorities continue to confiscate land and
demolish the homes of Jerusalemites in order to change
the human nature of the holy city. Israel also continues
to build settlements around the city on the lands of
Palestinian citizens. The occupying Power continually
transfers Israeli settlers to East Jerusalem, forcefully
displacing Palestinian families from their homes and
cancelling their residency permits.

In closing, I cannot fail to mention the seriously
deteriorating situation in the Syrian Arab Republic.
We all know of the recent increased intensity of
killing, whose victims now exceed 17,000. Syria has
also witnessed an increased flow of refugees escaping
the hell of fighting to neighbouring countries. Their
numbers now exceed 200,000 refugees, not to mention
internally displaced persons. The most recent victims
fell in the Al-Hula massacre of 25 May and the Trimseh
massacre of 13 July, in which over 250 civilians were
killed, not to mention the daily acts of killing in which
tens if not hundreds die as a result of these clashes.

In the past, we have spoken in the Council about
Israeli excavation activities around the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. However, the past 10 years have witnessed
unprecedented excavation activity in the area directly
attached to the Mosque, including the Arab village of
Silwan, which was annexed by Israel along with the
holy city of Jerusalem. According to the Centre for
Jerusalem Studies, which is part of Bar-Ilan University
in Israel, the recent activities undertaken by the Israeli
authorities are considered to be the largest excavation
operation ever beneath the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque and its
vicinity. All of these actions are illegitimate and illegal,
according to the resolutions on Jerusalem adopted by
the Security Council and the General Assembly.

All of that leaves no room for doubt that the
Syrian regime is relentlessly killing any Syrian who
opposes it. What encourages the regime to persist in
killing its people is the inability of the Council and the
international community to take any firm measure to
stop it, most recently when the Council failed to adopt
a draft resolution pertaining to Syria last week.

The third issue that I would like to address — following
the eighth anniversary of the adoption of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice of 9 July
2004 on the illegitimacy of the construction of the
wall in the occupied territories — is that of the racist
separation wall built by Israel, the occupying Power.
The wall breaks the West Bank into small and isolated
pockets in a manner that deprives the Palestinian people
of their land and water resources.
The deteriorating situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories at the very least requires the
Security Council to dispatch a mission to Palestine.
In the past, the Security Council has visited many
areas throughout the world, such as Sierra Leone,
Haiti and most recently Liberia, in order to observe
the situation there first-hand. We therefore call on the
Security Council to make such a visit, out of moral and
humanitarian motives and on the basis of its mandate
to maintain international peace and security. We also
call on Council members to respond to the invitation
that has been sent to them from the President of the
Palestinian National Authority, Mr. Mahmoud Abbas,
in that regard.

It appears that those who support the regime in
its criminal actions do not understand the dangers of
their support and its consequences in terms of human
tragedy, which will be remembered for all time. The
Syrian regime would not have killed or displaced those
thousands of people if it had not enjoyed the support
and backing of influential international Powers.
The Arab States have taken a clear and firm
position on the situation in Syria. They have urged the
Syrian regime to abandon the security option and to
adopt the political option, pursuant to the resolutions of
the League of Arab States that formed the basis of the
mandate given to Mr. Kofi Annan, Joint Special Envoy
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States
on Syria. On that basis, and in view of the Security
Council’s inability to take the necessary measures
incumbent upon it by virtue of its mandate and
responsibilities, the Arab States have decided to appeal
to the General Assembly to uphold its responsibilities
in such situations, pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iceland.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): The escalation
of violence in Syria and the failure of the parties to
implement the Annan peace plan are of grave concern.
We were extremely disappointed by the use of the
veto last week (see S/PV.6810) and strongly urge the
Council to continue its deliberations with a view to

12-4396211

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

reaching consensus on how best to prevent further
conflict in Syria, while at the same time taking steps
towards permanent peace. Those steps must address the
legitimate aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people
without regard to ethnicity, religion or gender. Ceasefire
must be a priority and all violence aimed at civilians must
be put to an end immediately by all parties. If nothing
is done, there may be very far-reaching repercussions,
not only for the Syrian people, but for the whole region.
The number of refugees and internally displaced
persons is increasing. This includes Palestinian refugees.
Syria is host to almost half a million Palestinian refugees
who are registered with the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
which will have growing needs for assistance should the
conflict continue to deteriorate.
That leads me to the question of Palestine, with the
Israeli/Palestinian conflict continuing to be the core
issue for peace and security in the Middle East. The
situation in Palestine is unfortunately not receiving
much international attention at the moment, including
on the part of the Security Council. The situation
is, however, far from static. It would be unwise to
assume that it can be put on the back burner much
longer, with developments on the ground continuing
to systematically cement the occupation and seriously
undermine the two-State solution.
Continued and accelerated settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including in East
Jerusalem, remain the main obstacle to peace. The
settlements are illegal and in violation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention. According to the Convention, all
parties are obliged to ensure respect for the Convention.
As a party to the Convention, Iceland calls upon Israel
to adhere to its obligations and stop all settlement
activities. Iceland also urges Israel to cooperate with
the fact-finding team recently appointed by the Human
Rights Council in Geneva to investigate the implications
of the settlements for the civil, political, economic,
social and cultural rights of the Palestinian people in
the occupied Palestinian territory.
We would like to reiterate our encouragement to the
members of the Security Council to accept the invitation
to visit the occupied Palestinian territory at their earliest
convenience. Such a visit would demonstrate goodwill
on behalf of the Council and give Council members
the necessary insight to assist them in addressing this
long-standing problem.

12

At the moment, all avenues continue to seem closed
to the Palestinians, and that in itself is very serious.
There is a need for a breakthrough and, under the
current circumstances, that breakthrough has to come
from the international community. There are plenty of
avenues to be explored. In particular, the international
community could send a clear message on the illegality
of the settlement activities and demand their immediate
halt. It could also demand the immediate lifting of
the blockade on Gaza, which in itself is a collective
punishment and which reached its fifth anniversary in
June.
The Palestinians continue to look to the United
Nations, especially to the Security Council, to help them
realize their right to self-determination. The Security
Council should renew its commitment to settling the
conflict and inform the rest of the membership of the
United Nations on how it intends to proceed.
Iceland fully supports the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and reiterates its call on
the Security Council to recommend to the General
Assembly that Palestine be accepted as the 194th State
Member of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): As we
come together in today’s open debate, my delegation
once again would like to express its conviction
regarding the need and importance of continuing to
support all actions that could lead to the establishment
of justice, peace and stability and an end to violence in
the Middle East.
The Middle East region is witnessing a widespread
transformational thunderstorm that struck across the
region. The region is currently witnessing drastic
changes and people are aspiring to democracy and
opposing dictators, supported by some Powers in the
West. At the same time, the situation in the Middle
East is growing ever more complex. There are more
and more threats of terrorism, extremism and foreign
intervention, which are all impediments to the growth,
development and stability of the region. In this situation,
any miscalculation, poor decision-making or fueling of
the fire will affect the whole region and harm many
people, as well as all stakeholders. For that reason,
one cannot overstate the risks of overemphasizing one
situation and closing one’s eyes to another, similar
situation. That is too risky when, in a given situation,

12-43962

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

there is a deliberate attempt to change the realities on
the ground through force, armed conflict and creating
a fait accompli.
It is clear that there has been an inexorable
radicalization of approaches that could lead to an
ever-growing spiral of violence. For the Middle East,
there are still many pieces of the puzzle to be put together
in order to gain a clear and comprehensive picture of it,
and many themes should be considered in the broader
context. We should see a trend in democratization,
development, economic relations and the energy
market. At the same time, we should be concerned
about extremism, terrorism and ethnic vendettas. What
is needed are revised approaches to the developments
in the Middle East. The West must revise its approach
vis-à-vis the Middle East. There seems to be only one
path ahead of us that could bring peace, stability and
prosperity. That is the path of cooperation rather than
confrontation and genuinely responding to the desires
of the people rather than forcing them to accept what
seems to be an artificial and superficial solution.
On the issue of Palestine, the Security Council and
the world community must spare no effort to prevent the
escalation of tension and confrontation in the occupied
lands of Palestine. The desecration of Muslim holy
places and the expansion of illegal settlements continue
on an unprecedented scale. The Israeli occupying forces
have continued to carry out missile air attacks and
artillery bombardments of civilian areas in the Gaza
Strip, in grave violation of international law, including
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War. The occupying Power
continues to deliberately target and kill Palestinian
civilians, continuing its policy of extrajudicial
executions. Moreover, no place in Gaza is safe from
Israel’s relentless aggression, with even playgrounds
now becoming targets for Israeli warplanes.
In that connection, the Islamic Republic of Iran
supports the action taken by the Non-Aligned Movement
to request Switzerland, in its capacity as depositary
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, to reconvene, at
the earliest opportunity, a conference of the high
contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention,
for the purpose of upholding the obligations and
responsibilities incumbent upon the high contracting
parties in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem.

Regarding the situation in Syria, it is clear that
violence continues on various fronts. We believe that
the current crisis should only be resolved through
national dialogue and reconciliation and in a peaceful
manner. About two weeks, ago Mr. Kofi Annan
visited Iran for the second time and met Iranian senior
officials. Our officials assured the Joint Special Envoy
of Iran’s support for his mission and expressed Iran’s
deep concern over the regional consequences of any
violation of Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We reiterated our readiness to host talks between the
Syrian Government and opposition parties.
There are numerous efforts by certain States to
further complicate the situation in Syria by providing
financial assistance and arms to armed groups.
Sabotage, terror and violence against innocent people
must be brought to an end. The countries of the region
should cooperate with one another to resolve the Syrian
crisis so that the final result would be to the benefit
of the Syrian people, the region and the international
community.
Finally, I hate to respond over and over again to the
accusations by the representative of the Israeli regime,
but I have to. Today the representative of the Zionist
criminal regime levelled baseless allegations against
my country on the issue of the recent terrorist attack
in Bulgaria, as well as impugning the peaceful nature
of Iran’s nuclear activities. It is amazing that, only a
few minutes after the terrorist attack, Israeli officials
announced that Iran was responsible.
While condemning any terrorist attack in whatever
form or manifestation, with regard to the terrorist
attack in Bulgaria I should make it clear that we have
never engaged in and will not engage in such despicable
acts. Such a terrorist operation could only be planned
and carried out by the same regime whose short history
is full of State terrorism operations and assassinations
aimed at implicating others for narrow political gains.
I could provide the Council many examples showing
that that regime has killed its own citizens and innocent
Jewish people during the past couple of decades. As is
well known, Iran is a victim of such operations by the
Israeli regime, and the assassinations of Iran’s nuclear
scientists are fresh cases in our mind.
On the nuclear issue I should say that the Israeli
regime’s clandestine development and unlawful
possession of hundreds of nuclear warheads and a
nuclear weapons arsenal is the unique threat to the

12-4396213

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

region, as well as being a threat to international peace
and security. Unless United Nations organs, including
the Security Council, take meaningful steps to deal
with such criminal policies and practices, hope for
peace and stability in the Middle East will remain a
dream to come true.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your country, Colombia, on presiding
over the Security Council.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela endorses the
statement delivered by Ambassador Mootaz Ahmadein
Khalil, Permanent Representative of the Arab Republic
of Egypt, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Venezuela notes with concern the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
Building a just, comprehensive and lasting peace in that
region is now one of the most urgent challenges for the
international community. Many resolutions have been
adopted by the Council since 1947 on the Palestinian
issue, and none of them has been complied with by the
State of Israel. In fact, the political and military elite
of Israel have established a new apartheid in Palestine:
roads for the exclusive use of the settlers, separate
policies for Palestinian settlements and villages,
endorsement of the aggression of the settlers against
the Palestinian population and segregationist controls
and checkpoints.
The existing illegal settlements, which are
promomoted by the occupying Power, are sabotaging
the peace process. They constitute a grievous violation
of international law and must cease immediately.
Those inhuman practices are implemented by a State
that, paradoxically, calls itself democratic. We express
our deep concern at the tragic plight of thousands of
Palestinian civilians, including children and teenagers,
incarcerated by the Israeli Government without charges
or a fair trial. Those prisoners are kept in inhumane
conditions under the policy of administrative detention.
We stand in solidarity with them and demand their
immediate release.
Unfortunately, there are Powers that support these
abuses, which, by all accounts, violate the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and international

14

humanitarian law, particularly the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Times of War. Venezuela has repeatedly
called on the Security Council to consider, by virtue
of the competencies granted to it by the Charter of
the United Nations, Israel’s failure to comply with its
resolutions on peace and security in the Middle East,
which is causing a humanitarian tragedy with dire
consequences.
Israel’s frequent violations of Lebanese sovereignty
and occupation of the Golan are of great concern. We
demand an end to its blockade of the Gaza Strip, which
has been repudiated by the international community.
We reiterate the urgent need for the Council to
recommend to the General Assembly the admission of
Palestine as a full Member State, in reaffirmation of
the international recognition that the concert of nations
has granted progressively and in greater numbers to
Palestine over more than two decades, and which has
been rightly reflected in forums such as UNESCO. We
firmly support the establishment of an independent,
viable and territorially contiguous Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The conflict affecting the peace-loving Syrian
people is painful and regrettable. The Council must
unambiguously support the implementation of the
six-point plan presented by Joint Special Envoy Kofi
Annan, which has been welcomed by the Syrian
Government. Attempts to undermine that facilitation
and the peace efforts are causing grave concern.
Warmongers do not want peace in Syria. Instead, they
seek to bolster their geopolitical interests through
regime change that, should it materialize, would
destabilize the Middle East region.
Historical experience has shown that resorting
to sanctions and foreign military intervention in the
internal affairs of a sovereign country does not settle,
but instead aggravates, domestic conflict.
Venezuela emphasizes the need to promote a
negotiated solution among the Syrians themselves.
In that context, a ceasefire is urgently needed. It is
deplorable that, rather than encourage peace and
support the efforts of those sincerely seeking peace,
foreign factions are inciting the most extremist factions
that consider violence the only means of achieving their
purposes. We reiterate that only political dialogue and
diplomatic negotiations can contribute to settling the
grave conflict affecting the Syrian people.

12-43962

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

We salute those countries that, with respect to
Syria, have firmly defended before the Security
Council the principles of sovereignty, independence,
self-determination and territorial integrity enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. We also salute those
countries that are committed to peace and to promoting
dialogue among the parties, and have continued to make
balanced proposals to address the Syrian situation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor to
the representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Hamadi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and your successful
organization of its work, including today’s meeting. I
also thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing this
morning.
Israel, the occupying Power, has continued its policy
of non-compliance with all resolutions of international
legitimacy and of imposing a fait accompli. One of
the worst aspects of that policy has been manifested
through measures taken by the Israeli authorities to
Judaize Jerusalem and to obliterate the Arab and Islamic
character of that holy city. In that context, we reiterate
that those Israeli actions are null and void and without
any legal basis. Jerusalem remains an Arab, Islamic and
Christian city with mosques and churches, and there
could be no Palestinian State without Jerusalem and no
Jerusalem without the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Those policies of imposing a fait accompli carried
out by the Israeli authorities are also manifested in
the building of settlements on Palestinian territories.
We were alarmed to learn of Israel’s recent attempts
to legitimize the outposts through the establishment
of the so-called Levy Committee, which has made
recommendations that run counter to international law
and international legitimacy.
Two decades after the Oslo accords, Israel has
continued to speak about its search for peace and to call
on Palestinian leaders to resume negotiations. However,
it also continues to carry out policies that run counter
to all of that. How could negotiations be successful in
the light of Israel’s continuing settlement policies and
the Security Council’s ongoing inability to assume its
responsibilities with regard to peace in the Middle East,
or in the absence of a strong basis for the negotiations?
How could they be resumed? How could they bear fruit
while Israel continues to detain thousands of people

and to subject them to unjust and cruel conditions?
How can we speak of trust between the Palestinian and
Israeli parties when Israel has maintained its strangling
blockade against the Gaza Strip for the past five years?
We renew our call on the members of the Security
Council, the members of the Quartet and those influential
countries to pressure Israel to end its settlement policies
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including in East
Jerusalem, and put an end to the blockade against the
Gaza Strip. Unless those demands are met, there will
be no basis for the resumption of negotiations between
the Israelis and the Palestinians. If the international
community is unanimous with respect to the ultimate
solution, namely, the two-State solution, then rejecting
recognition of the State of Palestine is contrary to that
call.
Qatar takes this opportunity to urge all Member
States to assist the Palestinian State in gaining
membership to the Organization in recognition of the
positive contribution that this would make towards
establishing a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
in the Middle East. My delegation also reiterates that
the solution to the crisis in the Middle East depends
upon Israel’s withdrawal from all of the occupied
Palestinian and Arab territories, including the occupied
Syrian Golan and the remaining occupied Lebanese
territories. Israel must end all of its violations of
Lebanese sovereignty, international law and resolution
1701 (2006).
The Syrian people continue to be subjected to their
Government’s systematic cruelty in violation of their
rights. Regrettably, instead of assuming responsibility
for its people, the Government has adopted a
scorch-and-burn policy by using heavy artillery,
attack helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft, which has
led some Syrians to take up arms in self-defence. The
Syrian regime therefore bears full responsibility for the
situation in Syria today.
The regime has not halted its terribly brutal
and indiscriminate shelling of the capital and cities
throughout the country, including schools, hospitals,
mosques and churches. To add insult to injury, it has
threatened — through a spokesperson of the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs — to use chemical and bacteriological
weapons. It has gone so far as to highlight its threat to
use internationally prohibited weapons against Syrian
villages. Those threats reflect an extremely dangerous
escalation and indicate that the regime has crossed all

12-4396215

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

red lines and abnegated all responsibility. I cannot fail
to mention several announcements that threaten to set
fire to the entire region. The situation has become a
threat to the security of the region and to the entire
international community. The international community
must take urgent steps to adequately confront those
regional and international threats.
We recall that the International Committee of the
Red Cross has announced that its criteria and definition
of civil war are now applicable to the crisis in Syria.
Given those extremely serious considerations, my
delegation further regrets the Council’s inability to
effectively deal with the Syrian crisis in a manner that
promotes the maintenance of international peace and
security.
Consequently, Member States have been obliged to
adopt various measures in order to actively address the
crisis in accordance with international laws and codes
of conduct. Along those lines, the Group of Arab States
will request the General Assembly in New York to deal
with the serious threat of the Syrian crisis. We also note
that the Joint Special Envoy and his initiative will be
effective only if Syria acts to ensure a transitional period
that will guarantee the establishment of a democratic,
pluralistic Syrian State in which all citizens are equal
before the law and all rights and freedoms are respected.
History is fraught with examples of the international
community’s failure to bear its moral responsibility in
the face of catastrophe. Today, we are all reminded of
our responsibility to put an end to the bloodshed of
thousands of innocent Syrians and to play a positive and
constructive role in finding a solution to the crisis while
maintaining the unity of the Syrian people and Syria’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity,
in full respect for the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Abdou Salam Diallo,
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): At the outset, I wish to
condemn in the strongest possible terms the murderous
18 July bombing of a bus carrying Israeli tourists at
Burgas airport in Bulgaria. That cowardly attack on
innocent people provided a stark reminder of the level
of commitment we must demonstrate against terrorism
and its sponsors.

16

I would also like, on behalf of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, to thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to address the Council on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question, and
in particular for the outstanding manner in which you
have conducted the Council’s work during the month
of July.
With all the acute crises and upheavals that are taking
place in the region, it would be wrong to underestimate
the threats posed to international peace and security by
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The current situation
of neither war nor peace is unsustainable. Rather than
focus on conflict management, we must strengthen our
efforts to seek a long-term solution.
In that respect, it is high time to return to genuine
negotiations. Unfortunately, the ongoing settlement
activities constitute a major obstacle on the path to
peace. Moreover, the creation of a committee by the
Israeli Government with the sole purpose of finding
arguments to legitimize the occupation and settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory has not
helped to build confidence among the parties concerned.
I recall that the deliberate policy of establishing
illegal settlements is inevitably accompanied by the
destruction of Palestinian homes. Is it possible to truly
measure the human tragedy of those who have suffered
the double heartbreak of the occupation and the loss of
their homes?
A negotiated settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict must be based on international law. The
Committee calls on Israel to demonstrate its good faith
by recognizing the 1967 borders, which are the basis of
a peaceful settlement under resolution 242 (1967), and
by adopting minimal confidence-building measures,
including a halt to the illegal settlement activities and
the release of Palestinian prisoners.
The Quartet should stay focused on ensuring
respect for the timetable it promulgated last year. At the
same time, without Palestinian reconciliation centred
on the leadership of President Abbas, there will be no
two-State solution. We call on all key international and
regional actors to redouble their efforts in support of
Palestinian unity.
The debilitating financial crisis affecting the
Palestinian Authority has reached unprecedented
proportions. Generous support from donors will be
needed to continue to support Palestinian State-building

12-43962

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

efforts. It is also time to take a fresh look at Palestine’s
application for admission to membership of the United
Nations. It deserves to be evaluated on its merits,
expeditiously and with an objective and open mind.
For its part, our Committee has continued to
contribute constructively towards our shared goal of two
States living in peace and security. The international
meeting we convened in April sounded an early warning
about the critical situation of Palestinian prisoners, and
we are pleased to note that other entities of the United
Nations system have engaged on the issue since then.
Our International Meeting on the Question of
Palestine in Paris in late May, followed by the Meeting
of Civil Society in Support of Israeli-Palestinian Peace
in early June, focused on the role of women and youth
in support of peace and on the use of social media. The
sense of frustration with the current situation conveyed
by participants served as a timely wake-up call that the
status quo should not be taken for granted.
Our most recent Asia and Pacific Meeting in Support
of Israeli-Palestinian Peace, held in Bangkok earlier
this month, focused on obstacles to achieving peace,
in particular the settlements, and discussed regional
strategies to ensure compliance in that context with
international law. It was also felt by participants that
the Security Council and the high contracting parties
to the Fourth Geneva Convention must honour their
obligations. The Human Rights Council’s fact-finding
mission was welcomed and seen as a first step towards
abiding by the principle of accountability.
In conclusion, the Committee will continue to work
within the framework of its mandate to mobilize all
stakeholders in the international community in order to
uphold the principle of two States living side by side in
peace and security and within secure and internationally
recognized borders.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.

including the Palestinian question. Allow me to say
frankly that this event has become, regrettably, a routine
matter — I am tempted to say merely lip service. That
is not due to insufficient importance accorded to the
Palestine question, which my country considers to
be undoubtedly one of the fundamental issues on the
agenda of the United Nations and those of its bodies.
The issue requires sustained, genuine interest on the
part of all Member States until the Palestinian people
regain their rights and peace is restored in the region.
The problem lies in the absence of tangible,
meaningful results from those periodic meetings,
as well as major, bold decisions that would make
such meetings — which include high-level officials
of the United Nations Secretariat — worthwhile.
The Palestinian people do not need endless hours of
discussion every two or three months on the Palestinian
issue, at least not until the discussions produce some
tangible results on the ground.
My country has therefore called for establishing a
regular schedule for such meetings, as well as for new
measures and mechanisms to be considered with the
goal of updating and better aligning the discussions with
the daily suffering and reality of the Palestinian people.
The meetings should include active deliberations aimed
at finalized resolutions and results to follow up the
discussions.
Important, decisive events are now occurring
in our region, accompanied by major challenges that
have political, security and economic impacts. It is
well known that the situation in the Middle East has
produced repercussions on issues of international peace
and security, as well as on the international economic
situation. At the same time, some consider those
challenges to be cause or justification for ignoring the
Palestinian question, even if only temporarily. Such a
pretext can obscure issues related to the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including violations
of every sort carried out by the Israeli occupying
authorities. We consider that a colossal strategic error.

Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to warmly congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, at a time when the Council has
before it an agenda replete with important issues and
developments. I also wish to commend your skilful
stewardship of the Council’s deliberations.

All attempts, whether deliberate or not, to undermine
or put off the question of Palestine owing to tensions
prevailing in the region would only further complicate
the situation; whereas resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict would be key to bringing about lasting stability
to the Middle East.

We are meeting today in the context of a periodic
public debate on the situation in the Middle East,

The Israeli authorities are taking advantage of
current regional events in order to entrench their

12-4396217

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

oppressive colonial policy. They have continued their
status quo policy of devouring ever greater tracts of
Palestinian land, establishing numerous settlements
and asphyxiating our Palestinian brothers and
sisters everywhere — including in the holy city of
Jerusalem — thereby altering Palestine’s demographic,
geographic and religious character. It is noteworthy that
Israel, the occupying Power, is acting in that fashion at
a time when it should be sending a reassuring message
that the country is seriously pursuing, as indicated in its
statements and decisions, its purported strategic choice
of peace over its colonialist policy, which we resolutely
condemn.
The era of colonialism and occupation ended
decades ago. We can no longer act in the same fashion
with respect to freedoms when the people of a region
have cast off the domestic oppression that contributed
to their economic difficulties. At the same time,
the Palestinian people continue to face the same
predicament and continue to fight for each and every
fundamental right that every one of us holds dear. Those
are the basic human rights, including the right to live in
freedom and dignity, which we all defend with every
fiber of our being owing to our profound respect for the
principles of the Organization, which itself symbolizes
the defence of the weak and the oppressed who are
victims of injustice.
In that context, there is only one choice, namely,
to find an immediate solution to the question of
Palestine based on international consensus and aimed
at establishing a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
with two States living side by side in peace and security
within the pre-1967 borders. At present, Israel, the
occupying Power, is pursuing a policy of collective
punishment. That has been recognized for decades now.
It is not something that was simply made up; rather, it is
rooted in a set of facts that have been documented over
many years.
On 13 June, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs stated in a press release that
(spoke in English)
“[t]he blockade of Gaza … has had a devastating
impact on the lives and livelihoods of the 1.6 million
Palestinians who reside there.”
She went on to say that
“[t]his amounts to a collective punishment of all
those living in Gaza and is a denial of basic human
rights in contravention of international law.”
18

(spoke in Arabic)
We owe it to ourselves, to the world and to present
and future generations to not justify those acts and to
not fail to resolve the Arab-Israeli-Palestinian question.
We are witnessing scandalous, real violations of
international law, legal instruments, norms and values
of every sort. We must properly assess international
relations and determine appropriate responsibilities
for perpetrators and victims. How can we ignore all
of those instruments? How can we struggle to decide
who is the aggressor and who is the object of the
aggression? We cannot allow one State to violate all of
those instruments with impunity as if any State were
above the rule of law.
The follow-up committee on the Arab Peace
Initiative met recently in Doha to review developments
on the Palestinian question. It adopted a communiqué
in which it condemned the Israeli settlement policy
and reasserted that the resumption of direct peace
negotiations required an end to the illegal settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. The communiqué also referred to Palestinian
prisoners and detainees in Israeli jails and called for a
resolution of that problem. It further called for an end to
the unjust blockade of Gaza and for an investigation into
the circumstances of the death of the late President of
the Palestinian National Authority, Mr. Yasser Arafat.
These decisions and positions have prompted
us to work together on the Palestinian question.
Notwithstanding its political complexity, history and
the conflict of external interests, it remains an issue
of justice, historic rights and moral humanitarianism.
The solution is not difficult; it is not impossible.
The solution requires genuine will. The solution is
straightforward — the Palestinian people must exercise
their rights, beginning with their natural right to live in
freedom and dignity and the return of their territories,
allowing them to live in a State side by side with Israel
in peace and security.
Then the region will enter a new era, which in turn
will see the advent of a better future, not just for those
two peoples, but for the world as a whole. It would
prevent further tensions and frustrations that may
cause us to lose any hope of achieving peace. There is
thus an extremely urgent need to resolve the Palestinian
question and to end this grave deadlock if the talks do
not resume. We hope that the international community
will be resolute in the face of ongoing Israeli violations
and breaches.
12-43962

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

We hope that the fraternal Arab peoples will
recover their occupied territories. We should have a
sound and serious framework without manipulation
or attempts to exploit these talks for purely political
purposes at the expense of the oppressed Palestinian
people. We hope that this will be the first step towards
the official recognition of Palestine as an independent
and full Member of our Organization. That we feel is
the essential element for genuine peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): As members of the
Council know, Norway chairs the donor support group
for the Palestinian territory. We are taking the floor
today to underline the serious dangers threatening the
foundations of a viable Palestinian State.
First, the Palestinian Authority (PA) is facing a
grave financial crisis. This is due to decline in economic
growth and a reduction of donor contributions. It could
push the PA into a full financial crisis within the
coming months. The PA has accumulated significant
debt and faces difficulties in paying salaries. Since the
establishment of the PA, and in particular since the Paris
Conference in 2007, the Palestinians have achieved
tremendous institutional progress towards building a
viable Palestinian State. Today these achievements are
in jeopardy.
Secondly, peace negotiations are at an impasse.
The expansion of Israeli settlements in the West Bank
persists, in grave violation of international law. That
illegal activity undermines efforts to resume peace
negotiations and threatens the two-State solution. The
scope and scale of settlements and the encirclement
of East Jerusalem are the most severe impediments to
peace. Those unlawful and unilateral acts, aiming at
changing the situation on the ground and pre-empting the
outcome of negotiations must stop. There is a grave risk
that further expansion of the settlements could trigger
waves of uncontrolled unrest in the neighbourhoods and
lead to a breakdown of current security mechanisms.
When the donor support group for the Palestinian
territory meets on 23 September here in New York, it
will be against that backdrop. The main topic of the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee meeting will be to address the
key challenges of the Palestinian economy and how to
avoid an aggravated financial crisis in the short term.
Immediate budgetary needs must be met as soon as
possible.

But beyond that, stimulating sustainable economic
growth is key. The Palestinian private sector must be
allowed to develop and engage in trade internally in
the Palestinian territory, as well as with its neighbours.
Many restrictions on the movement of goods in and
out of the West Bank and Gaza are crippling economic
activity and must be lifted. Opportunities for private
sector development also in Area C must be stimulated.
Norway commends those donors that have
contributed to covering the PA’s recurrent deficit. The
European Union’s front-loading of its aid was pivotal
and has helped to keep the PA’s budget somehow afloat.
Also, recent contributions from Saudi Arabia enabled
the PA to pay, albeit with a delay, full salaries prior to
the holy month of Ramadan.
However, the outlook for the remainder of the
budget year looks grim, unless further contributions
are made. This is not the time to hold back funds
and to jeopardize financial stability in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Too much is at stake.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to express once
again its great concern at the repeated feverish attempts
of certain delegations to distract the Security Council’s
deliberations of the item on its agenda, the situation in
the Middle East, from the main objective and reason
for which it was included, namely, putting an end to the
Israeli occupation of Arab territories and the settlement
of the Arab-Israeli conflict, based on the well-known
terms of reference for peace.
Some are attempting to cover up the failure to find
a solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict, due to Israeli
intransigence, supported by some influential countries,
by involving other issues within the discussion of the
item with the intention of weakening the well-known
and established terms of reference for putting an end
to the Israeli occupation of Arab territories, and to
thwart the establishment of a Palestinian State within
the borders of 4 June 1967, with Jerusalem as its capital.
That is how we understand the substance of this
agenda item. Therefore, I will confine myself to the
substance of the item under discussion. I will not
respond to the false claims and allegations made by
certain delegations against my country, Syria, at this

12-4396219

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

meeting. I will not fall into the trap, about which Syria
has repeatedly warned over many years, of involving
the Council in manipulations and manoeuvres that
could undermine Arab-Arab relations and establish
delusional fronts that can only benefit Israel and
its protectors. I would like to put an observation on
record — those who have most harmed the discussion
of this agenda item, the situation in the Middle East,
are certain Arab delegations that have consistently tried
to kill the spirit of the item in a manner that benefits
Israel’s continued occupation of Arab territories at the
expense of the legitimate rights of the Arab people.
The fact of the matter, regrettably, indicates once
again that there is a systematic Israeli policy — which
some would not like to subject to standards of international
accountability — of violations and practices that
contradict the absolute minimum of human rights
principles, international humanitarian law and all
moral and humanitarian standards. Israel, as we well
know, continues to disregard hundreds of resolutions
adopted by the United Nations since 1948 calling on the
occupying Power to withdraw from all occupied Arab
territories to the borders of 4 June 1967, with a view
to establishing a just, lasting and comprehensive peace.
The reason behind the Israeli challenge can be
attributed to the absence of any serious deterrent to
Israel, which benefits from the promotion of the culture
of impunity and from putting itself above the law due to
the direct protection provided to it by certain influential
States. Those States that claim to be concerned with
international law and human rights are the same States
that guarantee Israel illegitimate immunity for all its
crimes during decades of occupation of Arab territories.
They are the same States that have provided Israel with
nuclear weapons and submarines capable of launching
nuclear weapons. They are the same States that have
defended Israel’s failure to implement the resolution
on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of
weapons of mass destruction, adopted at the 1995
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(see NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I), Annex).
In that context, the Security Council regrettably
has not been able to rise up to its responsibilities in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
No progress has been achieved in that regard. On the
contrary, the situation has deteriorated since the United
Nations has become a disabled second fiddle to the
international Quartet with regard to the continued

20

escalation of aggression by Israel and the uncontrolled
and unprecedented settler activity, political intransigence
and preparation for new aggression in the coming days.
The Israeli escalation enjoys the political, military
and unlimited financial and media support of certain
influential States that are originally responsible for all
the tensions and conflicts in our region.
It may be useful to recall here that just yesterday,
in Brussels, the European Union entered into around
60 new agreements of cooperation with Israel, in spite
of Israel’s violations of human rights and its policies
of aggression and settlement activity contravening
international law. Nevertheless, this morning we have
listened to the statements made by some colleagues,
ambassadors of European countries, in which they
spoke of the fact that the Palestinian State is now being
called Area C in the deliberations of the Council. Later
on, it will become Street A, B and C and not Area C.
Area C would be the Palestinian State. The Palestinian
State is no longer there.
Israel continues to refuse to return the occupied
Syrian Golan to its motherland, Syria, in flagrant
violation of resolution 497 (1981), which declares
Israel’s annexation of the Syrian Golan null and void
and without legal basis. Israel also pursues its settler
policies, its State terrorism and the exercise of policies
of discrimination and oppression against the Syrian
inhabitants of the Golan. It continues to dismember
the Golan, build the separation wall and establish
the segregationist isolation of the Golan east of the
occupied Majd al-Shams village.
We have informed the Secretary-General and
the members of the Security Council of all of
those violations; we sent our most recent official
communication on 17 July. However, and most
regrettably, our complaints have fallen on deaf ears.
Not only did the representatives of the Secretariat
not address those serious Israeli violations in their
monthly media briefings to the Security Council under
the agenda item “The situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question”, but they also did
not refer to the Syrian Golan at all, including the threat
made by the Israeli Minister of Defence two days ago
that the Golan is a candidate for aggression and the
potential trigger of a full-scale war that would actually
backfire against Israel itself.
That approach by the representatives of the
Secretariat, which is repeatedly and blatantly collusive,

12-43962

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

represents a clear violation of the Secretariat’s duties to
brief the members of the Security Council on these and
related developments in accordance with resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981). The simplest
lesson that we can draw from all of this is that this
approach has encouraged Israel to maintain its policies
of aggression and occupation and to keep the truth from
the members of the Security Council and the United
Nations.
There is another point that I would like to make
clear at this juncture concerning the reckless attempts
of certain countries to harm brotherly relations between
Lebanon and Syria. Violations of Syrian sovereignty by
armed terrorist groups from Lebanese territory have
recently increased. I have with me an official list of 114
cases of weapons smuggling from Lebanese into Syrian
territory; there is none in the opposite direction. Those
114 cases are only the ones we know about, and they all
took place within a period of only two months, from
1 May to 24 July.
In that context, we do not need to stress the strong
bilateral Lebanese and Syrian ties, and we welcome the
measures taken by the Lebanese authorities in charge
of monitoring the common borders to prevent arms
smuggling to Syria and to stop all terrorists. However,
the problem lies in the actions taken not by the Lebanese
Government but by certain political parties in Lebanon
that finance, shelter and support those armed groups and
help them to smuggle weapons from Lebanon to Syria
to carry out terrorist operations that would prolong the
bloodshed and the conflict among innocent civilians and
members of the military. Those actions enjoy the direct
intelligence, military, media and financial support of
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and other countries, such as the
United States and France, which provide these armed
groups with sophisticated equipment.
Meanwhile, they claim that the equipment is
non-lethal, when in fact it is being used to facilitate
terrorist operations in Syria, costing the lives of
thousands of innocent Syrians, civilian and military
alike. We have provided the Secretariat and the members
of the Council with scores of documents and evidence
about armed incursions into Syria originating in
Lebanon and other neighbouring States. That reality has
been confirmed by the international media, including
through video and audio evidence, most recently in
an article in today’s New York Times. However, the
representative of the Secretariat failed to mention any

of these facts in his briefing, to the great detriment of
the Secretariat’s credibility.
In conclusion, the representatives of Qatar and
Saudi Arabia shed crocodile tears over the suffering
of the Syrian people. The Syrian blood being spilled
hourly by the Qatari-Saudi collusion — through direct
military, financial, diplomatic and political interference
and the media — should suffice in the eyes of any
observer to contradict the outrageous claims made on
the Al-Jazeera and Al-Arabiya satellite channels and
by the officials of those two countries, to which Syria
has never done any harm. That coverage and those
statements clearly unmask the political approach of
the politicians of those two countries. Qatari and Saudi
foreign policy should have supported the Kofi Annan
plan and the Geneva document, instead of conspiring to
undermine both while escalating their attacks on Syria
and its interests in the General Assembly, having failed
to do so in the Security Council.
The Syrian people will find their own wellspring,
free of the petro-dollar spigot, Wahhabist-Salafist
forces and Western hegemony over their political fate
and options. I call on the Governments of Qatar and
Saudi Arabia to immediately respond to the demands
of their own people and to their internal and external
oppositions. Saudi civilians have suffered greatly
from oppression by the military and security forces
in Al-Qatif and Al-Awamiya. More than 250 Qatari
opposition figures — some of them members of the
ruling family — have made legitimate demands
for reform and for an end to the squandering of the
Qatari people’s money and resources on attacks and
conspiracies against other Arab and Islamic peoples.
Qatar and Saudi Arabia are no example for anyone to
follow when it comes to democracy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s important debate at this critical
time. The Sri Lankan delegation associates itself with
the statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The year 2012 has so far turned out to be a year
of political stagnation for the Palestinian-Israeli peace
process, unfortunately overshadowed by momentous
international and regional developments. Even though
the objective of a comprehensive peace in the region
continues to be elusive, we must not give up on the

12-4396221

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

peace process. We are here in this Chamber not to pay
lip service but to ensure that the world does not forget
the plight of the Palestinians, as well as to urge both
parties to the Palestinian issue to commit to a peaceful
settlement. Hope endures if intentions and efforts are
true.
The United Nations Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories recently concluded its fact-finding mission
to Jordan, Egypt and Gaza. As the Chair of the Special
Committee, I will present the mission report to the
General Assembly in November, with its observations
and recommendations on improving the human rights
situation in the occupied territories. There are essential
steps that need to be taken to improve the situation on
the ground, as well as for confidence-building. In the
meantime, let me state that, in the light of the testimony
received by the Committee, the situation on the ground,
especially in Gaza, is unsustainable.
The blockade of Gaza, although marginally
alleviated recently, is having a devastating effect on
ordinary people, particularly the young. Approximately
80 per cent of families in Gaza are dependent on
humanitarian aid from the United Nations for their
survival. Prospects for long-term economic growth are
meagre, given the stifling restrictions on imports and
exports. Having to rely on illegal smuggling through
100 tunnels, essentially due to the blockade, is among
the indignities experienced by the Gaza Palestinians.
That is worrying, as the economic sustainability of the
Gaza Palestinians would be an essential component of
any peace plan, and the blockade is denying them any
possibility of developing their economy. We urge Israel
to lift its restrictions within the framework of resolution
1860 (2009).
Israel’s illegal settlement activity is contrary to
international law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, relevant United Nations resolutions and
the International Court of Justice advisory opinion, as
well as being contrary to Israel’s commitments under
the Road Map. World opinion has called for a cessation
of settlement activity. That call must be heeded. At
the meeting of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People held on
16 May, we heard of the unfortunate developments that
continue to take place in the Jordan Valley, displacing
many Palestinian families and destroying their
livelihoods. The Bedouin are particularly affected.

22

We reiterate that the international legal framework
is the final guarantor of our rights. It protects all of
us. The marginalization and oppression of Palestinians
in their own land creates a charged environment. The
mass imprisonment of Palestinians, including children,
and the routine demolition of houses, which continues
unabated, are unacceptable. Such actions are eroding
the prospects for a two-State solution and sap away
necessary confidence. Israel is obliged by international
humanitarian law to protect the Palestinian civilian
population in the occupied territories. Violence
between Israeli settlers and Palestinians has become
more commonplace. We also note that the firing of
rockets from Gaza into Israel and indiscriminate
attacks against Israeli civilians will only further widen
the gap between the parties.
Against this background, there is an urgent need
for mutual confidence-building measures in support of
efforts to resume dialogue and substantive negotiations,
as the Middle East Quartet has continued to stress.
The political unity and economic advancement of the
Palestinian people will contribute to the viability of the
two-State solution. Palestinian internal reconciliation
efforts must continue, and regional support is vital.
Therefore, we urge leaders on all sides, as well as
regional leaders, to infuse renewed vigour into the peace
process. Sri Lanka also supports the implementation
of the General Assembly’s resolutions regarding the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to statehood
and the attainment of a two-State solution on the basis
of the 1967 borders. We hope that the State of Palestine
will soon be able to take its rightful place among the
Members of the United Nations and that peace, dignity
and security will be restored to all parties.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba wholeheartedly endorses the statement made by
the Ambassador of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
At various times of the year, the Security Council
resumes this cyclical debate on the Middle East, but
the problems persist or, worse still, deteriorate. The
situation in the Middle East remains deplorable. Israel’s
ongoing occupation of the Palestinian and other Arab
territories is the main obstacle to achieving a just,
lasting and comprehensive solution in the region.
Palestinian families suffer the consequences of
the Israeli occupation. Each year, the relevant agencies
12-43962

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

of the United Nations receive reports of flagrant
violations of the human rights of the Palestinian people,
including children, women and the elderly. Recently,
the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the occupied Palestinian territories reported
that, in the course of this year, the Israeli authorities
have demolished more than 330 structures, and that
half of the 536 Palestinians displaced in 2012 are
children. This situation is unacceptable. Thousands of
Palestinian political prisoners remain in jail, victims of
the arbitrary actions of the Israeli authorities. Several
have gone on hunger strike in order to denounce the
exactions and injustice inflicted upon them.
None of these facts generates headlines or
campaigns in the major international press, nor are they
presented to the Council by members that encourage
wars and occupations against countries of the South,
giving no thought to the consequences of their actions
for the very civilians whom they claim to protect. The
Security Council must play its due role in defence of
international peace and security by adopting concrete,
practical measures to ensure that Israel ends its abuses
against the Palestinian people.
Israel’s conduct deliberately flouts the resolutions
of the United Nations and international law. It poses a
threat to regional and international peace and security,
and violates the human rights of an entire people with
flagrant, systematic and inhuman abuses that this organ
should condemn. Israel must immediately withdraw its
illegal presence in the Palestinian territories it occupies,
ignoring the demands of the international community. It
must cease the construction of settlements in occupied
Palestine. It should end its attacks and indiscriminate
use of military force against Palestinian civilians,
and unconditionally and fully lift its cruel and illegal
blockade of Gaza.
Cuba reiterates its support for Palestine’s request
for admission as a full State Member of the United
Nations. That request has so far come to naught because
of the threat of a veto from one permanent member of
the Security Council, despite the fact that the State of
Palestine already enjoys the recognition of more than
130 countries in all regions of the world. The Security
Council must without further delay take a positive stand
on this issue, in accordance with the manifest wish of
the overwhelming majority of the States Members of
the Organization.
The complicit silence of some Powers on the
Council perpetuates the current state of impunity

enjoyed by the Israeli Government. Cuba reaffirms
its rejection of the illegal construction and expansion
of Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan since 1967,
which violate international law and the Charter and
resolutions of the United Nations.
Cuba reaffirms its position in support of a just and
lasting peace for all the peoples of the Middle East that
would end Israel’s occupation of all Arab territories
and guarantee the exercise of the self-determination of
the Palestinian people through the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
Cuba is closely monitoring the situation concerning
Syria and its international repercussions, aware that
the information available is disparate, imprecise and
frequently manipulated. We are alarmed by the appeals
of those who champion regime change in Syria and
advocate the use of force and violence, rather than
contributing to dialogue and negotiation among all
the parties. Cuba reaffirms its rejection of policies
of interference and destabilization in Syria aimed at
imposing regime change.
The Security Council was not conceived as and
cannot act as an instrument for triggering regime
change in any country. Its obligation is to promote
peace, not violence; it is to avoid destabilization and
protect the innocent, not to exploit and manipulate them
for geopolitical ends. These are also the responsibilities
of the United Nations as a whole. We support the
endeavours under way to achieve a peaceful settlement
of the situation in that country, in full respect for
its sovereign rights. The Security Council should
unanimously direct its efforts to that end.
Cuba shares the concern over the loss of innocent
life in Syria and elsewhere. At the same time, we
reiterate our categorical rejection of any form of
external interference, direct and indirect alike,
including logistical support for irregular armed groups.
An intervention by external forces in Syria would
have grave consequences for international peace and
security, especially in the Middle East. Taking into
account the experience of and precedents set by recent
cases, in which clear manipulation of the United Nations
Charter, double standards and flagrant violations of
international law have been in evidence, we reaffirm
our rejection of any attempt to undermine Syria’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The role of the international community, at this time
of difficulty for one Member State, is to help safeguard

12-4396223

S/PV.6816 (Resumption 1)

peace and stability in that country. We reiterate our
confidence in the ability of the Syrian people and
Government to resolve their own internal problems
without external interference. We demand full respect
for the free self-determination and sovereignty of that
Arab country.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor to
the representative of the Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): The Maldives congratulates
Colombia on having assumed the presidency of the
Security Council, and commends the work it has
completed to date. We further thank Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry,
for his briefing.
One year ago, in an open debate on this very
same topic, the Maldives called for peace in Syria, for
settlement activity in the occupied territories to cease,
and for the recognition of the sovereign and independent
Palestinian State. It is unfortunate to note again today
that the international community has been unable to
make any meaningful progress on these issues.
Every day we hear tragic news of the number of
deaths in Syria. We hear the stories of the many atrocities
committed. Many more thousands of people are being
displaced as a result of the ongoing violence. That is
precisely the reason that the issue is not a domestic one,
but one that calls for an internationally led remedy. It is
now clear that, with the increasing number of incidents
occurring along the border with Lebanon, the violence
in Syria is bound to destabilize the entire region.
The Maldives applauds the efforts of Mr. Kofi
Annan, Join Special Envoy of the League of Arab
States and the United Nations, as well as those of the
United Nations Supervision Mission. Yet, regrettably,
the United Nations is seen as helpless in giving hope
to the people of Syria, who are paying the price of the
conflict. It is our hope that the Security Council can
come up with an effective response to address the need
of the hour, before the situation spins out of control. In
this, the holiest month of the Islamic calendar, we pray
for a way forward. Let peace find its way.
Trying to find peace in the Middle East has become
the quest of our generation. Yet, it is also increasingly

24

clear that the possibility for a two-State solution
is diminishing the longer that the peace process is
stalled. As Special Coordinator Serry emphasized, the
continued Israeli settlement activity is transforming the
very demographics of the two nations into one that is
inherently Israeli. The Maldives believes that the single
most important issue concerning peace in the Middle
East is the recognition of Palestine as an independent
sovereign State. We do not believe that there can be
a meaningful dialogue without the acceptance of
statehood.
My delegation fails to understand how the peace
process in the Middle East could continue while it is
absolutely undermined by the existence of an unequal
power relationship. While that dynamic will not change
until real peace is established, we as the United Nations
have an obligation to level the playing field. We have an
obligation to ensure that all elected Governments have
the representation that is equal to the mandate given to
them by their people.
The Maldives believes that Palestine has a
Government that is capable of administering its affairs,
and an administration that is ready to take on the full
burden of governance. The only way forward, therefore,
is through international recognition of Palestine as
a State, with a view to Palestinians negotiating their
own interests and concentrating on developing their
own social and economic infrastructure, while being at
peace with the State of Israel.
After six decades of inaction, it is time to move
forward. The Maldives calls on the international
community, and especially the members of the Council,
to support three generations of Palestinians who
have lived their lives under the yoke of occupation.
The United Nations has an obligation to protect the
full enjoyment of rights of the Palestinian people by
supporting a free and independent Palestinian State.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

12-43962
