S/PRST/2010/13

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 July 2010
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6355th meeting of the Security Council, held on 9 July 2010, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Letter dated 4 June
2010 from the Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2010/281) and other
relevant letters”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council notes the letter dated 4 June 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea (ROK) to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2010/281), and
the letter dated 8 June 2010 from the Permanent Representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2010/294).
“The Security Council deplores the attack on 26 March 2010 which led
to the sinking of the ROK naval ship, the Cheonan, resulting in the tragic loss
of 46 lives.
“The Security Council determines that such an incident endangers peace
and security in the region and beyond.
“The Security Council deplores the loss of life and injuries and expresses
its deep sympathy and condolences to the victims and their families and to the
people and Government of the ROK, and calls for appropriate and peaceful
measures to be taken against those responsible for the incident aimed at the
peaceful settlement of the issue in accordance with the UN Charter and all
other relevant provisions of international law.
“In view of the findings of the Joint Civilian-Military Investigation
Group led by the ROK with the participation of five nations, which concluded
that the DPRK was responsible for sinking the Cheonan, the Security Council
expresses its deep concern.
“The Security Council takes note of the responses from other relevant
parties, including from the DPRK, which has stated that it had nothing to do
with the incident.
“Therefore, the Security Council condemns the attack which led to the
sinking of the Cheonan.

10-44311 (E) 090710

*1044311*

S/PRST/2010/13

“The Security Council underscores the importance of preventing further such
attacks or hostilities against the ROK or in the region.
“The Security Council welcomes the restraint shown by the ROK and stresses
the importance of maintaining peace and stability on the Korean peninsula and in
north-east Asia as a whole.
“The Security Council calls for full adherence to the Korean Armistice
Agreement and encourages the settlement of outstanding issues on the Korean
peninsula by peaceful means to resume direct dialogue and negotiation through
appropriate channels as early as possible, with a view to avoiding conflicts and
averting escalation.
“The Security Council reaffirms the importance that all Member States uphold
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.”

2

10-44311
