S/2018/786

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 August 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 24 August 2018 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to the request of the Security Council in paragraph 61 of its resolution
2409 (2018), I have the honour to submit the 30-day update covering the period from
26 July to 24 August 2018 on political and technical progress towards the holding of
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 23 December 2018 and
obstacles to the implementation of the 31 December 2016 political agreement (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

18-14170 (E)

310818

*1814170*

S/2018/786

Annex
Update of the Secretary-General on progress in the electoral
process and implementation of the 31 December 2016 political
agreement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
24 August 2018
1.
The present update, which covers developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo from 26 July to 24 August 2018, is submitted pursuant to resolution 2409
(2018), in which the Security Council requested the Secretary-General to provide a
written update every 30 days on political and technical progress towards the holding
of elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 23 Dec ember 2018 and on
obstacles to the implementation of the 31 December 2016 political agreement.

I. Key political developments related to the electoral process
and implementation of the political agreement
2.
The Independent National Electoral Commission continued to take key steps
towards the holding of the presidential and national and provincial legislative
elections on 23 December. On 27 July, the Commission published the provisional list
of candidates for the provincial elections, which comprises 19,788 candidates, of
whom 88.2 per cent are men and 11.8 per cent are women. As at 9 August, 3,179
candidates, of whom 89.6 per cent are men and 10.4 per cent are women, had
registered for the national legislative elections. On 24 August, the Commission
published the provisional list of presidential candidates, declaring inadmissible 6
candidacies out of 25 for reasons such as conviction on corruption charges, dual
citizenship, conflict of interest, procedural errors in the registration process and lack
of proof of payment of registration fees. The leader of the Mouvement de libération
du Congo opposition party, Jean-Pierre Bemba, was declared ineligible on the
grounds that he had been sentenced, in March 2017, by the International Criminal
Court to one year in prison and a fine of 300,000 euros for witness tampering. Former
Prime Ministers Adolphe Muzito, Antoine Gizenga and Samy Badibanga were also
declared ineligible on the grounds of conflict of interest, procedural error and dual
citizenship, respectively. Opposition parties rejected the decision, arguing that it was
politically motivated, and stated that they would appeal it before the Constitutional
Court. The Minister of Communications and Government Spokesperson, Lambert
Mende, rejected the opposition’s allegations and noted that all political actors should
submit to the legal requirements of eligibility. The Commission published, on the
same date, the provisional list of 15,222 eligible candidates from a total of 15,505
candidates for the national legislative elections.
3.
On 1 August, 25 governors and 1 acting governor signed the charter of the Front
commun pour le Congo, a platform for which the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Joseph Kabila, serves as the “moral authority”. A wide array
of political, civil society and religious leaders in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo participated in the signing ceremony.
4.
Also on 1 August, Jean-Pierre Bemba returned to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and was welcomed by thousands of supporters in Kinshasa. On 2 August,
he submitted his candidacy for the presidential elections at the headquarters of the
Independent National Electoral Commission in Kinshasa. At a press conference held
on 3 August, Mr. Bemba called for inclusive, transp arent and democratic elections.
He also appealed to the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to find
a solution that would allow the leader of the Ensemble pour le changement opposition

2/8

18-14170

S/2018/786

platform, Moïse Katumbi, to take part in the presidential elections. On 5 August,
Mr. Bemba left the Democratic Republic of the Congo for Brussels after visiting his
electoral stronghold of Gemena, in Sud-Ubangi. The national police provided security
to Mr. Bemba and his family. No incidents occurred upon his return.
5.
From 6 to 8 August, other opposition leaders registered as presidential
candidates. Of note are: Félix Tshisekedi, the leader of the Union pour la démocratie
et le progrès social; Freddy Matungulu of Congo Na Biso; Martin Fayulu of the
Engagement pour la citoyenneté et le développement; Tryphon Kin-Kiey Mulumba,
a former member of the Majorité présidentielle; and Vital Kamerhe, the leader of the
Union pour la nation congolaise. Former Prime Ministers Adolphe Muzito of the
Nouvel élan, Antoine Gizenga of the Parti lumumbiste unifié, allied with the Majorité
présidentielle, and Samy Badibanga of the Progressistes also submitted their
candidacies.
6.
Moïse Katumbi was unsuccessful in his attempts to return to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo through Lubumbashi, Haut-Katanga, on 3 and 4 August.
Against the backdrop of media reports that the Government authorities had refused to
grant landing rights to Mr. Katumbi’s aeroplane at Lubumbashi airport, he was
allegedly not permitted to cross into the Democratic Republic of the Congo from
Zambia through the Kasumbalesa border post. The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo claimed that Mr. Katumbi had not presented himself at the
border crossing and refuted claims that he had attempted to la nd in Lubumbashi.
Demonstrations ensued in Kasumbalesa and Lubumbashi between 3 and 6 August,
during which one woman, a 15-year-old boy and a 10-year-old boy were reportedly
killed by bullets fired by national police elements, while three other persons were
wounded by live ammunition. A total of 89 persons were arrested, of whom 55
persons, including 1 minor, were arrested during a police operation in Kasumbalesa
on 5 August and 34 persons, including 2 minors, were arrested during demonstrations
in Lubumbashi on 6 August. At the time of reporting, 21 of those persons had been
released, including 3 minors who had been transferred to a juvenile court. The other
68 persons had appeared before the Tribunal de grande instance of Lubumbashi and
were being held at the Kasapa prison on charges including destruction of property,
robbery, contempt of authority and rebellion against the State.
7.
On 6 August, the Conférence épiscopale nationale du Congo issued a
communiqué in which it called upon the Government to allow Moïse Katumbi to
return and submit his candidacy. On 10 August, the Secretary-General of the
Ensemble pour le changement political platform, Delly Sesanga, announced that the
platform had submitted requests to the Conseil d’Etat that Mr. Katumbi be allowed to
enter and move around freely in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and that
measures be taken to allow him to register as a presidential candidate.
8.
On 8 August, the Front commun pour le Congo platform nominated the
Permanent Secretary of the ruling Parti du peuple pour la reconstruction et la
démocratie and former Vice Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior, Emmanuel
Ramazani Shadary, as its presidential candidate. The designation of Mr. Ramazani
Shadary was broadly welcomed across the political spectrum as a positive
development that puts an end to speculation and uncertainty regarding the
commitment of President Kabila to respect the Constitution. On 9 August, in a joint
statement, Canada, Switzerland, the United States of America, the African Union, the
European Union and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) welcomed the decision of the
President to respect the Constitution, stating that this constituted a key milestone
towards the first peaceful transfer of power in the country ’s history. On the same day,
the Comité laïc de coordination issued a statement in which it announced that it had

18-14170

3/8

S/2018/786

cancelled the protest marches that it had planned for 12 to 14 August in the event that
President Kabila decided to run again for office.
9.
Several key political actors, including Adolphe Muzito, Félix Tshisekedi,
Freddy Matungulu, Jean-Pierre Bemba and Vital Kamerhe advocated a single
opposition presidential candidate. In that regard, on 9 August, in Kinshasa,
Mr. Tshisekedi, the Secretary-General of the Mouvement de libération du Congo, Eve
Bazaïba, and Mr. Kamerhe met to exchange views on the issue of a single opposition
presidential candidate.
10. On 13 August, opposition leaders Félix Tshisekedi, Freddy Matungulu,
Jean-Pierre Bemba, Martin Fayulu, Moïse Katumbi and Vital Kamerhe issued a joint
communiqué in which they noted that the decision of President Kabila to abide by the
Constitution should not detract the attention of the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the international community from ensuring that the 23 December
elections meet basic democratic norms. They condemned the actions by the
Government to hinder the efforts of Mr. Katumbi to return to the count ry and register
as a presidential candidate, called upon the Government to fully implement the
confidence-building measures envisaged by the 31 December 2016 political
agreement by releasing political prisoners and detainees, and urged the Independent
National Electoral Commission to stop the use of the voting machines and remove
some 10 million alleged fraudulent voters from the electoral register. They also stated
that consultations had been held to agree upon a common political agenda and
nominate a single opposition candidate.
11. On 14 August, the spokesperson of the Majorité présidentielle, André -Alain
Atundu, held a press conference during which he lauded the designation of Emmanuel
Ramazani Shadary as the presidential candidate of the Front commun p our le Congo,
indicating that this signalled the beginning of a long and necessary march towards the
democratic conquest of power in conformity with the strategic plan of the moral
authority of the Front commun. In the same vein, on 16 August, the Strategic
Committee of the Front commun held a press conference during which the Chief of
Staff of President Kabila, Néhémie Mwilanya, reiterated the Government ’s decision
to assume responsibility for the logistics and materials required for organizing the
forthcoming elections. Highlighting the principle of respect for national sovereignty,
he noted that the Democratic Republic of the Congo expected only political and
diplomatic support from the international community. At the same event, the Minister
of Justice, Alexis Thambwe Mwamba, stated that Moïse Katumbi was a “fugitive and
must be arrested” and that an international arrest warrant had been issued to that
effect. He observed that, contrary to media reports, Mr. Katumbi had never attempted
to present himself to national security forces at the Kasumbalesa border post, who
stood ready to carry out his arrest. On 2 August, the counsel for the prosecution,
Joseph Nsabua, had issued a communiqué in which he stated that Mr. Katumbi would
be put under immediate arrest upon his return to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as he had failed, when his temporary authorization to seek medical treatment
abroad had expired, to appear before a magistrates’ court to face charges of attempts
against the security of the State.
12. At the regional level, on 30 July, the Heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of West African States and the Economic Community of
Central African States held a joint summit on peace, security, stability and the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism in Lomé. In a communiqué, they called upon
stakeholders in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to respect the 31 December
2016 political agreement as it remains the only viable path to credible elections in the
country. They also lauded the efforts of the Government to implement the electoral
process in accordance with the timetable laid out by the Independent National
Electoral Commission.
4/8

18-14170

S/2018/786

13. On 6 August, the African Union Commission Chairperson, Moussa Faki
Mahamat, stressed the need for all stakeholders to ensure the holding of peaceful,
transparent and inclusive elections, as well as the implementation of appropriate
confidence-building measures to create an environment conducive to a level playing
field. On the same date, the European Union issued a declaration in which it echoed
the communiqué of the African Union on the electoral process, recalling the
importance of commitments undertaken by all parties to respect the 31 December
2016 political agreement, including the implementation of confidence-building
measures.
14. On 14 August, the President of Angola, João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, in
his capacity as Chair of the Organ on Politics, Defence and Security Cooperation of
the Southern African Development Community (SADC), co nvened a summit in
Luanda to review the political and security situation in the Central African, Great
Lakes and Southern African regions. In the final communiqué of the summit, the
Heads of State commended President Kabila for abiding by his commitment to fully
respect the Constitution, thereby clearly demonstrating his determination to place the
interests of the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo above any other
considerations. They also expressed their readiness to support the Democratic
Republic of the Congo at a critical moment in the consolidation of its democratic
process.
15. On 17 and 18 August, President Kabila took part in the thirty-ninth summit of
SADC in Windhoek. In the final communiqué of the summit, SADC commended the
President and the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for upholding
the Constitution and took note of the decision of the Government to provide the
funding and logistics necessary for the holding of peaceful and credible elections.
16. With respect to relations between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
regional actors, on 29 July, in Kigali, the Vice Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Léonard She Okitundu, delivered
to the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame, a message from President Kabila relating
to political and security issues. On 2 August, in Luanda, President Kabila met
President Lourenço to discuss bilateral cooperation between Angola and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the situation in Central Africa and the Great
Lakes region. In the communiqué issued at the end of the meeting, the Presidents
reiterated, inter alia, their commitment to the principles of non -interference in the
domestic affairs of States and respect for national sovereignty and welcomed the
progress made in preparations for the holding of elections on 23 December. On
10 August, the President of South Africa, Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa, arrived in
Kinshasa, where he met President Kabila to discuss the political, elec toral and
security situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, issues of common interest
in the region and bilateral cooperation between the two countries. In the communiqué
issued after the meeting, the noteworthy progress made by the national auth orities in
preparations for the 23 December elections and the funding of the electoral process
by the Government were highlighted, among other things.

II. Key electoral developments related to the implementation
of the political agreement
A.

Electoral developments
17. On 28 July, MONUSCO, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and the Projet d’appui au cycle électoral au
Congo, managed by the United Nations Development Programme, organized a

18-14170

5/8

S/2018/786

two-day training workshop in Lubumbashi for female candidates, who were
introduced to election-specific mechanisms such as electoral observation. On 31 July,
MONUSCO organized an awareness-raising session on elections with the
participation of 50 persons (32 men and 18 women), including students and members
of civil society organizations.
18. On 8 August, in accordance with the electoral calendar, the Independent
National Electoral Commission officially closed the 172 candidate registration offices
processing presidential and national legislative candidacies. However, processing
continued until 13 August for additions, modifications or withdrawals relative to
candidates and the documentation submitted by them. Candidates in possession of
completed files when the registration offices closed on 8 August were accorded
48 hours to finalize the registration process.
19. Since the original request was received from the Independent National Electoral
Commission for MONUSCO to provide logistical support, on the basis of which the
Mission submitted its proposed plan on 30 November 2017, recent public statements
by officials of the Government and the Commission have indicated that the
Commission intends to hold the elections without support from external partners. The
efforts of MONUSCO have been geared primarily towards establishing a capacity
that could be used if required. To ensure its readiness, the Mission had contracted 24
air assets to provide support to the first phase of the electoral process. In the
meantime, MONUSCO intends to utilize these assets to support its internal operations
as well as the Ministry of Health, the World Health Organization and other partners
in the response against the Ebola outbreak in the Beni area, in North Kivu.
20. On 14 August, at a press conference in Kinshasa, the President of the
Independent National Electoral Commission, Corneille Nangaa, stated that the
Commission was acquiring 7 helicopters, 7 aeroplanes, 130 trucks and 191 pickup
vehicles for electoral logistics. He noted that every e ffort would be made to ensure
that elections take place on 23 December.

B.

Restrictions on political space and violence related to the
implementation of the political agreement in the electoral context
21. On 26 July, in Kinshasa, the leader of the Mouvement lumumbiste progressiste
party, Franck Diongo, who is currently detained at the Makala prison, was denied
permission to go to the registration office of the Independent National Electoral
Commission to submit his candidacy for the national legislative elections. The
Attorney General stated that he was not responsible for managing Mr. Diongo ’s
detention and was therefore not able to order the prison authorities to escort him to
the Commission. It should be recalled that, in a letter to the Commissio n dated
31 October 2017, the Minister of Justice had stated that the offence for which
Mr. Diongo had been sentenced did not entail the deprivation of his political rights.
However, no appropriate action was taken to uphold his rights.
22. On 30 July, in Kinshasa, 40 people, including 5 women, were arrested by the
national police during a peaceful march organized by the Engagement citoyen pour
le changement citizens’ movement to submit to the office of the Personal
Representative of the President on Sexual Violence and Child Recruitment a letter
denouncing sexual violence against minors in several provinces. They were all
released the following day.

6/8

18-14170

S/2018/786

C.

Confidence-building measures
23. On 27 July, in a meeting with the Director of the United Nations Join t Human
Rights Office, the Minister of Justice reiterated that he was not willing to act on cases
of political prisoners sentenced for civil offences, such as Jean -Claude Muyambo
(sentenced for real estate fraud), Eugène Diomi Ndongala (sentenced for rape) and
Franck Diongo (sentenced for sequestration), although two of them (Muyambo and
Diomi Ndongala) are expressly mentioned in the 31 December 2016 political
agreement. Nevertheless, the Minister agreed to find solutions in terms of conditional
release or presidential pardon for emblematic cases, including the cases of Gérard
Mulumba, whose health is reportedly deteriorating, as well as Firmin Yangambi and
Eric Kikunda, who have already spent nine years in prison and have not benefited
from the presidential pardon of 2014.

III. Good offices efforts for the implementation of the
political agreement
24. As part of her efforts to foster a credible and inclusive electoral process, my
Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo met the Vi ce Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs on 3 and 15 August and raised, inter alia,
the cases of Jean-Pierre Bemba and Moïse Katumbi. She also met the SecretaryGeneral of the Mouvement de libération du Congo, the Secretary-General of the
Ensemble pour le changement and the team of lawyers representing Mr. Katumbi on
2 August, as well as Vital Kamerhe on 14 August to discuss the electoral process.

IV. Observations
25. I welcome the encouraging developments in the ongoing political and electoral
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The political developments
witnessed over the past weeks show the determination of actors across the political
divide to ensure that democratic practices are consolidated in the country. I especially
wish to recognize the continued public commitment of President Kabila to the
organization of the elections at the end of 2018 in conformity with the Constitution,
which will lead to the first democratic transfer of power in the country. The steady
progress made by the Independent National Electoral Commission in meeting the
critical deadlines in the electoral calendar is another encouraging step in the right
direction. I also take note of the Commission’s efforts to remain in continued dialogue
with political actors on the various contentious issues in the electoral process.
26. I call upon the Government, opposition parties and civil society to use this
momentum to ensure that the 23 December elections are held in a peaceful and
transparent environment. It is of paramount importance that all stakeholders in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo adopt a constructive approach in pursuit of
solutions to outstanding contentious electoral matters, including the use of voting
machines and the voter register. The Constitution and the 31 December 2016 political
agreement remain the main frameworks for finding peaceful, democratic and durable
solutions to the challenges facing the electoral process.
27. With respect to the support of MONUSCO to the electoral proce ss, it would be
important that the Independent National Electoral Commission provide the necessary
details that would enable timely and effective assistance from the Mission. I wish to
note that the United Nations, while respecting the decision of the Gove rnment to fully
fund the electoral process, stands ready to provide the logistical and technical
assistance that MONUSCO has been mandated to carry out. Moreover, I call upon the
18-14170

7/8

S/2018/786

Government to continue to provide to the Commission regular and adequate
disbursements of funds to enable smooth and timely preparations for the elections.
28. I am also encouraged by the active involvement of regional actors in supporting
the political and electoral process. The role of regional actors in consolidating the
progress made in stabilizing the Democratic Republic of the Congo over the past
decade cannot be overemphasized. I appeal to regional actors, working in
collaboration with international partners, to continue to pursue initiatives aimed at
creating the conditions for peaceful, credible and transparent elections and to remain
engaged in the post-electoral period. Furthermore, I note the continued diplomatic
efforts of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to strengthen
bilateral cooperation with key regional actors. My Special Representative for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region
will continue to provide their good offices and support to national, regional and
international initiatives aimed at promoting peaceful solutions to the challenges
facing the political and electoral process.
29. I remain, however, concerned by continued reports of repression and
intimidation of political activists and human rights defenders and other restrictions
on the political space. I call upon the national authorities to lift the general ban on
public demonstrations and uphold the rights of citizens to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly. Equally important is the need for progress on implementing the
confidence-building measures set out in the 31 December 2016 political agreement. I
urge the Government to explore various avenues that would lead to the effective and
swift implementation of the confidence-building measures. Strong political gestures
could be envisaged, in lieu of legalistic approaches, in the interests of dialogue and
peace. The release of all political prisoners and prisoners of opinion would be a
positive development in this regard. Upholding the fundamental rights and freedoms
of all citizens and implementing fully and swiftly the confidence-building measures
will help to defuse political tensions and create a level playing field in the lead -up to
the elections.

8/8

18-14170
