67

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

San Marino
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey

United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northem
Ireland
United States of America

C. LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION 11, PARAGRAPH 4 (e)

Argentina
Barbados
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guatemala

Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

D. LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION 11, PARAGRAPH 4 (d)

Albania
Bulgaria
Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic
Czechoslovak.ia
Hungary

2845 (XXVI).

Poland
Romanía
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics

Public administration and
development

The General Assembly,
Taking into account its previous resolutions on the
role of public administration in economic and social
development, particularly resolutions 723 (VIII) of
23 October 1953, 1024 (XI) of 21 December 1956,
1256 (XIII) of 14 November 1958, 1530 (XV) of
15 December 1960, 1710 (XVI) of 19 December
1961 and 2561 (XXIV) of 13 December 1969,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1199 (XLII) of 24 May 1967 and 1567 (L) of
6 May 1971,
Emphasizing the importance of improving public
administration in order to speed up the economic and
social development of the developing countries and to
achieve the aims and objectives of the Second United
Nations Development Decade,
Considering, therefare, that the measures needed
to increase the capability and efficiency of public
administration in the developing countries are indispensable far the farmulation and implementation of
economic and social development plans and programmes,
Recognizing the importance far developing countries of the establishment and entry into service of
regional centres of administration far development,
the purpose of which is to co-operate with Governments in increasing their administrative capability far
the implementation of their cconomic and social development programmes,
Noting the existence of the African Training and
Research Centre in Administration far Development
and the farthcoming entry into service of the Asian
Centre of Development Administration, the Centre of
the Arab Organization far Administrative Sciences
and the Latin American Centre of Administration for
Development,

Recognizing the prompt and effective co-operation
given by the United Nations Development Programme
far the establishment and operation of the regional
centres in Asia and Africa,
l. Draws the attention of Member States to the
importance of measures to increase administrative
capability far economic and social development, the
desirability of making such measures an integral part
of development plans at all levels, as appropriate, and
the need far such measures to be adequate to enable
Governments, individually and collectively, to achieve
the aims of the Second United Nations Development
Decade;
2. Takes note of the report of the Second Meeting
of Experts on the United Nations Programme in Public
Administration; 44
3. Endorses the objectives of the regional centres
of administration for development to increase the
administrative capability and efficiency of the developing countries in arder to speed up the process of
economic and social development;
4. Invites the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to provide the
technical and financia! co-operation necessary far
the establishment and operation of the Latin American
Centre of Administration far Development and the
Centre of the Arab Organization far Administrative
Sciences in the same way in which it supparted the
regional centres in Africa and Asia, and further invites
it to continue to provide the necessary assistance to
the regional centres in Africa and Asia.
2026th plenary meeting,
20 December I 971.
2846 (XXVI). Question of the creation of an
intergovernmental sea service

The General Assembly,
Having given preliminary consideration to the question of the creation of an intergovernmental sea service,
1. Decides to refer this question far further consideration to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits
of National Jurisdiction at its session to be held in
July and August 1972;
2. Requests the Committee to report on this question to the General Assembly through the Economic
and Social Council.
2026th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
2847 (XXVI). Enlargement of the Economic and
Social Council

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that an enlargement of the Economic
and Social Council will provide broad representation
of the United Nations membership as a whole and
make the Council a more effective organ far carrying
out its functions under Chapters IX and X of the
Charter of the United Nations,
44 Public Administration in the Second United Nations Development Decade (United Nations publication, Sales No.:
E.71.II.H.3).

68

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

Having considered the report of the Eoconomic
and Social Council, 411
l. Takes oote of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1621 (LI) of 30 July 1971;
2. Decides to adopt, in accordance with Article 108
of the Charter of the United Nations, the following
amendment to the Charter and to submit it for ratification by the States Members of the United Nations:

"Rule 14746
"Toe General Assembly -shall each year, in the
course of its regular session, elect eighteen members
of the Economic and Social Council for a term of
three years."
2026th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

"Article 61
"l. Toe Economic and Social Council shall consist of fifty-four Members of the United Nations
elected by the General Assembly.
"2. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 3,
eighteen members of the Economic and Social Council shall be elected each year for a term of three
years. A retiring member shall be eligible for immediate re-election.
"3. At the first election after the increase in the
membership of the Economic and Social Council
from twenty-seven to fifty-four members, in addition
to the members elected in place of the nine members
whose term of office expires at the end of that year,
twenty-seven additional members shall be elected.
Of these twenty-seven additional members, the term
of office of nine members so elected shall expire at
the end of one year, and of nine other members
at the end of two years, in accordance with arrangements made by the General Assembly.
"4. Each member of the Economic and Social
Council shall have one representative.";
3. Urges all Member States to ratify the above
amendment in accordance with their respective constitutional processes as soon as possible and to deposit
their instruments of ratification with the SecretaryGeneral;
4. Further decides that the members of the Economic
and Social Council shall be elected according to the
following pattern:
(a) Fourteen members from African States;
(b) Eleven members from Asian States;
(e) Ten members from Latín American States;
(d) Thirteen members from Western European and
other States;
(e) Six members from socialist States of Eastem
Europe;
5. Welcomes the decision of the Economic and Social Council, pending the receipt of the necessary ratifications, to enlarge its sessional committees to fiftyfour members;
6. Invites the Economic and Social Council, as soon
as possible and not later than the organizational meetings of its fifty-second session, to elect the twenty-seven
additional members from States Members of the United
Nations to serve on the enlarged sessional committees;
such elections should be in accordance with paragraph
4 above and should be held each year pending the
coming into force of the enlargement of the Council;
7. Decides that, as of the date of the entry into
force of the above amendments, rule 147 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly shall be
amended to read:

2848 (XXVI). Protein resourccs

45 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/8403).

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2416 (XXIII) of 17 December 1968 and 2684 (XXV) of 11 December 1970,
Economic and Social Council resolution 1640 (LI)
of 30 July 1971, World Health Assembly resolution
WHA22.56 of 25 July 1969 and resolutions 2/69 and
7/71 adopted by the Conference of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations on 26
November 1969 and 22 November 1971,
Recalling also paragraphs 18 and 69 of the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the world food
problem adopted on 22 March 1968 47 by the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its
second session,
Recognizing that the protein problem is part of the
general prob]em of food production and supply, which
depends on a great many economic, social, cultural
and political factors, including social and economic
under-development, which is manifested in unemployment and under-employment, extremely low incomes,
poor nutritional habits, poor health and sanitary conditions, low agricultura! productivity and serious defects
in marketing,
Recognizing also that protein-calorie malnutrition is
the primary cause of high infant and child mortality,
reaching from 25 to 30 per cent in many developing
countries, that it increases susceptibility to infection
and can permanently impair growth and development
in the survivors, to the detriment of their later physical
and intellectual performance,
Considering that it is in the interests of developing
countries to make increased use of the extemal-and
particularly multilateral-financia! and technical assistance avai]able for dealing with problems of food supply
and nutrition since the direct and indirect costs of malnutrition to national development are often far more
than the amount that would be required for its prevention,
Recognizing that, since the ultimate solution of the
protein problem can only be found over the long term
while immediate action with respect to vulnerable
groups is required if irreversible damage is to be prevented, clear national and international priorities must
be set now in taking remedia! action, and that consequently externa! short-term assistance such as emergency food support must be combined with assistance
for vital long-range projects,
Acknowledging the programme and assistance activities relating to the protein problem being undertaken
46 Formerly rule 146 (see resolution 2837 (XXVI), annex I,
para. 9).
4 7 Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, Second Session, vol. I and Corr.1 and 3
and Add.1 and 2, Report and Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.II.D.14), p. 28.
