A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/37
7 January 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 60
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/51/566/Add.1)]
51/37.

Prohibition of the development and
manufacture of new types of weapons of
mass destruction and new systems of such
weapons: report of the Conference on
Disarmament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the prohibition of the development
and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of
such weapons,
Taking note of paragraph 77 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly,1
Determined to prevent the emergence of new types of weapons of mass
destruction that have characteristics comparable in destructive effect to
those of weapons of mass destruction identified in the definition of weapons
of mass destruction adopted by the United Nations in 1948,2
Noting that the item entitled "New types of weapons of mass destruction
and new systems of such weapons: radiological weapons" was considered in the
Conference on Disarmament during its 1994, 1995 and 1996 sessions,

1

Resolution S-10/2.

2

The definition was adopted by the Commission for Conventional Armaments
(see S/C.3/32/Rev.1).

97-76003

/...

A/RES/51/37
Page 2

Also noting the desirability of keeping the matter under review, as
appropriate,
1.
Reaffirms that effective measures should be taken to prevent the
emergence of new types of weapons of mass destruction;
2.
Requests the Conference on Disarmament, without prejudice to
further overview of its agenda, to keep the matter under review, as
appropriate, with a view to making, when necessary, recommendations on
undertaking specific negotiations on identified types of such weapons;
3.
Calls upon all States, immediately following any recommendations
of the Conference on Disarmament, to give favourable consideration to those
recommendations;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the Conference on
Disarmament all documents relating to the consideration of this item by the
General Assembly at its fifty-first session;
5.
Requests the Conference on Disarmament to report the results of
any consideration of the matter in its annual reports to the General Assembly;
6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth
session the item entitled "Prohibition of the development and manufacture of
new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons:
report of the Conference on Disarmament".
79th plenary meeting
10 December 1996
