40

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

unfinished and to the large number of important issues
remitted by the Conference to its continuing machinery
for further consideration and action, and urged the
Trade and Development Board at its forthcoming sessions, in considering the issues remitted to it by the
Conference, to seek the widest possible measure
of agreement on concrete and practica! action or recommendations, as appropriate,
Recalling further that at its twenty-third session the
General Assembly requested the Trade and Development Board to continue its efforts to reach the maximum
degree of agreement on the issues which were remitted
to it by the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development at its second session and which were
of basic importance for the elaboration of the international development strategy for the 1970s, 33
Expressing its concern that most of the issues remitted to the continuing machinery of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development after
its second session are still outstanding, and that this
has contributed to the delay in the completion of the
work of the Conference relating to the preparations
for the Second United N ations Development Decade,
Bearing in mind the recommendation made by the
Conference to its member States at the second session
to devise and explore earnestly ways and means of
assisting the continuing machinery of the Conference
to discharge the responsibility placed upon it after its
second session,
Recalling the improvements brought about in the
institutional machinery and methods of work of the
Conference in terms of decision 45 (VII), adopted by
the Trade and Development Board on 21 September
1968.34 and as further elaborated in paragraphs 4
and 5 of General Assembly resolution 2402 (XXIII),
Having considered the report of the Trade and
Development Board for the period from 24 September
1968 to 23 September 1969, 35
l. Takes note of the report of the Trade and Development Board for the period from 24 September 1968
to 23 September 1969;
2. Requests the Trade and Development Board to
seek to resolve the outstanding issues remitted to it by
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at the second session in the fields of commodities,
manufactures and semi-manufactures, financing and
invisibles, including the question of international legislation on shipping;
3. Further requests the Trade and Develooment
Board to accelerate in particular the work already
undertaken in the specific fields which determine the
participation of the United N ations Conference on
Trade and Development in the international develooment strategy, so that it may make a timely and significant contribution to the preparations for the Second
United Nations Development Decade;
4. Suggests to the Trade and Development Board
that the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development at its third session should consider ways
and means of implementing the measures agreed upon
within the continuing machinery and seek new areas of
agreement in the dynarnic context of the Second United
N ations Development Decade;
83 See

resolution 2411 (XXIIl).
34 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Twentythird Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/7214), p. 93.
8~ lbid.,
Twenty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 16
íA/7616).

5. Urges the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
expedite his consultations with interested Governments
with a view to reconvening the United Nations Cocoa
Confercnce in order to conclude an international
agreement on this commodity as early as ~ossible in
1970;
6. Notes with satisfaction that sorne of the improvements introduced in the institutional machinery and
methods of work of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development have been utilized, particularly by means of the decisions of the Trade and
Development Board, to hold a special session on
preferences:16 and to call an intergovernmental group
on trade expansion, economic co-operation and regional
integration among developing countries;37
7. Considers that the Trade and Development
Board, while making a fuller and more effective utilization of the improved machinery and methods of work
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in accordance with decision 45 (VII) of
thc Board and General Asscmbly resolution 2402
(XXIII), should at the same time keep the question
of further improvements in the institutional machinery
of the Conference constantly under revicw and from
time to time make such suggestions as may enable the
continuing machinery to discharge thc responsibilities
entrnsted to it.
l 832nd plenary meeting,
J 3 December 1969.
2571 (XXIV). lnternational clevelopment strategy

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2218 B (XXI) of 19 December 1966 and 2305 (XXII) of 13 December 1967
by which it initiated measures for proclaiming the
1970s as the Second United N ations Development
Decade,
Further recalling its resolution 2411 (XXIII) of
17 December 1968 whereby it established the Preparatory Committee for the Second United Nations Development Decade. charged with the responsibility of
preparing a draft of an international development
strategy for the l 970s, and requested it to submit to
the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session a
preliminary draft of the strategy,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1447 (XLVII) of 5 August 1969 regarding the
work done so far on the formulation of an international
development strategy,
Recalling the Charter of Algiers, 38 in particular part
two entitled "Programme of action", regarded by the
developing countries as constituting important elements
of the strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
Taking into account the results achieved by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
at its second session and the task referred to the continuing machinery of the Conference in connexion with
measures which the intemational community should
take in the field of trade and development,
36 !bid .. resolution 61 (IX), p. 209.
37 !bid., resolution 53 (VIII), p. 73.
38 Proceedings of the
United Nations

Conference on
Trade and Development, Second Session, vol. I and Corr.l
and 1 and Add.1 and 2. Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: E.68.IJ.D.14), p. 431.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Having considered the progress report of the Preparatory Committee for the Second United Nations Development Decade on the preparation of a prelirninary
draft of an international development strategy,39
Deeply concerned that very little progress was made
by the Trade and Development Board at its resumed
eighth session and at the second part of its ninth session in finalizing the contribution of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development to the strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
Recognizing that the primary responsibility for the
economic development of developing countries rests on
them and also that a fuller mobilization and more
effective utilization of the domestic resources of those
countries to achieve an accelerated rate of growth requires concomitant, effective and sustained international
action,
Considering that the success of the international
development strategy will depend upon the commitments by developed and developing countries alike to
the adoption of specific policy measurcs to implement
the strategy,
Gravely concerned that, in spite of the efforts made
during the First United Nations Development Decade,
the levels of living of millions of pcople in the developing parts of the world are still pitifully low,
Recognizing that there is an urgent need for strengthening the political will, particularly in the area of
international co-operation, to carry on effectively with
the task of devclopment,
Reaffirming the common rcsponsibility and resolve of
the international community to work continuously to
bring about a substantial improvement in the lot of
mankind by accelerating economic and social progress
in developing countries, thus contributing to world
peace,
1. Expresses its concern that it has not been possible
for the Preparatory Committee for the Sccond United
Nations Development Decade to prepare a preliminary
draft of an intcrnational devclopmcnt strategy as envisaged in paragraphs 3 and 8 of General Assembly
resolution 2411 (XXIII);
2. Notes, however, that it has so far been possible,
inter alía, to agree that:
(a) Toe five main components ofi:he strategy should
be a preambular declaration, a specification of objectives, policy measures to fulfil those objectives, review
and appraisal of both objectives and policies, and
mobilization of public opinion;
( b) The main objective for the Second United
Nations Development Decade should be to promote
sustained economic growth, especially in developing
countries, to ensure a higher standard of living consistent with human dignity, to bring about sustained
improvements in the well-being of the individual and
to facilitate the process of narrowing the gap between
the developed and developing countries;
(e) There is a need for establishing a target for
the over-all growth rate for gross product in real terms
of the developing countries during the Second United
Nations Development Decade, as a broad indication of
the scope of international co-operative efforts to be
made within the framework of the international development strategy;
39 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyfourth Session, Annexes, agenda ítem 40, document A/7699.

41

(d) It is important to reach agreement on quantitative targets for a few major variables, consistent with
the over-all target and, to the extent possible, ea~h
consistent with the other, as well as to define certam
broad social objcctives;
(e) Arrangements should be made to keep under
systematic scrutiny the progress towards ~chieving. the
goals and objectives of the Second Umted Nat1o~s
Development Decade, to identify shortfalls in their
achievement and the policies that are not consistent
with the attainment of those objectives and to recommend positive measures, including new goals and
policies as needed;
(f) Existing arrangements for the review and appraisal of the progress towards achieving goals and
objectives of the Second United Nations Development Dccade should be fully and effcctively utilized,
strengthened as required, and complemented by new
arrangements, as appropriate, at the national, regional,
other multinational and global levels, and such arrangements should involve both developed and developing
countries;
3. Notes with concern the lack of progress in reaching agreement on policy measures for the fulfilment of
the objectives of the Second United Nations Development Decade, which is of paramount importance for
the formulation of the strategy;
4. Urges Governments to takc political dccisions
for the adoption of specific and concrete policy measures for thc successful completion of the preparation
and the implementation of the international development strategy;
5. Recognizes that there is an exprcss need for the
progressive integration of social and cconomic goals
and policies in the process of the formulation of the
international dcvelopment strategy for the Second
United Nations Development Decade;
6. Instructs the Preparatory Committee to finalize
its work in accordance with thc time-table laid down
in paragraph 8 of General Assembly resolution 2411
(XXIII) and, at its forthcoming sessions, to conccntrate particularly on objectives and policy mcasures;
7. Endorses the decision of the Trade and Development Board, at the second part of its ninth session, 40
to complete the contribution of the United Nations
Conferencc on Trade and Development to thc Second
United Nations Development Decade at the third part
of that session, so as to enable the Preparatory Committcc to complete its work in these areas as well as to
make progress in other arcas;
8. Calls upan all other organizations of the United
N ations system to make available, as soon as possible,
the contributions to the strategy expected of them, so
as to enable the Preparatory Committee to consider
them at its fifth session;
9. Draws the attention of the Governments and the
organizations concerned to the recommendations made
by the Comrnittee for Development Planning in its rcport on its fourth and fifth sessions; 41
1O. Considers that the procedures for the proclamation of the Second United Nations Development Decade
40
/bid., Twenty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 16 (Al
7616), p. 269.
41
See O/ficial Records of the Economic and Social Counci/
Forty-seventh Session, document E/ 4682.
'

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

42

should be so devised as to ensure the maximum possible
impact on world public opinion in support of all development efforts, particularly of the objectives and policies
for the Decade.
1832nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1969.
2572 (XXIV).

lnlernational Education Year

The General Assembly
l. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral,4~ prcpared with the assistance of the Un~ted
Nations Educational, Scicntific and Cultural Orgamzation pursuant to General Assembly resolution 2412
(XXIII) of 17 Decembcr 1968;
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1436 (XLVII) of 31 July 1969.
1832nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1969.
2573 (XXIV).

International university

The General Assembly,
Taking note with appreciation of the SecrctaryGencral's rcmarks concerning thc idea of an international univcrsity made in thc introduction to his
annual report on the work of the Organization, 43
W elcoming thc initiativc takcn by thc SecretaryGeneral,
l. Invites thc Sccretary-General to undertake, in cooperation with thc Unitcd Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and in consultation with
the Unitcd Nations lnstitute for Training and Research
and any other agcncy or organization he decms necessary and taking into account the views expressed at
the twcnty-fourth session of the General Assembly, a
comprehensive expcrt study on thc feasibility of an
international university, including a clear definition of
its goals and objectivcs as well as rccommendations as
to how it might be organizcd and financcd;
2. Expresses the hope that the report on the study
will be available early in the lntcrnational Education
Year and in time to be submitted through the Economic
and Social Council to thc General Assembly at its
twenty-fifth session.
1832nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1969.
2577 (XXIV). Report of the Industrial
Develo¡,ment Board

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Industrial Development Board on the work of its third session, 44
Noting in particular the Board's recommendations
concerning the programme of work. of. the United
Nations Industrial Development Orgamzat1on for 1970
relating to the field activities and supporting activities
of that organization, 4 :;
42 E/ 4 707 and

Corr. l and 2 and Add.1 and 2.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyfourth Session, Supplement No. 1 A ( A/7601/ Add.1 ), paras.
196 and 197.
H /bid., Supplemen/ No. 17 (A/7617 and Corr.1 ).
45 Jbid., chapter VL
43 See

Recalling the recommendations of the International
Symposium on Industrial Development, held at Athens
in 1967, 46
Recalling further its resolution 2178 (XXI) of
9 December 1966 in which it, inter alia, requested the
Industrial Development Board to study in due course
the recommendations of the Symposium and to take
appropriate follow-up action,
Believing that an appropriate review and assessment
of the progress achieved in the implementation of the
aforementioned recommendations of the Board, as well
as those of the Symposium, could provide sufficient
information and impetus for devising effective ways
and means of attaining the speedy implementation of
those recommendations with a view to responding adequately to the urgent needs and problems of the developing countries in their efforts to accelerate their industrialization,
l. Takes note of the report of the Industrial Development Board on the work of its third session;
2. lm·ites the Industrial Developmcnt Board, with
the co-operation of the Executive Director of the
Unitcd Nations Industrial Development Organization,
to consiJcr the possibility of including in the Board's
annual rcports:
(a) A summary of the progress achieved in the
implementation of ali the substantive recommendations
and resolutions of thc Board and of the Intcrnational
Symrosium on Industrial Dcvelopment, as well as practica[ me;1surcs and policies for attaining thcir early
implementation, as appropriate;
( b) An up-dated listing of the titles of ali projects
and activitics undcrtaken by the United Nations Industrial Dcvelopment Organization in each country and
region, with estimated cost, source of financing, naturc
and duration by man-months of each project, and
titles of ali seminars, expert group meetings, workshops, publications of rcsearch and studies;
(e) An outline of the future work programme of
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization;
3. Suggests that the reports of the Industrial Development Board be made as concise and substantial as
possible, taking into account the additional information
called for in paragraph 2 above.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2578 (XXIV). Confcrence of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2089 (XX) of 20 December
1965 and 2152 (XXI) of 17 November 1966 on the
establishment of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
Having in mind Industrial Development Board resolution 22 (111) of 13 May 1969, 47 in which the Board
requested the Executive Director of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization to consult the
4 6 See United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
Report of the International Symposium on Industrial Development (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.69.11.8.7).
4, See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyfourth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/7617 and Corr.l ),
annex VII.
