United Nations

S/PV.5917

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5917th meeting
Friday, 20 June 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Khalilzad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Kafando
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Weisleder
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Spatafora
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2008/354)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-39202 (E)

*0839202*

S/PV.5917

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2008/354)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Serbia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic of
Serbia, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Boris
Tadić, President of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Sejdiu to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in response to a letter dated 17 June 2008 from
the Permanent Representative of Serbia addressed to
the President of the Security Council and contained in
document S/2008/401.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/354, which contains the report of the

2

Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I welcome the participation of the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, at this
meeting and invite him to take the floor.
The Secretary-General: Let me start by thanking
the Security Council for this opportunity to present the
Council with my assessment of the situation in Kosovo
and my idea for the way forward for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) as the international civil presence in
Kosovo.
Before doing so, I would like to welcome the
presence here today of His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić
of Serbia and of His Excellency Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu of
Kosovo.
The challenge facing us is an enormous one. In
almost 40 years of my diplomatic life, I have never
encountered an issue as divisive, as delicate and as
intractable as the Kosovo issue. Legally, politically and
morally, it is a landscape of enormous complexity and
sensitivity that requires the exercise of extraordinary
objectivity and balance. The declaration of
independence in February, the violence at the customs
posts and in Mitrovica, the elections organized by the
Serbs, the promulgation in Pristina of a new
constitution — all of those recent developments, and
many before them, have been fiercely contested by the
communities and by their supporters abroad, and have
profoundly changed the environment in which we are
operating.
In coming before the Council today to listen and
to seek its guidance, I am very aware that the package I
have developed is a humble effort in the light of those
new developments to try to find an operational modus
vivendi to help move Kosovo a few steps back from
the brink of further conflict. To many, it may not be
fully satisfying, because it does not completely meet
the aspirations of any of the key stakeholders. Indeed,
it is not a winner-take-all solution. Nevertheless,
personally, after open and transparent consultations
with all concerned over the past months, I have come
to the view that the package represents the least
objectionable way forward. I have presented it to the
Council mindful of the need to preserve and safeguard
the credibility and effectiveness of the United Nations,
in the interest of all of its Members.

08-39202

S/PV.5917

If there is any wisdom in this package, I should
also thank Council members: I have greatly benefited
from my wide-ranging consultations with you and with
your ministers in the development of the package.
Indeed, I held consultations with every member of the
Council, as well as with the parties and other
stakeholders, including the leaders present here today. I
appreciated their flexibility and admired their
leadership. I have drawn richly on their ideas. My
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
has also benefited from consultations in both Pristina
and Belgrade. This has been further enriched by the
daily contacts of my representatives on the ground and
by the work of the men and women of UNMIK.
The report (S/2008/354) before the Council sets
out the key recent developments in relation to Kosovo.
As the Council is aware, following the declaration of
independence by Kosovo’s representatives, on
17 February of this year, some Member States have
recognized Kosovo as a sovereign and independent
State, while others have not. The differences within the
international community have added to the complexity
of this issue. I have taken note of the position of the
Republic of Serbia as conveyed to me by President
Tadić.
Mindful of the divisions in the international
community, the United Nations has taken a position of
strict neutrality on the question of Kosovo’s status.
UNMIK operates within the framework of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), which is the legal
framework for its mandate and which remains in force
until the Security Council decides otherwise. As I have
indicated to the Council on prior occasions, UNMIK
has continued to operate and to implement its mandate
in the light of the evolving circumstances, however
difficult that might be. That is the foundation of my
package.
Following the declaration of independence by
Kosovo, UNMIK’s ability to operate as before has
come into serious question. The constitution
promulgated by the Kosovo authorities came into effect
on 15 June. That constitution envisages no real role for
UNMIK. The powers residing with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General are sought to
be assumed by the new authorities. On the other side of
the ledger, the Kosovo Serb community has
overwhelmingly rejected the new constitution and the
new laws that are emerging from Pristina. They have
expanded their boycott of Pristina institutions and,

08-39202

while they have agreed to continue to apply UNMIK
laws, they have opposed —sometimes violently — any
effort to bring them under the aegis of the new
arrangements in Pristina.
All of that is contributing to a substantially
changed situation in Kosovo. It is my assessment that,
taken together, these developments have created a
profoundly new reality in which UNMIK is no longer
able to perform as effectively as in the past the vast
majority of its tasks as an interim administration. That
needs to be acknowledged as a fact of life.
In the light of recent developments, the report
notes that I intend to adjust operational aspects of the
international civil presence in Kosovo and to
reconfigure the profile and structure of UNMIK. I will
not repeat the details of the package here; it is more
important for me to hear the reactions of participants. I
will just note that a reconfigured and restructured
UNMIK will continue to carry out a number of
functions. These will include, significantly, functions
related to the dialogue on the implementation of
provisions in six areas contained in my letter to
President Tadić: police, courts, customs, transport and
infrastructure, boundaries and Serbian patrimony.
I consider that this dialogue, which was initiated
by my Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations and which will be carried forward by my
Special Representative in close consultation with the
authorities in Kosovo and with relevant stakeholders, is
of crucial importance for all of Kosovo’s communities.
I look to the Security Council and to the broader
international community to support my Special
Representative’s efforts in bringing forward that
dialogue.
As the Security Council is aware, the European
Union has expressed its readiness to perform an
enhanced operational role in Kosovo in the area of the
rule of law, and has put in place measures to do so. I
believe that that enhanced role would be in the
interests of the United Nations and of the international
community as a whole.
I also note the aspiration of people of all
communities in the region to live in closer association
with the European family of nations. As I set out in my
report, the European Union will therefore take on some
increasing operational responsibilities in the areas of
international policing, justice and customs in Kosovo,
within a reconfigured UNMIK, within the mandate

3

S/PV.5917

established by resolution 1244 (1999), and under an
umbrella headed by my Special Representative.

its Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, which
took place on 17 February of this year.

Nine years since the inception of UNMIK, the
situation in Kosovo has evolved profoundly. Under the
United Nations interim administration, Kosovo has
made significant strides in moving beyond conflict
towards peace, in creating and consolidating democratic
governance institutions and in creating the foundations
for a viable economy. Not everything has been
achieved, but we have come a long way, and we must be
sure that, with these most recent changes in the
situation, we do not lose what has been gained with so
much effort. We must evolve our presence to ensure that
earlier achievements are safeguarded and built upon.

It is the position of the Republic of Serbia that
the unilateral declaration of independence directly
contravenes the Charter of the United Nations, the
Helsinki Final Act and other cornerstone documents
upon which the international system has been built.
Equally important is the fact that resolution 1244
(1999) clearly places a binding Chapter VII obligation
on all Member States to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of my country.

The task will be a difficult one. To lead this new
phase of the mission, I intend to appoint Mr. Lamberto
Zannier of Italy to be my Special Representative. He
will help to carry forward the vision I have presented
in my report and to lead a new phase of dialogue, and
he will be scrupulously balanced in his approach.
The reconfiguration of UNMIK that I have
presented to the Security Council aims at preserving
and consolidating the achievements reached during a
tumultuous period and at creating the foundations for
Kosovo’s further progress within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999). In doing so, my overriding
objectives are to ensure Kosovo’s overall stability, to
protect and promote the interests of all of its
communities and to maintain international peace and
security in Kosovo and the broader region.
I take this opportunity to once again express my
profound appreciation to the members of the Council
and the leaders of the concerned parties for their
valuable support and understanding in the broader
interest of peace and security in the region.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Boris
Tadić, President of the Republic of Serbia.
President Tadić (spoke in Serbian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting of the
Security Council. Once again, we are gathered to
discuss troubling developments in Serbia’s southern
province of Kosovo and Metohija, which have been
caused by the unilateral declaration of independence by

4

A great majority of this Organization’s 192
Member States have continued to abide by those
principles and obligations. On behalf of the Republic
of Serbia, allow me to express my profound
appreciation to them for their commitment to the rule
of international law and to state clearly my country’s
continued dedication to those same principles.
There is a minority that has, unfortunately,
chosen to support the attempt at secession by the
Kosovo Albanians. That has put at risk the
consolidation of peace and stability in the Western
Balkans has and set back more than a decade of hard
work by this Council. It has also created an
environment in which the international system as a
whole is becoming more unstable, more insecure and
more unpredictable. The potential damage to the
founding principles of this Organization is becoming
more apparent, as is the awareness that the legacy that
the United Nations will pass on to the future
generations will be tarnished.
The Republic of Serbia, for its part, has taken a
position entirely consistent with the fact that we were a
co-founder of this Organization in 1945 — one that
takes seriously international law and its aim of
promoting peaceful, just and consensual resolutions of
disputes. That is why our National Assembly has
declared the unilateral declaration of independence and
all subsequent decisions stemming from it to be null
and void, and that is why we have ruled out the use of
force, while affirming our right to employ all
diplomatic and political means to ensure that a
so-called independent Kosovo does not join the world
community of sovereign States.
I want to be very clear. Serbia will never
recognize the independence of Kosovo. We will
continue to work towards finding a legal way forward
that seeks to bridge differences and to find a

08-39202

S/PV.5917

compromise solution to the long-standing conflict
between Serbs and Albanians.
It is in that context that I turn to a consideration
of the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2008/354)
submitted to this Council and to the letter that I
received from him dated 12 June 2008. The report
refers to the emergence of a “new reality” (paras. 7
and 10) in Kosovo as a result of the unilateral
declaration of independence. It also refers to the recent
passage, by the provisional Assembly of our province
of Kosovo, of a so-called constitution intended to
implement the Ahtisaari proposal, which has not
received the endorsement of this Council and therefore
carries no legal weight whatsoever.
The report states that “the constitution is
designed in such a way that it would effectively
remove from UNMIK its current powers as an interim
civil administration” (para. 7). That usurpation by the
authorities in Pristina of the mandate this Council gave
to UNMIK is deeply troubling. Equally worrisome is
the fact that the report gives an impression of
acquiescing to an unjustifiable violation of resolution
1244 (1999).
I am led to conclude that the report is an
acknowledgment that an influential and determined
minority can set aside considerations of international
law in the name of appeasing an ethnic group that has
been threatening violence if its demands are not met.
That must not be the way forward. International peace
and security can only be consolidated through
dialogue, not imposition; through agreement, not
compulsion; and through law, not threats.
Since the unilateral declaration of independence,
the human rights record in our southern province has
not improved. Internally displaced persons have not
returned. Jobs have not been created. Destroyed homes
belonging to Serbs have not been rebuilt. Serbian
private property has not been returned. Organized
crime has not been reduced. Our cultural heritage has
not become more secure. In fact, since the unilateral
declaration of independence, things have gotten worse.
The uncomfortable yet incontrovertible truth is that the
“new reality” to which the report refers has caused a
further deterioration in the already unstable situation
on the ground.
I will provide an example. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim

08-39202

Rücker, finally agreed a few weeks ago to issue an
executive decision restoring illegally seized land to its
rightful owners: the thirteenth century Serbian
Orthodox Decani monastery — a UNESCO World
Heritage site. The unfortunate result has been the
refusal of the municipal authorities of the town of
Decani to restore the cadastral record as required by
the executive order, which was issued under the
authority of resolution 1244 (1999). United Nations
officials in Decani have been assaulted after having
been declared to be personae non gratae.
This illustration of the callous disregard for the
rule of law and the United Nations standards that we
face throughout the province is implicitly taken up in
the report through its assessment that “UNMIK will no
longer be able to perform effectively the vast majority
of its tasks as an interim administration” (S/2008/354,
para. 17). This can only lead us to the conclusion that
the United Nations mission has not been accomplished.
In other words, its mandate has not been fulfilled and
its task has not been completed. Under those
circumstances, the United Nations cannot, and must
not, walk away.
It is therefore the position of the Republic of
Serbia that the course of action proposed in the report
cannot give rise to a process that leads to a
compromise solution on the future status of our
southern province. That is why the Republic of Serbia
cannot endorse the Secretary-General’s report. Until
the process envisaged in resolution 1244 (1999) to
determine Kosovo’s future status is complete, the
international community, led by the United Nations,
has to retain its central role in the maintenance of
peace and stability in Kosovo.
“Reconfiguration”, to which both the report and
the Secretary-General’s letter to me refer, must be
decided by the Security Council, which is the only
institution endowed with the power to legitimate
changes in the composition of the international
presence in Kosovo, as paragraphs 5 and 19 of
resolution 1244 (1999) make abundantly clear.
In addition, we agree that the six topics
mentioned in both documents — police, judiciary,
customs, transportation and infrastructure, boundaries,
and patrimony — require pressing attention. Every day
that goes by without working towards some sort of
agreement on these and other issues raises the
likelihood of the creation of unsustainable hopes and

5

S/PV.5917

dangerous, uncoordinated outcomes on the ground. My
country is therefore prepared to continue engaging in
dialogue with the United Nations in order to arrive at a
satisfactory agreement.
Finally, I am concerned that an implicit shift in
position by NATO took place in Brussels a few days
ago during NATO’s most recent ministerial meeting.
While reaffirming its status neutrality and adherence to
resolution 1244 (1999), it also announced that KFOR
would undertake what it called “new tasks”. I refer
more specifically to NATO’s intent to supervise the
standing down of the Kosovo Protection Corps and to
supervise and support the establishment and training of
the so-called Kosovo Security Force, a new institution
whose establishment has not been approved by the
Security Council. This places it clearly beyond the
scope of resolution 1244 (1999).
Accordingly, I must express my country’s
apprehension at the possibility that parts of the
international community presence in Kosovo have
chosen to participate in the formation and training of a
quasi-military force. Such a wrong step would call into
question the trust that KFOR has worked hard to attain
among all the communities of our southern province,
especially the Kosovo Serbs.
I would like to raise another issue with this
Council. This concerns what was perhaps the final
negligent act by the outgoing Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim Rücker. Just a few
days ago, he issued an executive decision that initiated
a process by which funds totalling more than €426
million could be illegitimately transferred to the
authorities in Pristina.
I want to make it abundantly clear that these
funds, held in escrow by the United Nations to offset
future claims by workers, mostly Kosovo Serbs, who
have been laid off and Serbian companies as a result of
the questionable privatization process undertaken by
the Kosovo Trust Agency, are not the property of the
authorities in Pristina. The United Nations must
immediately take all appropriate measures to ensure
that these funds remain in its possession and guarantee
they continue to be available for their intended
purpose. We must work together to produce a solution
to this serious issue in the very near future.
I now draw attention to the fact that the Republic
of Serbia held parliamentary elections on 11 May. I
have a constitutional duty to guide the process of the

6

formation of the Government, which will be united in
pursuing the policy of defending the integrity of our
country and will implement the clear commitment of
the citizens of Serbia to move decisively forward to
full membership in the European Union. It will also
have the duty to complete the process of full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia at The Hague in the
conviction that a stable and secure future for the entire
Western Balkans lies in the European Union. The time
has passed for us to be part of the problem of the
Balkans: we want to be part of the solution.
I would like to stress the importance of finding a
legal way forward on Kosovo, acceptable to all
stakeholders and approved by the Security Council.
Only such an approach can produce a sustainable
outcome that will enable us fully to construct and
integrate, and so to grasp the infinite opportunities that
the Europe of the twenty-first century offers to all
visionary crafters of a more prosperous tomorrow.
That is why I see Europe as the key to Serbia’s
future success. I draw strength for this fundamental
conviction from the solemn words of the preamble of
the Treaty of Rome: “pooling their resources to
preserve and strengthen peace and liberty”. That is the
kind of Europe to which we are committed, and to
which we — and the entire Western Balkans — will
belong very soon.
Let there be no more divisions, no more discord
and no more conflict. The time to strengthen peace and
economic development is now.
The President: I think the President of the
Republic of Serbia for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Fatmir
Sejdiu.
Mr. Sejdiu (spoke in Albanian; English
interpretation provided by the speaker): It is my
pleasure to appear before the Security Council to speak
of the situation in my country, the Republic of Kosovo.
Over the past four months the Security Council has
held regular and frequent meetings to discuss Kosovo
even as other regions demand the attention of the
international community. I recognize that this
programme reflects the great importance that the
Security Council attaches to peace and stability in
South-East Europe.

08-39202

S/PV.5917

As members know, a great deal has happened in
my country since the beginning of this year. Kosovo’s
independence, declared in conformity with the
recommendations of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, has been
recognized by 43 Members of the United Nations, and
more countries are recognizing it every month. As a
State desiring full integration into the Euro-Atlantic
community, Kosovo has been particularly grateful that
more than two thirds of the members of the European
Union and NATO promptly recognized our new status.
Kosovo has also achieved tangible progress on
the ground. As stated in our declaration of
independence, the Ahtisaari plan is the guiding
framework for our efforts. That document,
overwhelmingly endorsed by the Assembly of Kosovo,
continues to enjoy the broad support of our people. In
accordance with the obligations that Kosovo assumed
under the plan, the Assembly has adopted more than 40
pieces of legislation in crucial areas such as the
decentralization of local government, the protection of
ethnic minorities and the safeguarding of Kosovo’s rich
cultural heritage. A new constitution came into force in
Kosovo on 15 June. It enshrines many of the provisions
of the Ahtisaari plan and reflects the highest standards
of human rights.
Although there have been violent challenges in
Kosovo, including attacks resulting in the tragic death
of a United Nations police officer, most of Kosovo has
remained calm and orderly.
In short, the transition to our new status has gone
well.
Today, however, the Council is meeting to discuss
the future of the United Nations presence in Kosovo.
As we recall, nine years ago this month, the Security
Council took the extraordinary step of severing
Belgrade’s governance over Kosovo and placing
Kosovo under a transitional United Nations
administration. At that time, in that desperate year of
1999, hundreds of thousands of my fellow citizens
were displaced as a result of Belgrade’s ethnic
cleansing. Milosevic’s repression had left us without
any functioning institutions.
We were therefore grateful when the United
Nations came to Kosovo to help us rebuild our
shattered society. With United Nations support, we
developed our own democratic institutions of selfgovernment and selected leaders through multiple

08-39202

rounds of free and fair elections. The United Nations
oversaw the establishment of an entire system of
governance: our municipalities, our ministries, our
Assembly, our judiciary and our police.
In recent years, the United Nations has
progressively handed governing responsibilities over to
Kosovo’s new institutions. Since 1999, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has scaled down its physical presence and
personnel as the situation has improved in Kosovo.
Throughout this process, the United Nations has
continually taken account of circumstances in Kosovo
and has adapted its presence as Kosovo’s capacity to
govern itself has developed.
As the Secretary-General noted in his recent
report (S/2008/354), Kosovo’s independence and the
entry into force of our constitution have obviously
created a dramatically new situation to which the
United Nations must adapt once more. The people of
Kosovo, therefore, appreciate the Secretary-General’s
initiative to reconfigure the United Nations presence in
our country. We note that the Secretary-General has
proposed a number of residual tasks for the United
Nations presence in Kosovo, and we further understand
that the United Nations will continue to perform rule of
law functions for a limited duration in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) as until such
time that the European Union is able to fully perform
its operational role.
I assure the Secretary-General that he will have
the ongoing support and cooperation of Kosovo as he
moves forward with this initiative. I have indicated this
support in a letter I sent to the Secretary-General
earlier this week.
The Secretary-General has also proposed
dialogue to discuss possible practical arrangements to
address threats to stability. We are open to this
proposal and take seriously the Secretary-General’s
commitment to consult closely with us, as no
arrangements can be valid without the participation and
approval of the Government of Kosovo.
With respect to the threats to stability, we
recognize that addressing the situation of our minority
communities is the most essential element in
preserving peace. As President, I have continually
reached out to ethnic minorities, especially Kosovo
Serbs, to reassure them that they have a home in
Kosovo. Kosovo’s current Government, which includes

7

S/PV.5917

representatives from minority ethnic groups is
constantly seeking new ways to build a more inclusive
and just State.

Mr. Spatafora (Italy): Let me first express our
warmest welcome to President Tadić and President
Sejdiu and thank them for their statements.

I am particularly concerned, however, that our
neighbour, Serbia, has promoted a policy that its
leaders call “functional separation of ethnic Serbs from
ethnic Albanians in Kosovo”. As the Secretary-General
noted in his report, Serbia organized elections this
spring for illegal parallel municipal governments on our
territory. Serbia has also discouraged ethnic Serbs from
participating in Kosovo’s Government or reporting
through our multi-ethnic police chain of command.

I would also like to extend a warm welcome to
the Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon, to whom goes
our deepest and most sincere appreciation for his
efforts and good offices with the parties and the key
stakeholders at a politically very delicate juncture.
Italy fully supports the realistic, wise, balanced and
forward-looking way forward that the SecretaryGeneral has outlined in his so important and
meaningful report (S/2008/354).

The people of Kosovo are understandably
concerned about the threat to our sovereignty. We are
equally concerned, however, about the message that
such policies send to Serbs in Kosovo. Policies of
division undermine the multi-ethnic governance that
the United Nations has promoted in Kosovo since
1999. These policies do not bring lasting peace or
stability, only resentment and misunderstanding. With
great sadness, I recall how such policies brought
trouble and tragedy to my region in the 1990s.

The uncertainty of recent months is to no one’s
benefit, least of all that of the ethnic minorities we are
trying to protect, who need, more than ever, a stable
environment.

The Republic of Kosovo is the seventh
independent State to emerge out of the non-consensual
collapse of the Socialist Republic of Yugoslavia. Most
of these countries gained their statehood under
circumstances that were contentious, controversial and
challenged. Although this history is a dark one, I
believe that all seven States of the former Yugoslavia,
including Serbia, have a bright and prosperous future.
The United Nations role in bringing about such a future
has been essential.
As the period of United Nations administration in
Kosovo comes now to a close, I wish to reiterate my
gratitude to the women and men of the United Nations
for their work helping my country recover from war.
The people of Kosovo believe that the best way
to honour this legacy is to build a peace-loving State
that aspires to the highest purposes and principles of
the United Nations.
The President: I thank His Excellency
Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu for his statement. I shall now give
the floor to those Council members who wish to make
comments or ask questions in connection with the
statements we have just heard.

8

Kosovo has considerably advanced on the path of
stabilization and in building up its democratic
institutions. Nevertheless, shortcomings still exist, and
the objective of harmonious multi-ethnic coexistence
has not yet been reached. An extra effort — an extra
mile — to reach this goal must be made.
As the Secretary-General rightly stated in his
report, “the process of full reconciliation and integration
of Kosovo communities will be a long-term one”
(S/2008/354, para. 2). The international community
must remain engaged in Kosovo as long as necessary
and must provide strong support in that regard.
It is encouraging to read in the report of the
Secretary-General that both Pristina and Belgrade
recognize the need to find a solution to continue the
international civil presence in Kosovo. Additionally,
Council members have confirmed their interest in
adjusting the operational role of the United Nations in
the light of the evolving circumstances.
Italy fully
assessment that

shares

the

Secretary-General’s

“the objectives of the United Nations would be
best obtained through an enhanced operational
role for the European Union in the area of the
rule of law under the umbrella of the United
Nations, headed by my Special Representative”.
(S/2008/354, para. 13)
The European Union is ready to play that role in
Kosovo. It will complement the work of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and

08-39202

S/PV.5917

security and make available its resources and longstanding expertise in the Balkans.

move forward towards a more stable and prosperous
future in the European Union.

Significantly, just today, the European Council
concluded as follows — I will quote just a few
excerpts:

Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence in this Chamber and recognize the importance
of the report that he has just presented to us
(S/2008/354). We would also like to welcome the
President of Serbia, Mr. Boris Tadić, and the President
of Kosovo, Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu, and to thank them for
their respective statements.

“[T]he European Union remains committed to
playing a leading role in ensuring the stability of
Kosovo … . The European Union welcomes the
[United Nations Secretary-General’s] report on
UNMIK
[the
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo] and … his
intention to reconfigure the international civil
presence in Kosovo. This would facilitate the
deployment of EULEX Kosovo [the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo]
throughout Kosovo”.
With the European Union enabled to play an
enhanced role in Kosovo through the EULEX mission,
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999), it will
be possible to achieve major progress in the field of
minority rights with specific regard to the Serb
minority in Kosovo, including protection of its
religious and cultural heritage.
The European Union must develop its role in
areas of the police, justice and customs. At the same
time, the United Nations should redesign its role while
preserving certain fundamental functions, such as that
of facilitating the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, so that solutions may be found to pending
issues.
Italy reaffirms its commitment to contributing to
the international effort in Kosovo and to regional
stability. We will continue to work with the United
Nations to be one of the main contributors to the
Kosovo Force, and we favour an enhanced role for the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). In addition, we will be one of the main
participants in EULEX since we firmly believe that a
stronger European Union role in Kosovo will pave the
way towards the future integration of this country
within the EU.
I would like to conclude by quoting Benjamin
Disraeli: “Success is the child of audacity”. Let all of
us around this table be audacious, supporting the way
forward as outlined by the Secretary-General, in order
to safeguard and consolidate peace and stability and to
give Kosovo, Serbia and the whole region a chance to

08-39202

Before getting into the subject at hand today,
related to the future of Kosovo, I would like to
highlight two subjects that are particularly important to
Panama. I would like to say first that Panama would
have preferred that the differences between Serbia and
Kosovo had been addressed in a different way.
However, Panama recognizes that it is the
responsibility and the capability of the SecretaryGeneral to implement the mandates given to him by the
Security Council and, accordingly, to adjust those
mandates as the circumstances on the ground continue
to change. Secondly, we would emphasize the
preponderant role to be played by regional
organizations in the resolution of issues being dealt
with by this Council.
Referring now to the substance of this issue, we
cannot deny that the reality on the ground in Kosovo
today is very different from the reality that existed
when the Security Council approved resolution 1244
(1999) without an end date. Not only have we now
witnessed Kosovo’s declaration of independence and
its subsequent recognition by a significant number of
countries, including some members of this Council, but
also, less than a week ago, with the support of the
broad majority of the Kosovars, a constitution came
into force which bestowed the State powers upon
Kosovo and which, in addition, invites the European
Union to assume a supervisory role in the
establishment of the rule of law in the country.
Moreover, the European Union, as the major
regional organization with respect to this issue, has
played an important role in Kosovo since resolution
1244 (1999) came into force and has acted in
accordance with the operative part of that document.
Moreover, and due to the changing situation on the
ground, the European Union has made public its
intention to play a greater role in Kosovo and to
progressively assume, through the European Union

9

S/PV.5917

Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX Kosovo),
part of the mandate that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has seen
fit to give to it. Furthermore, the role of NATO as a
guarantor of the security of Kosovo and trainer of the
multi-ethnic Kosovo security force is also to be borne
in mind here.
In these circumstances, we support the proposals
of the Secretary-General to adapt the UNMIK format
to the current reality as well as the intention of the
European Union to assume, as has been deemed
appropriate by the Secretary-General, part of the
responsibilities of the United Nations in Kosovo.
This approach is particularly appropriate and
necessary in light of the inability of the Council to
reach agreement on this matter and given the openended nature of resolution 1244 (1999). If we do not
take this step and deal with the reality of this proposal,
we would be ignoring our primary mandate to ensure
international peace and security. Instead, we would be
prioritizing political questions of a national character.
Finally, we would like to make it clear that all
executive action, be it on the part of UNMIK, EULEX
or the Kosovar authorities, must guarantee the security
of the whole Kosovo community, including minority
communities.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2008/354) and for what he has told us with
regard to the future of the United Nations presence in
Kosovo. I also welcome Mr. Tadić, President of the
Republic of Serbia, and Mr. Sejdiu, President of the
Republic of Kosovo, both of whom we listened to with
great attention.
We are meeting today soon after Kosovo, on
15 June, ended a process that had begun in 1999, with
the entry into force of its constitution and 41 major
laws. We welcome the entry into force of these texts,
which will provide the new State with a legal
framework that is in conformity with European
standards and values and which offers a protective
framework to all communities living in Kosovo,
including the Serb community.
The independence of Kosovo, which came about
last 17 February, is the fruit of a long process. France,
followed by the great majority of its partners in the
European Union, immediately recognized the new

10

State of Kosovo. We are aware of the diverse reactions
that we have seen since the independence of Kosovo on
the part of the international community. However, there
is a new reality here that must be taken into account by
everyone.
Apart from questions of principle with regard to
status, an objective assessment shows that over the four
months since independence the pessimistic scenarios
predicted by some have not come to pass. On the
contrary, what we see is a security situation that is
generally calm and institutions that are working in a
satisfactory manner within a democratic framework.
This positive development of the situation has
been made possible by the international civil and
military presence through its efforts to build Kosovo’s
institutions — over the past nine years to be sure —
and through its stabilizing action on the ground during
the crucial period that has just passed.
But what has been achieved is still fragile. The
future of Kosovo and the region faces numerous
uncertainties. In this new environment, it is essential to
maintain an international presence, which will
contribute to building a democratic and multi-ethnic
Kosovo. In that regard, the Secretary-General has
shouldered his responsibilities as entrusted to him by
resolution 1244 (1999). He has acted in a spirit of
transparency and dialogue while ensuring that he
consulted all the stakeholders concerned at an early
stage, first and foremost Pristina and Belgrade. I would
especially like to thank him for the care he has taken to
come here today personally to inform the Security
Council about his plans for reconfiguration.
In his approach, the Secretary-General has
demonstrated
an
irreproachable
concern
for
impartiality as regards the mandate conferred upon him
by the Security Council. The priority goals he has
set — maintaining stability and security and preserving
the work done by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) over the
past nine years — are beyond question.
With regard to implementing the reconfiguration
of UNMIK that he has set out, the Secretary-General
should be able to count on the assistance of the entire
international community. I would like to assure him of
the full support of France. Like all other members of
the Security Council, we are determined to do
everything within our power to ensure that the era that
is dawning for the people of Kosovo will contribute to

08-39202

S/PV.5917

the irreversible return of peace and stability in the
entire Western Balkans.
UNMIK should therefore continue its mission in
a new context, taking into account the necessary
operational changes that must be made in order for it to
best carry out the functions entrusted to it. It can count
on the full cooperation of the European Union in that
effort, as has just been confirmed by the European
Council. The European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX Kosovo), which is currently being
deployed, is in particular prepared to take on an
increased operational role within the framework
defined by the Secretary-General, in full conformity
with international law and in the context of resolution
1244 (1999).
However, as beneficial as its influence may be,
the international presence can accomplish nothing
without the will of the Serb and Kosovar peoples to
resolve their differences through dialogue and to
preserve the possibility of a common future without
recourse to violence. We are pleased to see that both
the Albanian and Serb populations of Kosovo have not
followed extremists on either side, with the vast
majority continuing their commitment to a peaceful
resolution of the differences between the communities.
Kosovo’s population and authorities have shown
a responsible attitude that will contribute to gradually
enabling Kosovo to assume its place in the
international community. Their commitment to the rule
of law, their keenness to build a multi-ethnic State that
respects minorities, their desire to foster friendly links
with their neighbours and their pro-European
commitment are all strong commitments that should of
course be fully implemented. We very much appreciate
the commitment of the President of Kosovo, as
reiterated before the Council today by Mr. Sejdiu, to
continue to cooperate closely with the United Nations
to that end.

Council, to link his country’s future to a process of
integration into the European Union. In our view, it is
certain that Serbia will become a member of the
European Union. It is their calling and our hope.
The signing, on 29 April 2008, of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement was the first
step on the road towards Europe. We continue to
believe that Serbia’s path towards the European Union,
including candidate status, can be speeded up. France,
which will assume the presidency of the European
Union on 1 July 2008, intends to add significant
momentum to that process by offering Serbia clear
prospects.
In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that the
European Union is fully aware of its responsibilities as
it supports resolving the issue of Kosovo and helping
Kosovo to overcome the obstacles in the way of stable
and prosperous future for all the Western Balkans. It is
in that spirit that we have deployed EULEX. It is in
that spirit too that, in the months to come, we shall try
to make progress in building a common future for
Serbs and Kosovars in the context of the European
Union.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his report (S/2008/354) on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting by President Tadić of the Republic of Serbia
and are grateful for his analysis. We also listened
attentively to the speech delivered by Mr. Sejdiu,
although it is obvious that his opinions seriously
contradict provisions requiring respect for international
law and, in particular, the provisions of resolution 1244
(1999).

In the face of unfortunate developments, the Serb
people could have given in to national passions and
turned in on themselves. To the contrary, they have
shown that they posses the necessary courage and
clear-sightedness by twice, on 3 February and 11 May
2008, manifesting their clear support for democratic
and pro-European forces.

Russia’s approach to the current situation in and
around Kosovo is based on the need to strictly adhere
to resolution 1244 (1999) and the UNMIK mandate
approved by the Security Council in that resolution. We
are convinced that the unilateral declaration of
Kosovo’s independence and its recognition by some
States runs counter to international law, especially the
Charter of the United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act
and resolution 1244 (1999) and other decisions of the
Security Council.

In that regard, allow me once again to welcome
the ongoing commitment of President Tadić, which has
been reiterated numerous times before the Security

As the Secretary-General clearly states in his
report, resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in force.
Therefore, the Special Representative of the Secretary-

08-39202

11

S/PV.5917

General and the United Nations mission in Kosovo,
which the Special Representative heads, must carry out
the functions and responsibilities entrusted to them.
These include ensuring that the rights and security of
national minorities are preserved and achieving in the
province the democratic standards established by the
international community.
We consider unlawful both the deployment
without the appropriate approval of the Security
Council of the so-called European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, which has already begun, and the
establishment of the International Steering Group. That
runs counter to resolution 1244 (1999) and the agreed
principles for a resolution of the issue of Kosovo.
We are also perplexed at the behaviour of
Mr. Pieter Feith, who recently said that as of 15 June
the administration of Kosovo will be based on the
Kosovo constitution and that the role of the main
international representative in the province will belong
to him. That clumsy attempt to assume for himself the
functions of the main international representative in
Kosovo runs counter to paragraph 6 of resolution 1244
(1999), which stipulates that that role actually belongs
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
We also find unacceptable any actions aimed at
the transfer of functions or property from UNMIK to
the European Union mission or the international civil
representative, who has no legitimate status. The
attempt by former UNMIK leadership to reconfigure
the mission by bypassing the Security Council has
done damage to the prestige of the United Nations. The
activities of former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Rücker and his deputy Larry Rossin
were in total contradiction with the norms of behaviour
that international servants are required to adhere to in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Any attempt to reorganize the international civil
presence in Kosovo while deliberately concealing
information from the Security Council is unacceptable.
We request that the Secretariat regularly provide
members of the Security Council with detailed
information on all aspects of UNMIK’s activities.
With regard to the sad legacy left by UNMIK’s
former leadership, we must recall the events that took
place in northern Mitrovica on 17 March this year.
Those events are mentioned in paragraph 6 of the
report before the Council. However, nothing is said
about the results of the investigation carried out by the

12

Secretariat at the request of at least two Members of
the United Nations, namely, Serbia and Ukraine. We
insist that an appropriate report be submitted to the
Security Council in the nearest future.
We hope that UNMIK’s new leadership will learn
from what has happened and will act in an unbiased
manner, as is appropriate for United Nations officials,
and strictly within the framework of the mission’s
mandate based on resolution 1244 (1999).
The Kosovo Force acting in the province under
the aegis of the United Nations must also strictly
adhere to its mandate approved in resolution 1244
(1999). Any arbitrary interpretation of this mandate
would be unacceptable.
We are concerned by the recent actions of the
Ministers of Defence of the States members of NATO
seeking to directly involve the Kosovo Force in the
mission to train the so-called Kosovo security force. In
general, we welcome the stabilizing role of the NATOled Kosovo Force. At the same time, if a decision is
taken that NATO should be involved in the process of
training the Kosovo security force, then NATO will
have stepped beyond the mandate of the international
military presence as approved by the Security Council.
Having studied the report of the SecretaryGeneral, we do not agree with everything stated there.
In paragraph 5 the report states that the Kosovo Serbs,
after the unilateral declaration of independence, “took
measures that pose serious challenges to the role of
UNMIK in Kosovo”. At the same time, we do not see
any assessment of the actions of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo, which have
openly spoken of their intention to curtail their
cooperation with UNMIK. Yet, what is at stake here is
the real ability of the international civil presence to
fulfil the main elements of its mandate, such as
maintaining law and order and preserving social and
ethno-confessional peace in the province.
When there is any threat to UNMIK personnel or
any attempt to block their work, we expect that the
Secretary-General, together with the Kosovo Force
leadership, will take the necessary steps that are
provided for in resolution 1244 (1999) to ensure the
safety and security of United Nations personnel and
that the Secretary-General will immediately inform the
Security Council of any violations of the obligations
established by resolution 1244 (1999).

08-39202

S/PV.5917

In the report, the Secretary-General noted the
intentions of the interim Kosovo Albanian authorities
to significantly violate provisions of paragraph 7 of
resolution 1244 (1999). Paragraph 7 of the report reads
in part:
“the government of Kosovo has indicated that it
would welcome a continued United Nations
presence in Kosovo provided that it carries out
only limited residual tasks”.
And paragraph 9 reads in part:
“the government of Kosovo has passed legislation
that comes into force 15 June that effectively
seeks to assume tasks and competencies that have
been carried out by pillar IV [of UNMIK]”.
Unfortunately, those violations are treated as
valid in the report. Thus, in paragraph 10, reference is
made to a “new reality in Kosovo”, although it is the
responsibility of the Secretariat leadership to ensure
that Security Council decisions are implemented and to
inform the Council of their violation. In fact, we have
seen a serious violation of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations that may have extremely
negative consequences for the development of the
situation in various regions of the world and, indeed,
for the role of the United Nations in conflict resolution.
We would like to confirm our principled position
regarding UNMIK reconfiguration. We believe that,
after receiving clear approval from the parties — in
particular from Belgrade — for the proposals of the
Secretary-General on transforming the international
civil presence in Kosovo, the Council cold promptly
take the appropriate decision. Any steps to bypass the
Council would be a violation of the Charter, no matter
when they are taken.
To that end, we expect that the Secretary-General
will be guided in his actions by the provisions of the
Charter and by the existing mandate as contained in
resolution 1244 (1999) and that he will refrain from
any independent action not sanctioned by the Security
Council to reconfigure UNMIK.
We believe that today’s Council meeting does not
signify the end of the Security Council’s consideration
of the issue of UNMIK. This discussion, in fact, is just
a first step in the process of finding possible solutions
to the issue by the Council. To that end, we call on the
Secretary-General to continue consultations with the

08-39202

parties and with Council members on future UNMIK
parameters.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate of the Council.
I thank the Secretary-General for his participation and
for his personal presentation of his report on the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2008/354).
My delegation also welcomes the participation of His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic
of Serbia, and Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu in the Council’s
meeting today.
The position of the Government of Viet Nam
concerning the issue of Kosovo reflects our respect for
the most fundamental principles of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. Our principled
position remains unchanged.
My delegation has carefully studied the report of
the Secretary-General. We share his view that recent
events in Kosovo have posed significant challenges to
the ability of UNMIK to exercise its administrative
authority and that there is a pressing need for a
consensual solution that preserves peace and security
in Kosovo.
It is the view of my delegation that, as the legal
framework for the international civil presence in
Kosovo was provided for by resolution 1244 (1999)
and as its format, in the form of UNMIK, was
determined by the Council on the basis of the report of
the Secretary-General contained in document
S/1999/672, any change or reconfiguration of the
international civil presence in Kosovo will require a
new decision of the Council, in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999), as well as the consent of all
parties concerned.
Reaffirming Viet Nam’s consistent position that
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States
must be fully respected, we call upon Belgrade and
Pristina to refrain from actions that would endanger
peace and lead to violence or jeopardize security in
Kosovo and in the region. We urge both sides to
resume dialogue and negotiations aimed at achieving a
comprehensive and lasting solution to the issue of
Kosovo in the interest of peace, security and stability
in the Balkan region and in Europe at large.
My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
commend the efforts undertaken by the SecretaryGeneral and to encourage him, in coordination with

13

S/PV.5917

existing mechanisms, to engage both parties in
diplomatic efforts with a view to ensuring the
legitimate rights and interests of all communities in
Kosovo and to facilitate the dignified return of
refugees and internally displaced persons.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating Viet Nam’s
support for the central role of the United Nations in
promoting dialogue and the reconciliation process and
in maintaining peace and security in Kosovo and in the
Balkans.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow
me too to welcome among us the Secretary-General,
the President of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Boris
Tadić, and the President of the Republic of Kosovo,
Mr. Fatmir Sedjiu.
I would like to briefly highlight three points to
which my delegation attaches special importance. First,
apart from the incident in which a member of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) lost his life, the situation in Kosovo
has in general remained calm, including after the
declaration of independence of 17 February. In that
context, we welcome the responsible attitude of the
parties concerned.
Secondly, the international presence and its
composition are at the heart of the most recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2008/354) and of our
discussions today. Belgium appreciates the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to adapt the United Nations presence
to a reality that, as highlighted in his report, has
changed radically. The proposed reconfiguration is
necessary. More than that, it is in conformity with
resolution 1244 (1999). It is fully within the purview of
the Secretary-General. We can therefore support it.
Now, it is important that this reconfiguration be
implemented rapidly so that the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo can make its contribution to
the establishment and reinforcement of the rule of law
throughout Kosovo, which is in the interest of all of
Kosovo’s citizens.
For my third point, I would like to stress the
words, “throughout the whole of Kosovo”. In this
context, Belgium has been reflecting on the creation of
parallel municipal authorities in majority Serb areas
and the announcement of a Serb parliament in Kosovo.
This seems to run counter to the legislative framework
defined by UNMIK and supported by the international
community.

14

What has already transpired clearly shows that it
is in the interests of Pristina and Belgrade to establish a
good working relationship; in that respect, the letter
from the Secretary-General addressed to the two
parties indicates the path to follow. We call upon both
parties to establish this relationship and to give it some
substance, bearing in mind their future which, need we
say, is solidly in Europe.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to once
again repeat its satisfaction with the work
accomplished by UNMIK and Special Representative
Joachim Rücker over the past few years.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like to take this opportunity to welcome the
presence among us today of Presidents Boris Tadić and
Fatmir Sejdiu. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his presence and for the report
(S/2008/354) which he presented to us on the future of
the United Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
Kosovo.
In its nine years of operation in Kosovo, UNMIK
has helped Kosovo establish and consolidate its
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government as
democratic and responsible institutions, and to promote
a viable economy. Nevertheless, in spite of these
undeniable efforts and achievements in many areas,
much remains to be done. Here, we need to see the
process of reconciliation and the complete integration
of the Kosovo communities. This is a major challenge.
The new situation prevailing since the declaration
of independence of Kosovo is now a given fact, the
principal acts of which are — and previous speakers
have already recalled them — the promulgation of the
constitution, which entered into force on 15 June; the
wish of the Kosovar authorities for the United Nations
to carry out residual and limited tasks; the willingness
of the European Union to deploy personnel in the
police, justice and customs spheres; and the
disengagement of the European Commission with
respect to financing economic reconstruction, which
had been under UNMIK authority, and the decision of
the authorities in Pristina to assume responsibility in
this area.
It is in this new context that the debate takes
place on the nature and appropriateness of the
international presence in Kosovo, including on the
future of UNMIK. This merits particular attention by
the Security Council. It is important to arrive at a

08-39202

S/PV.5917

compromise on these crucial issues so as to maintain
peace and stability in Kosovo and in the region.
My delegation would like, in that regard, to thank
the Secretary-General for having taken the initiative to
undertake consultations with all parties with a view to
proceedings, within the framework of resolution 1244
(1999), to a reconfiguration of the international
presence in Kosovo. We endorse and support this
approach because it allows us, inter alia, to preserve
the important achievements of the United Nations and
of the international community in Kosovo and to adapt
their presence to the evolving situation on the ground.
We invite all parties and the entire international
community to cooperate with the Secretary-General
within the framework of this new approach so as to
ensure in Kosovo, and in the Balkans as a whole, a
prosperous future in peace, good-neighbourliness and
mutual understanding.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me join others
in thanking the Secretary-General for his briefing on
his proposals and for his report on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2008/354). We would also like to welcome
Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic of Serbia,
and Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu and to thank them for their
statements.
We have consistently underlined that the Council
must always inform itself fully and build a common
and shared understanding on how evolving
developments impact the work and policy of the
interim administrator of Kosovo, namely UNMIK. We
are aware that operational adjustments and fine tuning,
in response to developments and changes on the
ground, are inevitable in any United Nations mission,
including in Kosovo. In the case of the latter, these
efforts have to be consistent with the operational
framework established under resolution 1244 (1999).
We appreciate, therefore, the extraordinary and
thought-through efforts of the Secretary-General to
employ his good offices with the parties and key
stakeholders in order to identify a status-neutral
solution which would address the current challenge and
manage the situation effectively on the ground.
Indonesia is mindful of the importance of the package
of ideas communicated by the Secretary-General on
UNMIK’s reconfiguration — moving the region in the
direction of peace and security, while ensuring the
legacy and continuous role of the United Nations.

08-39202

Synergy in the efforts between the United Nations
and the European Union (EU) merits our support. The
European Union’s efforts to play a greater operational
role within the status-neutral framework should be
encouraged and supported, as this will provide further
stability to the region. Indeed, such a role puts into
effect the recently and often discussed theme of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, as envisioned in Chapter VIII of the
Charter. It is our view that regional organizations can
provide meaningful and constructive contributions to
address regional issues. This has been the case in
Africa, the Americas and Asia, and it applies equally to
Europe.
Elsewhere, however, synergy of efforts with the
United Nations is key. For this reason, it is important to
establish a clear organizational linkage between the EU
office, the international civilian operation and the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. The Council in this regard needs to stay
abreast of the activities of the EU and the international
civil operation on the ground, as well as the regular
briefings of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the written reports of the
Secretary-General.
Once again, the two entities have to work within
the framework of resolution 1244 (1999). I will share
some final thoughts before I conclude. We wish to
underline the fact that resolution 1244 (1999) remains
in force. Dialogue and negotiation remain essential for
the resolution of the question of final status. Indonesia
has and continues to maintain that position. The
Security Council must collectively transmit a clear and
unified message to all the parties to continue to
exercise restraint, and it must exercise its leadership on
the issue. We believe that the Secretary-General should
continue to engage all parties in the region to find a
mutually acceptable solution in line with resolution
1244 (1999).
Finally, I conclude by thanking the SecretaryGeneral and his team for their relentless efforts, and
the personnel of UNMIK for their continued dedication
and their pursuit of peace and security in line with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): First of all, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for presenting his report
(S/2008/354). We would also like to welcome His
Excellency President Boris Tadić of the Republic of

15

S/PV.5917

Serbia and His Excellency President Fatmir Sejdiu of
the Republic of Kosovo.
On 15 June, the constitution of the Republic of
Kosovo came into force. We congratulate the people of
Kosovo on having adopted one of the most progressive
of constitutions, one that contains the strongest
internationally recognized human rights protection
mechanisms and includes European best practices for
multi-ethnic protection. The constitution’s adoption
and entry into force reaffirm Kosovo as a true country
in Europe and Kosovo as a truly European country. We
hope that the constitution’s implementation and the
adherence to its most advanced provisions will be a
constant affirmation of this.
After long hardship and nine years of the United
Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK)
we wish the people of Kosovo every success in
administering their own lives. We wish them stability,
security and prosperity, as well as quick integration
into the United Nations in due course and into other
international forums and, naturally, into the EuroAtlantic community. We have repeatedly reiterated our
strong conviction that all countries of South-Eastern
Europe belong to the European and Euro-Atlantic
family, and we stand ready to offer them our
experience and know-how as they travel their path.
However, the entry into force of the Kosovo
constitution effectively removes UNMIK’s powers as
interim civil administration in Kosovo as of 15 June of
this year, and that is the main reason that we are
gathered in this Chamber today. Since 1999, the United
Nations, through its UNMIK presence in Kosovo, was
very successful at administering Kosovo for the benefit
of its inhabitants. We would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate everyone who was a part of
this effort and who put energy into building something
that today we can claim to be an overwhelmingly
positive United Nations legacy in Kosovo. In this
context, let me underline the role that the outgoing
Special Representative, Joachim Rücker, played in
Kosovo and to thank him for his work.
We commend the Secretary-General and the
Secretariat for displaying leadership, and especially for
bringing all sides together in order to find solutions,
which not everyone supports fully but can live with, all
in line with the United Nations status neutrality and
with resolution 1244 (1999).

16

We applaud the Secretary-General’s vision in not
stopping the river of history from flowing, while
addressing the major worries of those concerned. We
fully support the plan he has presented in his report,
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999), which
enables him to do so.
The new reality in Kosovo and its future are
clear. We welcome the readiness of the United Nations
to carry out its residual tasks in Kosovo and offer our
support to the European Union (EU), which has
expressed its readiness to play an enhanced role in the
rule of law through its European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX Kosovo). The prompt and
full establishment of EULEX in the entire territory of
Kosovo is the best guarantee that the successful United
Nations legacy in Kosovo will be preserved.
Finally, we call on the authorities both in
Belgrade and in Pristina — and, even more important,
all citizens of Kosovo, regardless of their ethnicity —
to continue cooperating with the United Nations and
the European Union in order to ensure the continued
stability and security of Kosovo, neighbouring
countries and the region. This is crucial if we are to see
the rest of the South-Eastern Europe fully integrated
into a stable and prosperous European future.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I join
others in welcoming the presence of the SecretaryGeneral at today’s debate. We are grateful that he is
here at this discussion to present his intentions in
person.
I also welcome President Sejdiu and congratulate
him on the important progress that he and his
Government have made since Kosovo’s declaration of
independence, especially in adopting priority
legislation on the protection of minorities and
enshrining it in Kosovo’s new constitution, which came
into force just a few days ago. There are obviously
many challenges ahead for Kosovo, and the United
Kingdom stands ready to support and assist President
Sejdiu as part of an international effort towards
stability, democracy, multi-ethnicity and prosperity in
Kosovo and throughout the Balkans.
I would also like to extend a warm welcome to
President Tadić. We understand the difficulty of this
issue for Serbia. Our common goal is stability in
Kosovo and the whole of the Balkans and to support
the European perspective of Serbia and Kosovo alike.
We are concerned only with dealing with the practical

08-39202

S/PV.5917

realities and with creating a stable, multi-ethnic
Kosovo in which all communities can live in
democracy and peace.
I would like also to pay tribute to the work of the
United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK) since 1999. Kosovo has come a long way,
and UNMIK deserves substantial credit. We would
particularly like to thank and pay tribute to the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Joachim
Rücker, for his tireless and principled work in testing
circumstances, under criticism from certain Member
States and, at times, without the full support he might
have expected.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2008/354), announcing his intent to reconfigure the
international civil presence in Kosovo. We recognize
that the Secretary-General has had to balance a number
of difficult questions since Kosovo’s declaration of
independence. We agree with him on the practical
necessity of this reconfiguration in the light of the new
reality in Kosovo and to meet the new operational
requirements.
The proposed reconfiguration does not as far as
we, the United Kingdom, believe it should, but we
recognize that there is a range of views in the Council
that the Secretary-General has sought to accommodate.
And whatever the United Kingdom view — or the
views of other delegations on the Council — in the
absence of an agreed view of the Council, the exact
disposition of UNMIK in Kosovo is the SecretaryGeneral’s decision to make, and we will respect the
decisions set out in his report.
In his statement, President Tadić asked for more
time for dialogue and to await a satisfactory agreement,
including with Belgrade. Sadly, we have heard this
before. During former President Ahtisaari’s work in
fulfilling resolution 1244 (1999), the Government of
Serbia, under Prime Minister Koštunica, refused to
engage with him or cooperate. The Serbian
Government then demanded that nothing be agreed
without Belgrade’s agreement.
Life has moved on, and while some in Serbia
have been left behind, we welcome the fact of the
outcome of the latest Serbian elections. The United
Nations, certainly, has to keep up with the practical
realities.

08-39202

President Tadić also said that paragraphs 5 and 19
of resolution 1244 (1999) make clear that only the
Security Council has the power to make changes to the
international presences in Kosovo. We agree that the
Security Council alone can change or revoke resolution
1244 (1999), which is why it remains in force. But
there is nothing in paragraphs 5 or 19 of that resolution
that defines the configuration of the international
presences. In any case, the configuration of the
international presences has evolved and changed
several times since resolution 1244 (1999) was
adopted, through decisions taken by the previous
Secretary-General.
Reconfiguration in Kosovo will allow the
relevant regional body, the European Union (EU), to
play a greater role, in accordance with the spirit of
resolution 1809 (2008), unanimously adopted by the
Council just two months ago. It would also free up the
United Nations to take on activity elsewhere.
It is now important for the Secretary-General to
provide clarity to the people of Kosovo and to
implement the United Nations configuration in order
for the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo and its police component to deploy over the
rest of the summer, avoiding any gaps in security.
NATO has also made clear its continued readiness
to contribute to the implementation of security
arrangements in Kosovo. Our thanks go to the Kosovo
Force for its work in ensuring peace and security there.
Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would, first of all, like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing. We appreciate his efforts to
safeguard peace and stability in Kosovo and in the
Balkans. We have also listened attentively to the
statements made by His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić,
President of Serbia, and Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu.
The overall situation in Kosovo has been stable in
the past four years, but it remains tense and sensitive.
That fragile situation affects the peace and stability of
the Balkans and Europe as a whole. China hopes that
all parties will view the relevant issues from a broader
and longer-term perspective, and avoid any statements
and actions that could lead to tension and endanger the
peace and stability of the region.
China has always maintained that all parties
should adhere to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions of the

17

S/PV.5917

Security Council and respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all countries. Likewise, China
has always maintained that a final resolution of the
status of Kosovo should be a settlement acceptable to
both sides reached through negotiations. We support
further efforts to find a proper solution for Kosovo’s
status through negotiations.
Nine years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1244 (1999), which has become the legal
basis for settling the issue of Kosovo. Since that time,
Kosovo has indeed experienced many changes; but the
basis for the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999)
has not changed.
Moreover, China has taken note of the
observations of the Secretary-General contained in
paragraph 17 of his report (S/2008/354), namely, that
events in Kosovo have had, and will continue to have,
a significant operational impact on the functioning of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and that, after 15 June, UNMIK will
no longer be able to perform effectively the vast
majority of its tasks as an interim administration.
We
attach
great
importance
to
the
Secretary-General’s proposal regarding UNMIK’s
reconfiguration. We believe that the Secretary-General
should continue to maintain close communications
with the relevant parties concerned in order that the
reconfiguration plan will be more reliable and feasible
and focused on a proper solution to the question of
Kosovo.
We understand and encourage the intention of the
European Union (EU) to enhance its role in the
Western Balkans. We hope that the EU will play a
positive role in the framework of resolution 1244
(1999), support the work of UNMIK and, together with
the United Nations, maintain the peace and stability of
the region.
Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
We are very grateful to you, Mr. President, for
convening this very important meeting. We welcome
the Secretary-General and would like to thank him for
his presence here today and for the report (S/2008/354)
he has provided to us. We would also like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić, President of Serbia,
and Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu, President of Kosovo.
The Secretary-General’s efforts to preserve peace
in Kosovo and in the region in general are very

18

commendable. We encourage him to continue those
efforts. It also seems to us to be of the utmost
importance to do everything possible to protect the
human rights of all the minority inhabitants living
together in Kosovo. We would like to ask the
Secretary-General to focus in particular on the efforts
needed to bring about the return of displaced persons
and the normalization of their living conditions.
We also support the Secretary-General’s proposal
for the reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in the
context of resolution 1244 (1999) and the powers it
confers and the limits it places on him. Like other
delegations, we too are of the view that the resolution
continues to be in force and that it should continue to
be the framework within which UNMIK and the United
Nations operate in Kosovo until the Council adopts a
different resolution. We believe that it is within the
power of the Secretary-General to propose the
reconfiguration he has made, which is now being
implemented.
We would like to thank the European Union for
its readiness to assume additional tasks and
responsibilities in Kosovo. That should always be done
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999) and, as
stated in the report of the Secretary-General, in
coordination with the United Nations and under the
leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Kosovo.
Finally, it is appropriate to call upon all the
communities that live together in Kosovo to make their
contribution to maintaining calm and to work together
constructively towards ending the conflict in the
framework of a political process. As in previous
occasions, Costa Rica hopes that the past, which has
unfortunately been very painful for the region, can be
overcome through a future of well-being, peace and
tranquillity for the peoples of Kosovo and the Balkans
in general.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.
I would like to welcome — this time in my
national capacity — the Secretary-General and
Presidents Tadić and Sejdiu.
I have to empathize with your predicament,
Mr. Secretary-General. I feel your pain. You have heard
opposition from some members to your reconfiguration

08-39202

S/PV.5917

plan. Most members have endorsed your plan. Faced
with the dramatic developments in Kosovo that you
have described and a Security Council that has been
unable to react to those developments, I understand that
you had to act. I understand further that resolution 1244
(1999) gives you that discretion. Just as resolution 1244
(1999) was the basis for your predecessor’s creation of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), it is the basis for your
reconfiguration of UNMIK to ensure that the United
Nations presence in Kosovo remains relevant and on
top of such dramatic changes on the ground.
Against that backdrop, the United States
appreciates the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/354) on the reconfiguration of the United
Nations presence in Kosovo. The issue before us is
whether the United Nations presence in Kosovo should
remain static and incapable of evolving to deal with the
reality on the ground, or whether it should adapt and
adjust appropriately to recent events and remain
relevant. I would like to make four points in response
to the Secretary-General’s report.
First, the United States believes that the
Secretary-General has discretion to reconfigure
UNMIK. We support the initiative he has taken to do
so. As I will describe in a moment, the United States
has some concerns about that initiative; but, on
balance, that initiative may prove to be the most
practical way forward.
The Secretary-General’s conclusion that the
United Nations must adapt to the evolving situation on
the ground should surprise no one. As far back as 2005,
the then United Nations envoy Kai Eide reported that
the Organization’s leverage in Kosovo was declining
and that new international actors, in particular the
European Union (EU), would need to play a leading
international role. The United Nations administered
Kosovo for nine years, much longer than anyone
imagined when the Council adopted resolution 1244
(1999) in June 1999. As the years have passed, the
Secretary-General has continually adjusted the United
Nations presence in Kosovo and its relationship to
other international organizations. The fact that
Kosovo’s democratic and multi-ethnic Government is
now ready to govern is a testament to the success of the
United Nations in institution-building.
with

The Secretary-General’s continued cooperation
international organizations, particularly the

08-39202

European Union, will ensure that there is appropriate
oversight by the international community and that
Kosovo continues its progress in building a more stable
society.
My second point is that the United States finds
certain elements in the Secretary-General’s report to be
troubling. The Secretary-General has proposed a new
round of United Nations dialogue with Belgrade to
discuss institutional arrangements within the State of
Kosovo. We believe that such dialogue should always
be encouraged, particularly if United Nations officials
can facilitate the support of the Government in
Belgrade for multi-ethnic institutions in Kosovo.
Nonetheless, any institutional arrangement for Kosovo
must be discussed with and agreed to by the
Government in Pristina. This dialogue must be
transparent with regard to both its agenda and its
objectives and must be thoroughly coordinated with the
major international stakeholders who will assume
responsibility for security and stability in Kosovo.
We understand the concern of President Tadić for
Kosovo Serbs, who of course remain Serb citizens
within Kosovo. I hope that it is that concern that
motivates him to engage in this dialogue on Kosovo’s
institutions rather than a desire to undo or undermine
their reconfiguration.
I also note with concern language in the
Secretary-General’s report that could be construed as
proposing a more robust and long-term United Nations
role in Kosovo than is warranted. Our view is that the
Secretary-General should have acknowledged more
explicitly that the United Nations can no longer play
such a major role in Kosovo under the present
circumstances.
Thirdly, I would note that the Council should be
encouraged by the rapid progress that Kosovo has
achieved since independence. That progress justifies
the Secretary-General’s decision to reconfigure the
United Nations presence. We are pleased to see that
Kosovo’s transition to independence has gone more
smoothly than some sceptics had expected. Kosovo’s
multi-ethnic Government has enthusiastically begun to
implement the minority rights framework proposed by
former United Nations Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari.
The Kosovo Assembly has adopted key laws to
implement the Ahtisaari plan in areas such as
decentralization of local government and protection of
cultural heritage and the rights of ethnic communities

19

S/PV.5917

and their members. Kosovo’s new constitution meets
the highest international human rights standards and
incorporates rights and protections contemplated in the
Ahtisaari plan.
Nevertheless, serious problems remain, and
Kosovo has much work to do to fight corruption,
implement market reforms and build better institutions.
But the political maturity shown by President Sedjiu
and other Kosovar leaders, particularly through their
words and actions to reach out to Kosovo’s minorities,
demonstrates that Kosovo has a bright future.
My fourth and final point is that Belgrade’s
efforts to promote ethnic separation in Kosovo threaten
to reverse the progress that the United Nations and the
people of Kosovo have achieved. The SecretaryGeneral’s report correctly notes that Serbia will
continue to have a relationship with Kosovo Serbs.
Indeed, the Ahtisaari plan provided for that relationship
to continue and proposed a transparent mechanism for
Belgrade to support Kosovo Serb communities. But
Belgrade has openly decided to use that relationship to
discourage Kosovo Serbs from cooperating or even
talking with their Kosovo Albanian neighbours.
On 22 March, Serbia’s Minister for Kosovo
publicly characterized Belgrade’s plan as the functional
division of Serbs and Kosovo Albanians in Kosovo. To
implement that plan, Belgrade sponsored parallel
municipal elections in Kosovo, which the United
Nations correctly declared illegal and contrary to
resolution 1244 (1999). Belgrade also pressured Serbs
to withdraw from Kosovo’s multi-ethnic institutions,
which were established under United Nations auspices.
Belgrade is now supporting a Serb parliamentary
assembly in Kosovo in an attempt to solidify parallel
institutions. Belgrade has also tried to extend indirect
control over northern Kosovo, where Serb-instigated
violence resulted in the death of a United Nations
police officer in March.
Such policies of ethnic partition and separation
run contrary to the principles of the United Nations
Charter and threaten to undermine nine years of efforts
by the international community to promote multi-ethnic
governance in Kosovo. The United States has long
believed that Serbia, a great nation and a regional
leader, has a bright and prosperous future in EuroAtlantic institutions. We therefore encourage Belgrade’s
new Government to encourage Kosovo Serbs to
participate in multi-ethnic institutions in Kosovo.

20

In conclusion, as the period of United Nations
administration over Kosovo comes to a close, we look
forward to working with the Secretary-General to
protect the positive legacy of the United Nations of
peace and democracy in Kosovo. I want to end by
congratulating the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier, and to thank
Mr. Rücker and all the men and women who work with
him for their service in Kosovo.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
The President of the Republic of Serbia, His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić, has asked to make a
statement, and I give him the floor.
President Tadić: Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the opportunity to comment, at the end of
this meeting, on the reactions to my statement and the
statements by Mr. Sedjiu and the Secretary-General.
First of all, there are no multi-ethnic institutions
in Kosovo and Metohija, even today. There are only a
few Serbs who participate in those institutions, and if
the question is, who is supporting those Serbs, I answer
that it is only the members of the Albanian
Government in Kosovo and Metohija. Belgrade is not
preventing Serbs from participating in those
institutions. There is no confidence in them because of
the lack of results they have achieved. If the question is
how many Serbs have returned to their homes after the
adoption of the Kosovo constitution and the declaration
of independence, my answer is crystal clear: none. If
the expectation is that some Serbs will return to their
own homes in the period ahead of us under these
circumstances, that is not a realistic expectation.
I would like to see progress, and I am going to do
everything in my power to establish the circumstances
in which Serbs will return to their own homes. But the
problem comes from Kosovo, its municipal institutions
and its central Government. Belgrade is not the
problem. Belgrade is the seat of Serbia’s legitimate
democracy today. We are participating in the
negotiation process, and we have always been doing so
since its beginning. Even though we have done so, the
Kosovo Albanian delegation has avoided talking with
the Belgrade delegation about the future status of
Kosovo, saying only a few words about our bilateral
relations after Kosovo’s independence. That is not
democracy. That is not a dialogue between two sides.

08-39202

S/PV.5917

As I say, Belgrade is going to do everything
possible in terms of improving the situation and
ensuring the respect of human rights and better
circumstances for all citizens of Serbia, including
Kosovo. After the unilateral declaration of
independence and after the adoption of the so-called
constitution of Kosovo, Belgrade did not cut Kosovo
off in terms of its economy, transportation and
communications.
Belgrade did not act violently against Kosovo and
Metohija. Belgrade is trying to do everything stipulated
by the United Nations in terms of providing stability
and security in Kosovo. If Mr. Sejdiu is saying that
Serbia’s current policy is sending our region back to
the 1990s, I totally disagree. We are not making war;
we are not threatening; we are trying to achieve a
compromise solution. At the same time, we are
respecting international law.
But this is not only about international law. If a
unilateral declaration of independence and so-called
Kosovo independence are going to happen, it is a
problem not only for our region and my country, but
also for other regions with similar problems. The
Council knows that I speak the truth. This is a very
dangerous precedent in terms of the stability of other
regions all around the world — on all continents —
with very similar problems. I ask Council members
what the next case will be in the Security Council of
the United Nations — it will be one very similar to the
case of Kosovo.
When the Secretary-General says that this is the
most complicated problem of his career, I believe him.
This is indeed one of the most complicated problems in
your career, Mr. Secretary-General. When Mr. Khalilzad,
the Permanent Representative of the United States, says
that he feels the Secretary-General’s pain, I expect that
Mr. Khalilzad will feel my pain as well.
I am the President of Serbia. Serbia is a
legitimate democracy — a European country with a
European culture which is defending its legitimate
interests in a normal way: by using diplomatic tools,
not by making war. We expect that our legitimate
interests will be respected, not only with regard to our
European future, which is not in question, but also with
regard to our integrity and sovereignty. We are a
normal and legitimate democracy — a European
State — with our own sovereignty and integrity.

08-39202

The President: I thank the President of the
Republic of Serbia for his statement. Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu
has asked for the floor, and I call on him now.
Mr. Sejdiu (spoke in Albanian; English
interpretation provided by the speaker): I would like
once more to emphasize that we have high regard for
the Secretary-General’s initiative to reconfigure the
United Nations presence in Kosovo, that is, the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), taking into
account the common need for a limited engagement,
until the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo is ready to assume responsibilities.
We have said before, and we re-emphasize, that
we are fully committed to coordination and
cooperation in order to successfully conclude the great
story of the international community’s investment for
peace and stability in Kosovo. In this regard, I would
like to say that we are committed, and I personally am
committed, as President of the Republic of Kosovo —
not as representative of the Albanians in Kosovo, but
as the representative of the people and institutions of
the Republic of Kosovo — to fully put into practice
and implement the plan put forward by the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy, Mr. Ahtisaari. Our
commitment is to shoulder direct responsibility for the
work of Kosovo’s institutions.
On the day that the constitution of the Republic
of Kosovo entered into force, I signed 41 laws, most of
them referring to the main provisions of the Ahtisaari
plan and related as well to safeguarding the interests of
the minority communities.
We take this opportunity to recall that the
Secretary-General spoke positively about the precise
moment of Kosovo’s declaration of independence and
the entire period since then. Some representatives of
Member States said that by its declaration of
independence Kosovo was threatened and the United
Nations was threatened. They also predicted that there
would be a large-scale exodus from Kosovo and that
bad things would happen. Just the opposite has
occurred. We have shown our genuine commitment,
taking a serious and mature approach. All developments
in Kosovo should be treated as joint developments,
which will lead to an objective perspective.
Despite this, I would like to emphasize again that,
as is well known, there have been attempts on the part
of Serbia to maintain tension with respect to
developments in Kosovo. For example, two border

21

S/PV.5917

crossing points were set on fire on the day of Kosovo’s
declaration of independence and subsequent events
included the wounding of police officers from the
United Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
death of a police officer from the Kosovo Force. I
personally visited the scene of these attacks to be with
the victims and to hear their concerns following their
stressful experiences.
I take this opportunity to again urge the Republic
of Serbia to allow the Serbs in Kosovo to live with the
reality, to allow the Serbs in Kosovo to live with the
reality, to allow Kosovo to become independent,
prosperous and deeply committed to the integration
processes within the Euro-Atlantic structures.
We therefore highly regard the special role that
the United Nations, the European Union and NATO
have played in Kosovo during these times, with respect
to the process that we have gone through. We also
express the readiness of the Kosovo institutions to
responsibly continue their work in cooperation with the
international presences in Kosovo, leading to a
conclusion of their operations in Kosovo on the basis
of principles that we have affirmed and will support in
order to move forward.
The President: I thank Mr. Sejdiu for his
statement.
Before adjourning the meeting, I would like to
give the floor to the Secretary-General to make a
further statement.
The Secretary-General: This has been a serious
challenge for all of us. I am quite sure that everyone
must have experienced pain. In that regard, I appreciate
the pain felt by Their Excellencies Presidents Tadić and
Sejdiu. Now, turning to our mission, my overriding
priority and concern is how to bring peace and security
and maintain this peace and security in the region. That
is what I am going to do as Secretary-General, and I
need the support, cooperation and sympathetic
understanding of participants in order to do it. This is
part of a broad mandate which is given to me by the
Charter of the United Nations and by resolution 1244
(1999), which Security Council members adopted in
1999.
I have shared with the Security Council my
assessment of the situation in Kosovo and have
described my intensive efforts, with the sides and key
stakeholders, to reach a compromise solution. These

22

efforts have resulted in an idea for the international
civil presence, which is before the Council today. This
package is a practical and workable solution, a
concrete and sustainable response to a complex and
difficult situation. It is founded on the imperative,
overriding need, as I have said, to maintain
international peace and security and stability in Kosovo
and the region, while responding and adapting to
changing circumstances on the ground.
The package furthers the objectives of the United
Nations in Kosovo. Its aim is to consolidate the
significant achievements of nine years of interim
administration. It takes into account the profoundly
changed reality in Kosovo, while also addressing areas
of concern for Serbia and for Kosovo’s minority
communities.
The package is strictly status neutral and is fully
within the framework of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999), which remains the legal framework for
UNMIK until and unless the Security Council decides
otherwise. It recognizes the importance of an enhanced
role for the European Union in Kosovo as part of the
European Union’s efforts to promote progress and
stability in the Western Balkans.
While no solution is ideal, this package is, I am
convinced, the result of an effort at compromise and
has benefited from extensive consultations. It is
supported by all my senior advisers, who have worked
tirelessly and intensively with me in its development. It
is, therefore, the view of the United Nations that this
package constitutes the best possible way forward to
manage the situation in Kosovo. Today’s meeting has
provided the Security Council with an important
opportunity to consider the package.
Finally, the Secretariat and I myself as SecretaryGeneral, are ready to brief the Council on operational
developments in Kosovo and to share with it the
challenges on which our mission has been focusing,
including the one related to Mitrovica, referred to by
the representative of Russia.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

08-39202
