82 (1950). Resolution of 25 June 1950

82 (1950). Resolution du 25 join 1950

[S/1501)

[S/1501)

Le Conseil de securit{.
Rappe/ant Jes conclusions que l'Assemblec generak a
formulees dans sa resolution 293 (IV) du 21 octobn:
1949, a savoir que le Gouvernement de la Republiquc
de Coree est un gouvernement lcgitime qui excrce
effectivement son autorite et sa juridiction sur la partie
de la Coree ou la Commission tcmporaire des Nations
Unies pour la Coree a ete en mesure de proceder a des
observations et a des consultations et dans laquelle reside
la grande majorite de la population de la Corce; quc
ce gouvernement est ne d'elections qui ont ete !'expression
valable de la libre volonte du corps electoral de cctte
partie de la Coree et qui ont ete observees par la Commission temporaire; et que ledit gouvernement est le seul
qui, en Coree, possede cette qualite,
Conscient de ce que l'Assemblee generale, dans ses
Mindful of the concern expressed by the General
Assembly in its resolutions 195 (III) of l 2 December resolutions 195 (III) du 12 decembre 1948 et 293 (IV)
1948 and 293 (IV) of 21 October 1949 about the conse- , du 21 octobre 1949, s'inquiete des consequences que
quences which might follow unless Member States pourraient avoir des actes prejudiciables aux resultat~
refrained from acts derogatory to the results sought to que cherchent a obtenir Jes Nations Unies en vue de
be achieved by the United Nations in bringing about l'independance et de !'unite completes de la Coree et
the complete independence and unity of Korea; and invite Jes Etats Membres a s'abstenir d'actes de cette
the concern expressed that the situation described by nature; et conscient de cc que l 'Assemblee generalc
the United Nations Commission on Korea in its report 9 craint que la situation decrite par la Commission dans
menaces the safety and well-being of the Republic of ! son rapport 9 ne menace la snrete et le bien-etre de la
Korea and of the people of Korea and might lead to Republique de Coree et du peuple Coreen et ne risquc
open military conflict there,
de conduire a un veritable conflit arme en Coree,
Noting with grave concern the armed attack on the
Prcnant acte de l'attaque dirigee contre la Republiquc
Republic of Korea by forces from North Korea,
' de Coree par des forces armees venues de Coree du Nord.
attaque qui le preoccupe gravement,
The Security Council,
Recalling the finding of the General Assembly in its
resolution 293 (IV) of 21 October 1949 that the Government of the Republic of Korea is a lawfully established
government having effective control and jurisdiction over
that part of Korea where the United Nations Temporary
Commission on Korea was able to observe and consult
and in which the great majority of the people of Korea
reside; that this Government is based on elections which
were a valid expression of the free will of the electorate
of that part of Korea and which were observed by the
Temporary Commission; and that this is the only such
Government in Korea,

1

Determines that this action constitutes a breach of the
peace; and

Constate que cettc action constitue une rupture de
la paix; et

Calls for the immediate cessation of hostilities;
Demande la cessation immediate des hostilites :
Calls upon the authorities in North Korea to withdraw
Invite Jes autorites de la Coree du Nord a retirer immeforthwith their armed forces to the 38th parallel;
' diatement leurs forces armees sur le 3ge parallele;

II

II

Requests the United Nations Commission on Korea:
(a) To communicate its fully considered recommendations on the situation with the least possible delay;

(b) To observe the withdrawal of North Korean forces
to the 38th parallel;
(c) To keep the Security Council informed on the
execution of this resolution:

Prie la Commission des Nations Unies pour la Corec:
a) De communiquer, apres mur examen et dans le
plus bref delai possible, ses recommandations au sujet
de la situation;
·
b) D'observer le retrait des forces de la Coree du Nord
sur le 3ge parallele;
c) De tenir le Conseil de securite au couraot de
I 'execution de la presente resolution;

llI

Ill

Calls upon all Member States to render every assistance
to the United Nations in the execution of this resolution

Invite tous Jes Etats Membres a preter !cur entier
concours a !'Organisation des Nations Unies pour

• See Official Records of the Security Council, Fifth Year, No. 1,5,
473rd meeting, p. 2, footnote 2 (document S/1496, incorporating
Sf 1496/Corr. I).

• Voir P~oces-ver~aux officiels du Consei/ de securite, cinquiemc
anm!e, 11° fa, 473• seance, p. 2, n0te 2 (document S/1496) et document S/1496/Corr. l (mimeographie) figurant quant au fond dam
la declaration du President, p. 3 et 4 de la meme seance.

1

4

and. to refrain from giving assistance lo the North Korean
authorities.

1'execution de la presente resolution et a s'abstenir de

Adopted at the 173rd meeting
by 9 votes to none, with 1
abstention ( Yugoslavia) . 10

Adoptee a la 47.3• seance par
.'I voix contre zero, avec une
abstention ( Yougoslavie} •• .

venir en aide aux autorites de la Coree du Nord.

83 (1950). Resolution of 27 June 1950

83 (1950). Resolution du 27 juio 1950

[S/ 1511]

[S/ 15 I l]

Le Conseil de securite,
The Security Council,
Ayant constate que l'attaque dirigee contre la RepuHaving determined that the armed attack upon the
Republic of Korea by forces from North Korea constitutes blique de Coree par des forces armees venues de Corec
du Nord constitue une rupture de la paix,
a breach of the peace,
Ayant demande la cessation immediate des hostilites,
Having called for an immediate cessation of hostilities,
Ayant invite Jes autorites de la Coree du Nord a retirer
Having called upon the authorities in North Korea to i
withdraw forthwith their armed forces to the 38th parallel, imniediatement leurs forces armees sur le 3ge parallele,
Having noted from the report of the United Nations
Arant constate, d 'apres le rapport de la Commission
Commission on Korea 11 that the authorities in North des Nations Unies pour la Coree 11, que Jes autorites de
Korea have neither ceased hostilities nor withdrawn their la Coree du Nord n 'ont ni suspendu Jes hostilites, ni
armed forces to the 38th parallel, and that urgent military retire leurs forces armees sur le 3ge parallele, et qu 'ii faut
measures are required to restore international peace and prendre d'urgence des mesures militaires pour retahlir la
paix et la securite internationales,
security,
Ayant pris acte de l'appel adresse aux Nations Unies
Having noted the appeal from the Republic of Korea
to the United Nations for immediate and effective steps par la Republique de Coree, qui demande que des
mesures efficaces soient pris.::s immediatement pour
to secure peace and security,
garantir la paix et la securite.
Recommends that the Members of the United Nations
Recommande aux Membrc,, de I'Organisation des
furnish such assistance to the Republic of Korea as may Nations Unies d'arporter a la R1~publique de Coree
be necessary to repel the armed attack and to restore toutc !'aide necessaire pour repousser Jes assaillants et
international peace and security in the area.
retablir dans cette region ld paix et la securite internationale~.
1

Adopted at the .J74th meeting

ldoptce ,; la 1;· f•· seance par
voix mntre une ( Yougoslavie) "·

hv 7 votes to 1 (Yugoslavia). 12

,

84 (1950). Resolution of 7 July 1950

84 (1950). Resolution du 7 juillet 1950

[S/1588]

[S/15881

The Security Council,
Le Conseil de securite,
Having determined that the armed attack upon the i
Ayant constate que l'attaque dirigee contre la RepuRepublic of Korea by forces from North Korea constitutes blique de Coree par des forces armees venues de Coree
a breach of the peace,
du Nord constitue une rupture de la paix,
Having recommended that Members of the United '
Al'ant recommande aux Membres de !'Organisation
Nations furnish such assistance to the Republic of des Nations Unies d'apporter a la Republique de Coree
Korea as may be necessary to repel the armed attack toute I 'aide necessaire pour repousser Jes assaillants et
and to restore international peace and security in the retablir dans cette region la paix et la securite interarea,
nationales,
10

Onemember(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) was absent.

10
•
Un des membres (Union des Republiqucs socialistes sovietiques)
eta1t absent.
11
Proces-verbaux ojjiciels du Conseil de securite, cinquieme anm;e,
11° lo, 474,· seance, p. 2 (document S/ 1507).
1
• Deux des membres (Egypte, Indc) n'ont pas participe au vote;
un des membres (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiqucs)
etait absent.

11 Or_{icial Records of the Security Council, Fifth Year, No. 16,
474th meeting, p. 2 (document S/1507).
12 Two members (Egypt, India) did not participate in the voting;
one member (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) was absent.

5
