Reaolutiom adopted on reports of the Third Committee
Con.sidering that the recommendations it has adopted
at its seventh session do not represe--it the only steps
that can be taken to promote respect for such right,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
ask the Commission on Human Rights to continue preparing recommendations concerning international respect for the right of peoples to self-determination,
and particularly recommendations relating to the steps
which might be taken, within the limits of their resources and competence, by the various organs of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies to develop
international respect for the right of peoples to selfdetermination ;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
submit through the Economic and Social Council its
recommendations to the General Assembly.
403rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1952.

638 (VD). Integration of refugees
The GeneraJ Assembly,
Taking note of the observations and information

contained in the report• of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the problem of assimilation of refugees in the countries of their residence,
Considering that the voluntary repatriation or the
resettlement in countries of immigration of refugees
under the mandate• of the High Commissioner, while
constituting valuable elements for the solution of the
refugee problem, are not sufficient in themselves under
the present conditions to offer within a reasonable time
a permanent solution of that problem,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts made by the governments of the countries of present residence oi
refugees towards their as~imilation, as well as the
studies and plans of the High Commissioner directed
towards the same objective,
Considering that, in view of the heavy financial burdens involved in the execution of int~ration pro~ e s , international funds may play a useful role
1n the successful execution of long-term projects for
.the assimilation of refugees,
lflflit,s the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, in consultation with the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development, to examine the
situation with a view to exploring, with the governments directly concerned, what sources of funds might
be available and the most effective means by which
such funds might be utilized.
408th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

27

639 (VII). Report of the United Natiom High
Commissioner for Refugees
The GeneraJ Assembly,
Concerned with the persistence of a serious refugee
problem which is the direct responsibility of the United
Nations,
1. Noles with appreciation the second annual report 10 of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees;
2. Takes note of the fact that contributions thus
far received by the High Commissioner for assistance
to refugees under the authority given to him by General Assembly resolution 538 B (VI) of 2 February
1952 will not be sufficient to provide in 1953 for
emergency aid to the most needy groups of refugees
under his mandate in Europe, the Near East and the
Far East, particularly in Shanghai ;
3. Notes with appreciation the contributions al~ea?~ made by governments, organizations and private
md1v1duals to the fund for emergency aid to refugees;
4. Expresses the hope that furtlter contributions
will be forthcoming to that fund so as to enable the
High Commissioner to carry out his plans of assistance
to the most needy groups of refugees;
. 5: Reiterat!s its appeal to all governments, spec1al1zed agencies and other inter-governmental and
non-governmental organizations interested in migration
to give to ~fugees under the mandate of the. High
Commissi?ner every possible opportunity in and benefit
from projects to promote migration, including such
measures as will facilitate the transit, resettlement and
employment of refugees in occupations suitable to their
training and skills.
408th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

640 (VII). Convention on the Political Rights of
Women
The GeneraJ Assembly,
Considering that the peoples of the United Nations
are determined to. promote equality of ri~hts of men
and women, in conformity with the principles embodied in the Charter,
Believing that an international convention on the
political rights of w?men will ~onstitute an important
step towards the universal attamment of equal rights
of men and women,
R,.ffirming its resolution S6 {I) of 11 December

1946,
Decides to open tne attached Convention for signature and ratification at the end of the present session.

409th plnary m•mng,
20 D,cnnb,r 195~.
• See Official Rttortl.r of IM Gmtf"ol Ass,mbl;y,· Srventli Sission, S11pplfflllnt No. l6.
• See resolution 428 (V).

10 See Official Rttortl.r of IM Gntn'ol Ass1tnbl;y, Sn.•intlt
Session, S11,Pllfnfflt No. l6.

General Asaembly-Seventh Seasion

28

ARTICLE VII

ANNEX

Convenlion on lhe Political Righi. o/ Women
Tht Contracting Parties,
Desiring to implement the principle of equality of ri~hts
£or men and women contained in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recognizing that everyone has the right to take part in
the government of his country directly or through freely
chosen representatives, and has the right to equal access to
p11blic service in his country, and desiring to equalize the
status of men and women in the enjoyment and exercise of
politic11I rights, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and of the Universal Declaration o( Human Rights.
Having rtsolvtd to conclude a Convention for this purpose,

Hereby agree as hereinafter provided:
ARTICLE

I

In the event that any State submits a reservation to any
of the articles of this Convention at the time of signature,
ratification or accession, the Secretary-General shall communicate the text of the reservation to all States which are
or may become parties to this Convention. Any State which
objects to the reservation may, within a period of ninety days
from the date of the said communication (or upon the date
of its becoming a party to the Convention), notify the Secretary-General that it does not accept it. In such case, the
Convention shall not enter into force as between such State
and the State making the reservation.

ARTICLE VIII

1. Anl State may denounce this Conventi~ by w~tten
notification to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Denunciation shall take effect one year after the date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary-General.
2. This Convention shall cease to be in force as from
the date when the denunciation which reduces the number
of p-:uties to less than six becomes effective.

Women shall be entitled to vote in all elections on equal
terms with men, without any discrimination.
ARTICLE IX

AnJCLEII
Women shall be elislble for election to all J)llblicly elected
bodies, established by national law, on equal terms with men,
without any discrimination.

AmCLE III
Women shall be entitled to hold public office and to exercise all public functions, established by national law, on
equal terms with men, without any discrimination.

Amcu IV
I. This Convention shall be open for signature on behalf
of any Member of the United Nations and also on behalf of
any other State to which an invitation has been addressed
by the General Assembly.

2. This Convention shall be ratified and the instruments
of ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.
ARTICLE

V

1. This Convention shall be open for accession to all States
referred to in paragraph 1 of article IV.
2. Acc:ession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-General of the United

NatloaL

Aana.a VI

l. This Convention shall come into force on the ninetieth
day following the date of deposit of the sixth instrument of
ratification of acce11ion.

2. For each State ratifying or acceding to the Convention
after the 4e,osit of the ■ixth instrument of ratification or

acca■ion ~ Convention ■ball enter into force on the ninetieth daJ after deposit by ■uch State of it■ in■trument of
ratification or acca■ion.

Any dispute which may arise between any two or more
Contracting States conceminc the interpretation or application of this Convention, which is not settled by negotiation,
shall at the request of any one of the parties to the dispute
be referred to tlte International Court of Justice for decision,
unless they agree to another mode of settlement.

ARTICLE

X

The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall notify
all Members of the United Nations and the non-member
States contemplated in paragraph 1 of article IV of this Convention of the followinr:
(a) Signatures and instruments of ratifications received
in accordance with article IV:
(b) Instruments of accession received in accordance with
article V;
( c) The date upon which this Convention enters into
force in accordance with article VI ;
(d) Communications and notifications received in accordance with article VII ;
(t) Notifications of denunciation received in accordance
with paragraph 1 of article VIII ;
(f) Abrogation in accordance with paragraph 2 of article
VIII.

AllTICU XI
1. Thi■ Convention, of which the Chinese, Enslish, French,
Ru11ian and Spanish text■ shall be equally authentic, shall
be deposited in the archive■ of the United Nations.

2. The Secretary-General of the United Nation■ ■hall
transmit a certified copy to all Members of the United Nations and to the non-member States contemplated in pararraph l of article IV.
