VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

above-mentioned international instruments, may be
under arrest or detention on account of trade union
activities;
( b) To ensure that, pending the release of such
persons, their fundamental rights are fully protected,
including the right not to be subjected to torture or
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and the right to receive a fair hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal in the determination of any criminal charge against them;
( c) To take effective measures to safeguard and
protect the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of trade union leaders who are detained or imprisoned
as a result of their struggle against colonialism, aggression and foreign occupation and for self-determination,
independence, the elimination of apartheid and all
forms of racial discrimination and racism, and for the
termination of all these violations of human rights.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33/170.

International Year for Disabled Persons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31 / 123 of 16 December
1976, in which it proclaimed the year 1981 International Year for Disabled Persons,
Recalling also its resolution 32/133 of 16 December 1977, in which, inter alia, it:
(a) Decided to establish an Advisory Committee
for the International Year for Disabled Persons, composed of the representatives of fifteen Member States
to be appointed, on the basis of equitable geographical
distribution, by the Chairman of the Third Committee,
in concurrence with the regional groups,
( b) Requested the Secretary-General to convene
the Advisory Committee no later than March 1979 at
the Headquarters of the United Nations,
Taking into consideration the fact that it has not
yet been possible to proceed to the appointment of
the members of the Advisory Committee on the basis
of the formula laid down in General Assembly resolution 32/133,
Convinced of the necessity of ensuring that the
Advisory Committee can be convened by the date
specified in resolution 32/133,
1. Decides that the Advisory Committee for the
International Year for Disabled Persons shall be composed of the representatives of twenty-three Member
States to be appointed, on the basis of equitable
geographical distribution, by the Chairman of the Third
Committee, in concurrence with the regional groups;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
the necessary information activities for the International Year for Disabled Persons are initiated, starting
from 1 January 1979, and to make the requisite
financial provisions.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

*
*

*

The Chairman of the Third Committee subsequently informed the Secretary-Genera/92 that, in accordance with para92 A/33/550.

157

graph 1 of the above resolution, she had appointed the members of the Advisory Committee for the International Year for
Disabled Persons.
As a result, the Advisory Committee is composed of the
following Member States: ALGERIA, ARGENTINA, BANGLADESH,
BARBADOS, BELGIUM, BYELORUSSIAN SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLIC, CANADA, GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, INDIA, KENYA,
LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA, MOROCCO, NIGERIA, OMAN, PANAMA,
PHILIPPINES, SWEDEN, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, URUGUAY, VIET NAM, YUGOSLAVIA and ZAIRE.

33/171.

Vnited Nations Yearbook on Human
Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 9
(II) of 21 June 1946, in accordance with which
the United Nations Yearbook on Human Rights was
established,
Conscious that many developments have taken place
since the Yearbook was initially established, as a result
of which the objectives, contents and format of the
Yearbook may now be in need of modification,
Mindful that the Human Rights Committee has
expressed the wish to have some of its documents
recorded in a yearbook,
l. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at
its thirty-fifth session to review the objectives, contents
and format of the United Nations Yearbook on Human
Rights with a view to framing appropriate recommendations as to the need for modifications, such as
the inclusion therein of appropriate documents of the
Human Rights Committee and the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination and of other
important documents on human rights in order to
enhance its wider dissemination of information relating
to human rights;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-fifth session
suggestions for new contents and format for the Yearbook.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/172.

Missing persons in Cyprus

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3450 (XXX) of 9 December 1975 and 32/128 of 16 December 1977 on the
missing persons in Cyprus,
Regretting the delay in the implementation of those
resolutions,
l. Urges the establishment of an investigatory body
under the chairmanship of a representative of the
Secretary-General with the co-operation of the International Committee of the Red Cross, which would
be in a position to function impartially, effectively and
speedily so as to resolve the problem without undue
delay; the representative of the Secretary-General shall
be empowered, in case of disagreement, to reach a
binding independent opinion which shall be implemented;

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

158

2. Calls upon the parties to co-operate fully with
the investigatory body and, to this effect, to appoint
their representatives thereto forthwith;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide his good offices through his Special Representative in Cyprus, to support the establishment of the
investigatory body.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33/173.

Disappeared persons

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 93 in particular articles 3, 5, 9,
10 and 11 concerning, inter alia, the right to life, liberty
and security of person, freedom from torture, freedom
from arbitrary arrest and detention, and the right to
a fair and public trial, and the provisions of articles 6,
7, 9 and 10 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, 94 which define and establish safeguards for certain of these rights,
Deeply concerned by reports from various parts of
the world relating to enforced or involuntary disappearances of persons as a result of excesses on the part
of law enforcement or security authorities or similar
organizations, often while such persons are subject to
detention or imprisonment, as well as of unlawful actions or widespread violence,
Concerned also at reports of difficulties in obtaining
reliable information from competent authorities as to
the circumstances of such persons, including reports
of the persistent refusal of such authorities or organizations to acknowledge that they hold such persons in
their custody or otherwise to account for them,
Mindful of the danger to the life, liberty and physical
security of such persons arising from the persistent
failure of these authorities or organizations to acknowledge that such persons are held in custody or otherwise to account for them,
Deeply moved by the anguish and sorrow which
such circumstances cause to the relatives of disappeared persons, especially to spouses, children and
parents,
l. Calls upon Governments:
(a) In the event of reports of enforced or involuntary disappearances, to devote appropriate resources to searching for such persons and to undertake
speedy and impartial investigations;
( b) To ensure that law enforcement and security
authorities or organizations are fully accountable, especially in law, in the discharge of their duties, such
accountability to include legal responsibility for unjustifiable excesses which might lead to enforced or
involuntary disappearances and to other violations of
human rights;
(c) To ensure that the human rights of all persons,
including those subjected to any form of detention and
imprisonment, are fully respected;
(d) To co-operate with other Governments, relevant United Nations organs, specialized agencies, intergovernmental organizations and humanitarian bodies
in a common effort to search for, locate or account
for such persons in the event of reports of enforced
or involuntary disappearances;
93 Resolution 217 A (ill).
94 Resolution 2200 A (XXI),

annex.

2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
consider the question of disappeared persons with a
view to making appropriate recommendations;
3. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to use
his good offices in cases of enforced or involuntary
disappearances of persons, drawing, as appropriate,
upon the relevant experience of the International Committee of the Red Cross and of other humanitarian
organizations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to draw the concerns expressed in the present resolution to the attention of all Governments, regional and interregional
organizations and specialized agencies for the purpose
of conveying on an urgent basis the need for disinterested humanitarian action to respond to the situation
of persons who have disappeared.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33 /17 4.

Establishment of the United Nations
Trust Fund for Chile

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31 / 124 of 16 December 1976 and 32/118 of 16 December 1977 and taking
note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/
15 of 5 May 1978 and Commission on Human Rights
resolution 13 (XXXIV) of 6 March 1978, 95
1. Decides to establish a voluntary fund, called the
United Nations Trust Fund for Chile, administered in
accordance with the Financial Regulations of the
United Nations by the Secretary-General with the
advice of a Board of Trustees, composed of a chairman and four members with wide experience of the
situation in Chile, to be appointed by the SecretaryGeneral with due regard to equitable geographical
distribution and in consultation with their Governments, to serve for a three-year term, to receive contributions and distribute, through established channels
of assistance, humanitarian, legal and financial aid to
persons whose human rights have been violated by
detention or imprisonment in Chile, to those forced
to leave the country and to relatives of persons in the
above-mentioned categories;
2. Adopts the arrangements for the management
of the Fund set forth in the annex to the present resolution;
3. Authorizes the Board of Trustees to promote
and solicit contributions and pledges;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to put into immediate effect the provisions of the present resolution
and to give the Board of Trustees all the assistance it
may require;
5. Appeals to Member States to respond favourably
to requests for contributions to the Fund.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
ANNEX
Arrangements for the management of the United Nations
Trust Fund for Chile
1. The Secretary-General shall apply the arrangements set
forth below for the management of the United Nations Trust
Fund for Chile.
95 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Cozmcil, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
