A/73/624–S/2018/1092

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

General Assembly
Seventy-third session
Agenda item 40
The situation in Afghanistan

Distr.: General
7 December 2018
Original: English

Security Council
Seventy-third year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2405 (2018), in which the Secretary-General was
requested to report every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including political, humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of the previous report, on 10 September 2018 ( A/73/374S/2018/824).

II. Relevant developments
3.
Parliamentary elections were held as scheduled on 20 October. In response to
long delays and widespread operational difficulties, the Independent Election
Commission extended voting in some polling centres for an additional day. Violence
peaked on election day, causing the highest number of civilian casualties in any single
day in 2018. In Kandahar Province, elections were delayed for one week following
the death of two high-ranking security officials in a Taliban attack. Controversy over
the use of biometric voter verification dominated both the pre-election and
post-election phases, as the electoral management bodies and political parties debated
whether to count ballots cast without the use of the technology. Political leaders began
negotiations to form tickets for the presidential elections, scheduled for 20 April 2 019.
The appointment of Zalmay Khalilzad as the United States Special Representative on
Afghanistan Reconciliation reinvigorated peace efforts. The Russian Federation
hosted an international meeting on Afghanistan, attended by representatives of the
High Peace Council of Afghanistan and the Taliban. Relations between Afghanistan
and Pakistan remained largely cordial. Preparations accelerated ahead of the Geneva
Ministerial Conference, held on 28 November. The humanitarian situation remained

18-20408 (E)

101218

*1820408*

A/73/624
S/2018/1092

grave, characterized by high levels of displacement, an increase in conflict -related
trauma cases, and drought conditions causing food insecurity for millions of Afghans.
The return of refugees from the Islamic Republic of Iran continued at high levels,
placing further pressure on resources in western Afghanistan.

A.

Political developments
4.
The political sphere was dominated by electoral preparations for the
parliamentary elections on 20 October. In the months before the election, the
Independent Election Commission advanced technical preparations, including the
recruitment of polling centre staff, the compilation of polling centre -based voter lists
and the accreditation of electoral observers. In cooperation with the Electoral
Complaints Commission, the Independent Election Commission also held provincial
electoral forums in 33 provinces to raise awareness among voters and improve buy -in
among electoral stakeholders. The official campaign period started on 28 September,
galvanizing political parties and candidates, who began mobilizing support at the
provincial and district levels.
5.
As preparations continued, political parties maintained their demand for the
introduction of biometric voter verification technology as a measure to curb electoral
fraud. On 15 September, supporters of the Grand National Coalition of Afghanistan,
a diverse grouping of political parties, began blockades of Independent Election
Commission offices in Balkh, Herat and Kandahar Provinces, expanding to Nangarhar
Province on 18 September, in an effort to pressure the Commission. On 22 September,
the Independent Election Commission announced that it would be responsible for the
implementation of the biometric voter verification process, which entailed scanning
two index fingerprints, a digital photograph of the voter and a scan of the voter’s
tazkera (identity document) and voter registration sticker. The announcement relieved
the immediate pressure on the Independent Election Commission from political
parties, which ceased their blockades of the four provincial Independent Election
Commission offices. On 16 October, the Government’s National Procurement
Authority announced that, in collaboration with the Central Statistics Organization, it
had signed a contract with Dermalog, a Germany-based company, to provide
biometric voter verification technology on polling day. However, civil society
organizations expressed concern that this late procurement left little time for crucial
tasks, including additional recruitment and training of polling c entre staff, public
outreach, logistical arrangements for the transportation and retrieval of the biometric
voter verification devices, and the revision of polling day procedures to incorporate
the new technology. Electoral watchdogs raised concerns that t he introduction of the
technology would stretch the capacity of the Independent Election Commission to
complete other electoral preparations, and the international community voiced
concerns that under certain configurations, the technology could threaten t he secrecy
of the ballot.
6.
Electoral preparations were further complicated by significant security threats
against the electoral process by the Taliban, which issued statements warning voters
and electoral staff not to participate in the elections and threatening security personnel
charged with protecting election personnel and sites. A total of nine candidates were
assassinated in the pre-election period, with the Taliban claiming responsibility for
two of the attacks. Public confidence was shaken by the assassination of the Chief of
Police of Kandahar Province, Abdul Razziq, in an attack claimed by the Taliban. In
the aftermath, it was decided to postpone parliamentary elections in Kandahar
Province until 27 October.
7.
On 20 October, parliamentary elections were held in 32 provinces, all except
Kandahar and Ghazni, where voter registration and candidate nominations had earlier

2/16

18-20408

A/73/624
S/2018/1092

been stymied by protests blocking the Independent Election Commission. The
elections were characterized by high voter enthusiasm, despite security threats.
However, late polling centre openings often due to security threats against polling
staff, confusion over the use of biometric voter verification devices, and errors in the
newly introduced voter lists caused lengthy delays in ma ny areas, leading some voters
to leave polling centres without casting their ballots. Amid increasing voter
frustration, the Independent Election Commission announced on the afternoon of
20 October that polling would be extended for several hours and that polling centres
that had failed to open by 1 p.m. would be reopened on 21 October. In response to
widespread reports of unavailable or malfunctioning biometric voter verification
devices, the Commission also announced that voting could take place using vot er lists
in cases where biometric voter verification was unavailable. The announcements
placated voters in some areas but prompted concerns among some candidates that the
additional time and ensuing confusion could create opportunities for fraud. On
21 October, polling centres opened in many provinces and in Kabul City. The
following week, on 27 October, parliamentary elections were conducted in Kandahar
Province, with technical problems similar to those that had occurred on 20 October.
According to the Independent Election Commission, a total of 4,812 polling centres
were open across the three days of voting, with the estimated turnout reported at
4.2 million voters. The turnout was higher in provincial capitals, with particularly
high numbers recorded in Kabul, Herat, Nangarhar, Paktia and Daikundi.
8.
Out of 8.5 million registered voters, an estimated 35 per cent were women, an
increase of eight percentage points compared with the 2014 presidential election. On
election day, female voter turnout was estimated at around 30 per cent of the
electorate. Polling stations for women numbered 7,429 compared with 11,667 for
men. Some 13,000 Afghan women reportedly participated as election observers across
Afghanistan.
9.
The retrieval of materials and tally of results commenced immediately. Ballot
retrieval was delayed in several provinces, owing mainly to security threats that
required the use of helicopter rather than road movements. Recounts were
subsequently announced by the Independent Election Commission in 24 provinces,
owing to incomplete forms and procedural irregularities. The Electoral Complaints
Commission registered 11,845 complaints. As at 18 November, it had completed
adjudicating 10,447 complaints in 21 provinces.
10. The aftermath of the election was marred by a public dispute between the
Independent Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission over
the validity of non-biometric voter verification ballots. On 27 October, the Electoral
Complaints Commission issued a statement declaring that all votes cast without the
use of biometric voter verification should be nullified. Although not within the remit
of the Electoral Complaints Commission, the statement quickly attracted the support
of political parties and many candidates, who claimed that discarding non-biometric
voter verification ballots was the only way to ensure that fraudulent votes were not
counted towards the election results. Others expressed concern that the nullification
of non-biometric voter verification ballots could result in the ballots of millions of
genuine voters being discarded. On 30 October, the two Commissions released a joint
statement announcing that non-biometric voter verification ballots would be counted,
provided that printed voter lists had been used and ve rified in the polling centres. On
3 November, the Independent Election Commission announced that the publication
of the preliminary election results would be delayed from the scheduled date of
10 November to a new date of 23 November for 32 provinces and 1 December for
Kabul Province. On 23 November, however, the Commission had announced results
for only five provinces.

18-20408

3/16

A/73/624
S/2018/1092

11. As delays in the ballot retrieval and counting accumulated, political parties and
opposition figures expressed increasing concern about the conduct of the elections,
with some voicing scepticism that the Independent Election Commission would be
unable to conduct the presidential elections on the scheduled date of 20 April 2019.
The uncertainty over the presidential election led to the res urrection of calls for an
interim administration, advocated most vocally by former President Karzai. On
6 November, the leader of the Hizb-i Islami political movement, Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar, joined those calls, stating that the electoral system should be cha nged to
a proportional representation system and warning that Hizb -i Islami would call for an
interim administration if demands were not met.
12. Nonetheless, most political leaders began channelling their energies towards the
contestation of the 2019 presidential elections, with coalition-building activities
accelerating as the deadline for finalizing nominations approached. On 31 October,
Hizb-i Islami announced that the movement was considering fielding its own
candidate for President in consultation with other political groups. Separately, on
8 November, the Grand National Coalition of Afghanistan announced that it would
present a ticket with a presidential candidate, three Vice -Presidents, a Prime Minister
and three deputy Prime Ministers. On 13 November, Chief Executive Abdullah stated
that he would decide on his potential candidacy in consultation with former jihadi
groups, but ruled out lending his support to another presidential candidate.
13. Meanwhile, President Ghani conducted a series of provincial visits, travelling
to Ghazni, Faryab, Parwan, Kandahar, Helmand, Paktika and Daikundi Provinces,
where he highlighted the Government’s commitments on local infrastructure projects
and security. On 2 November, the spokesperson for President Ghani confir med that
the President would run for re-election. On 9 November, while visiting the Hazaramajority province of Daikundi, President Ghani announced that the current Second
Vice-President, Sarwar Danesh, an ethnic Hazara, would form part of his ticket.
14. On 25 August, the then National Security Adviser, Hanif Atmar, announced that
he had resigned from his position owing to policy differences with President Ghani.
The following day, President Ghani announced the appointment to the position of
Hamdullah Mohib, the then Ambassador to the United States of America. This was
followed by a series of personnel changes in the security leadership. On 2 October,
President Ghani dismissed his Senior Adviser and Deputy Director of the National
Security Council, Din Mohammad Jurat. A statement issued by the Office of the
President confirmed that General Jurat had been removed by presidential decree. No
details were given on the circumstances leading to his removal. On 18 October, seven
members of the Office of the National Security Adviser resigned, including two senior
members, the Directors of Strategic Threat Assessment and Strategic Communications.
15. The pursuit by Afghanistan of a negotiated peace settlement received additional
impetus on 21 September, when the United States appointed Zalmay Khalilzad as its
Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation. From 4 to 14 October,
Mr. Khalilzad visited Afghanistan, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates in an effort to generate regional support for the Afghan peace process.
During his visit to Afghanistan, Mr. Khalilzad met with President Ghani, Chief
Executive Abdullah, representatives of the High Peace Council and members of the
political opposition. In the meetings, Mr. Khalilzad emphasized the necessity of
Afghan ownership of the peace process and, in a subsequent press conference, called
on the Government and the Taliban to form negotiating teams to engage in direct
talks. On 5 November, President Ghani announced that a national consultati on board
on the peace process would be formed with representatives nominated by civilian and
military authorities in all 34 provinces. On 13 October, the Taliban announced that
Mr. Khalilzad had met with the Taliban Political Commission in Qatar the previo us
day. According to the statement by the Taliban, the meeting was constructive, with
4/16

18-20408

A/73/624
S/2018/1092

discussions revolving around the withdrawal of international troops from Afghanistan
and finding a solution to the Afghan conflict. On 30 October, the Taliban announced
the appointment of five senior officials, formerly imprisoned in Guantanamo Bay, to
its Political Commission. On 10 November, Mr. Khalilzad visited Afghanistan again,
meeting with Government officials and members of the political opposition to discuss
his plans for future regional engagement. This was followed by visits to other
countries in the region, including Qatar, where Mr. Khalilzad again met with the
Taliban Political Commission.
16. On 9 November, the Russian Federation hosted a conference on Afgha nistan in
Moscow, with representatives from China, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan and from
the High Peace Council of Afghanistan and the Taliban Political Commission. An
embassy official from the United States joined as well. Speaking at the conference,
the Taliban representative reiterated the Taliban’s position that the presence of
international military forces was the main obstacle to peace in Afghanistan, adding
that other issues, including mutual recognition between the Government of
Afghanistan and the Taliban, constitutional amendments and women ’s rights, could
be negotiated once the issue of foreign troops had been resolved. Following the
conference, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a statement in which it welcomed
all efforts towards a peace process in Afghanistan but warned against allowing the
Taliban to instrumentalize regional processes.
17. Since August, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNA MA)
field offices have supported eight local peace initiatives, covering a total of
11 provinces. These included a series of consultations in support of the role of young
people in the peace process in Paktya Province, an intercommunity conflict resolution
initiative in Samangan Province and a project bringing together elders, religious
scholars, women and young people to discuss confidence -building measures in
volatile areas of Helmand Province.

B.

Security
18. The security situation remained volatile, with incidents continuing at
consistently high levels. While the number of security incidents in some categories
decreased slightly, the overall number of casualties rose owing to an increase in the
severity of certain attacks. The two contrasting exceptions to this trend were the Eid
al-Adha holiday period and the first day of parliamentary elections on 20 October,
which recorded exceptionally low and high incident levels, respectively. Between
16 August and 15 November, UNAMA recorded a total of 5,854 security incidents, a
2 per cent decrease compared with the same period in 2017. The southern region saw
the highest number of incidents followed by the eastern and south -eastern regions.
Armed clashes continued to comprise the largest number of security in cidents,
recording 63 per cent of the total, although the number was 5 per cent lower compared
with the same period in 2017. Suicide attacks decreased by 37 per cent, possibly
reflecting successful interdiction efforts in Kabul and Jalalabad cities, while air
strikes by the Afghan Air Force and international military forces increased by 25 per
cent compared with the same period in 2017.
19. The overall level of violence decreased significantly during the Eid al -Adha
holiday from 20 to 24 August. Over the holiday week, UNAMA recorded a total of
227 incidents, the lowest level of violence in a one-week period since early 2013.
This reduction in violence occurred despite the Taliban’s lack of acknowledgement
of President Ghani’s offer, on 19 August, of a three-month conditional ceasefire.
Mirroring the security dynamics witnessed around the Eid al -Fitr holiday in June, the

18-20408

5/16

A/73/624
S/2018/1092

number of Taliban-initiated attacks after Eid al-Adha quickly returned to the 2018
weekly average of 433 incidents.
20. The first election day, 20 October, witnessed high levels of security incidents
around the country, with the Taliban conducting attacks and placing improvised
explosive devices to disrupt the election process. Kunduz City recorded the highest
number of incidents (25) followed by Kabul City, where there were 14 improvised
explosive device attacks as well as a high-profile suicide attack claimed by Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP). Taking into account that
voting did not take place in Kandahar and Ghazni Provinces, the overall number of
security incidents on 20 October was comparable to figures recorded during the 2014
presidential run-off election. While intimidation by the Taliban was reported to have
deterred many voters from turning out in areas under their control and influence, the
high number of incidents did not result in any significant disruption of the electoral
process in urban areas. On 29 October, a suicide attacker detonated at the entrance to
the Independent Election Commission compound in Kabul. ISIL-KP claimed
responsibility for the attack. This was the second suicide attack recorded at the
headquarters of the Commission in 2018.
21. Following the large-scale Taliban attack in Ghazni City in August, concerns
remained about the possibility of another major attack in the south -east, including
against Ghazni City. While that did not occur, the Taliban continued to pressu re
Government forces in the city outskirts, surrounding districts and along the main
Highway 1, eventually capturing Andar district on 14 October. Security deteriorated
in the Hazara-dominated western areas of Ghazni Province, with large -scale Taliban
attacks leading to heavy clashes and large-scale displacement during the first half of
November. A separate clash between Taliban and pro-Government militias in Khas
Uruzgan district of Uruzgan Province also caused the displacement of Hazara families
in November.
22. The Taliban temporarily captured strategic posts along main roads in several
regions, allowing the group to effectively restrict movement between provinces.
Along the Highway 1 route to Kabul, the Taliban captured Daymirdad and Sayyidabad
districts of Wardak Province. The Taliban also carried out frequent attacks on the
Mazar-Shirbingham and Maimana-Andkhoy main roads in the northern region, and
along the Herat-Qala-e Naw road in the west, complicating Government access and
limiting the movements of residents. On 30 September, the Taliban carried out a
coordinated attack against several Government check posts in Qaysar district of
Faryab Province, resulting in a protracted clash before the Taliban forces retreated on
1 October.
23. Concerns about security increased in Kandahar Province following the
assassination of police chief Abdul Razziq, along with the provincial head of the
National Directorate of Security, General Abdul Momin Husain Khel, in an armed
attack in Kandahar City on 18 October. The Governor of Kandahar Province, Zalmai
Wesa, was wounded in the attack, which occurred during the visit of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization Resolute Support Mission Commander. The Taliban
claimed responsibility and posted the name of the alleged assailant on social media.
On 22 October, following lobbying by local elders, President Ghani appointed
Razziq’s younger brother Tadin as the provincial Chief of Police.
24. The ISIL-KP presence remained significant in the eastern region, where the
group claimed responsibility for three suicide and complex attacks in Nangarhar
Province during the reporting period and six attacks in Kabul City. However, the
robust presence of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces in Jalalabad City
since August appeared to have a positive impact on the overall security situation in
the city. ISIL-KP continued to fight against the Taliban, with armed clashes between
6/16

18-20408

A/73/624
S/2018/1092

the two groups reported in Nangarhar and Kunar Provinces. International military
forces continued to target ISIL-KP, conducting a series of air strikes against targets
in Deh Bala, Achin, Khogyani, Nazyan and Chaparhar districts of Nangarhar Province.
25. Thirteen incidents involving United Nations personnel were reported, including
three cases of intimidation, seven criminal-related incidents and two improvised
explosive device-related incidents. The dependant of a United Nations staff member
living in Kunduz Province abducted in a criminal incident was released on 29 October.

C.

Regional cooperation
26. Afghanistan and Pakistan continued efforts to improve their bilateral relations
following the inauguration in August of the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Imran Khan.
On 15 September, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, Shah Mehmood
Qureshi, visited Kabul, meeting with President Ghani, Chief Executive Abdullah and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Salahuddin Rabbani. Discussions
addressed security, regional peace and stability, counter-terrorism and the
implementation of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity. The
visit was Minister Qureshi’s first official trip after his appointment and was viewed
as a signal of Pakistan’s prioritization of the bilateral relationship. On 22 October,
President Ghani publicly stated that the assassination of the Kandahar Chief of Police
had been planned in Pakistan. The allegation prompted a strong response from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, which issued a statement on 24 October
rejecting the claims as unfounded and calling on Afghan officials to channel
discussions of security concerns through the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for
Peace and Solidarity mechanism.
27. Efforts to improve international cooperation on the Afghan peace process
expanded. On 11 September, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) convened
a meeting of permanent representatives in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, attended by the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan. The Secretary General of OIC
called on participants to encourage all parties concerned to engage in peace talks. On
4 and 5 October, Chief Executive Abdullah visited Jakarta, meeting with the President
of Indonesia, Joko Widodo, who called on the Taliban to come to the negotiating table.
On 3 and 4 November, a delegation from Indonesia’s Ulema Council visiting Kabul
reiterated support for the peace process and proposed following up on the trilateral
meeting of Afghan, Pakistani and Indonesian ulema held in Jakarta in May 2018.
28. Multilateral cooperation continued under the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process,
with a meeting of senior officials in New York on 28 September and regional technical
group meetings on culture and education in the Islamic Republic of Iran on 20 August;
counter-terrorism in Kabul on 15 September; trade, commerce and industry in New
Delhi on 20 October; and counter-narcotics in Moscow on 31 October.

III. Human rights
29. On 10 October, UNAMA released its 2018 third-quarter update on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. 1 The Mission documented 8,050 civilian casualties
(2,798 people killed and 5,252 injured) between 1 January and 30 September 2018,
the highest number of civilian deaths recorded in the first nine months of the year
since 2014. UNAMA attributed 65 per cent of all civilian casualties to anti-government
elements (35 per cent to the Taliban, 25 per cent to ISIL-KP and 5 per cent to
__________________
1

18-20408

UNAMA, “Quarterly report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict: 1 January to
30 September 2018” (Kabul, 10 October 2018).
7/16

A/73/624
S/2018/1092

unidentified anti-government elements, including self-proclaimed ISIL-KP), 22 per
cent to pro-government forces (16 per cent to Afghan national security forces, 5 per
cent to international military forces and 1 per cent to pro -government armed groups),
10 per cent to unattributed crossfire during ground engagements between
anti-government elements and pro-government forces and 3 per cent to other
incidents, including explosive remnants of war and cross-border shelling.
30. The use of improvised explosive device tactics (including suicide and
non-suicide attacks) caused 3,634 civilian casualties (1,065 people killed and 2,569
injured) and at 45 per cent of the total was the leading cause of civilian casualties
during the first nine months of 2018. In a special report of 7 October, 2 UNAMA
documented that the use of improvised explosive devices by anti -government
elements reached record high levels in the first three quarters of 2018, with
anti-government elements increasingly directing such attacks against the civilian
population, including minority Shi’a Muslims. Ground engagements, the second
leading cause, accounted for 2,311 civilian casualties (605 people killed and 1,706
injured), amounting to 29 per cent of the total. UNAMA continued to document high
levels of civilian casualties from aerial strikes by pro -government forces, recording
649 civilian casualties (313 people killed and 336 injured), with wome n and children
comprising more than half of those casualties. UNAMA documented 2,136 child
casualties (653 children killed and 1,483 injured) and 829 female casualties (250
women killed and 579 injured).
31. Violence during the parliamentary elections on 20 October caused the most
civilian casualties recorded in a single day to date in 2018, as well as the most civilian
casualties on any election day since UNAMA began documenting such incidents in
2009. In total, 435 civilian casualties (56 people killed and 379 injured) were recorded
on election day. Nearly all the casualties resulted from deliberate or indiscriminate
attacks by anti-government elements, primarily the Taliban. UNAMA documented
53 civilian casualties (13 people killed and 40 injured) from t he suicide attack at a
polling centre in Kabul claimed by ISIL-KP.
32. From 1 July to 30 September, the country task force on monitoring and reporting
on grave violations against children in armed conflict verified 412 grave violations
affecting 820 children (241 girls, 570 boys and 9 unspecified). The most significant
violations were the killing and maiming of 783 children (284 deaths, of which
179 were boys, 99 were girls and 6 were unspecified; 499 children injured, of whom
356 were boys, 140 were girls and 3 were unspecified). Those living in central,
southern and northern regions were the most affected. During the third quarter, there
were 33 incidents of attacks against schools and education-related personnel,
compared with 79 incidents during the second quarter when schools were targeted
because of their use as voter registration centres. The country task force on monitoring
and reporting attributed 15 incidents to ISIL-KP, 14 to the Taliban, 2 to the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces and 1 each to pro-government militias and
undetermined armed groups. The violations included nine incidents of the recruitment
and use of children, involving 19 boys, five incidents of abduction, involving 15 boys,
and rape and other forms of sexual violence committed against three children (two
girls and one boy). In addition, it verified 19 attacks against health -care facilities and
8 incidents of denial of humanitarian access.
33. Of the 19 attacks against health facilities and health-care personnel verified by
the country task force on monitoring and reporting, 15 attacks were against facilities
and 4 were against health-care workers, involving eight personnel, including three
__________________
2

8/16

UNAMA, “Special report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict: Increasing harm to
Afghan civilians from the deliberate and indiscriminate use of improvised explosive devices ”
(Kabul, 7 October 2018).
18-20408

A/73/624
S/2018/1092

women, compared with 12 incidents in the previous reporting period. The task f orce
attributed 14 incidents to armed groups (11 to the Taliban and 3 to ISIL -KP), 2 each
to the Afghan National Army and international military forces and 1 jointly to
international military forces and the National Directorate of Security.
34. The country task force on monitoring and reporting verified nine incidents of
the recruitment and use of children involving 19 boys (10 by the Taliban, 7 by
pro-government militia and 2 by the Afghan Local Police), compared with verified
recruitment and use of two boys and documentation of credible allegations of the
recruitment and use of five boys in the previous reporting period. The task force
verified three cases of sexual violence against children, including for the purposes of
bacha bazi, two by the Afghan National Police and one by the Afghan Local Police.
The task force verified five incidents of abduction of children, involving 15 boys
(three by the Taliban and one each by the Afghan Local Police and Tehrik -eTaliban
Pakistan).
35. On 10 November, a group of 55 juveniles, who surrendered on 31 July in
Jowzjan Province along with 250 suspected affiliates of self-proclaimed ISIL-KP to
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces were transferred to the Kabul Juvenile
Rehabilitation Centre. The juveniles had been detained without charge by the National
Directorate of Security in violation of the Criminal Procedure Code.
36. Following the launch in May 2018 of the UNAMA report “Injustice and
Impunity: Mediation of Criminal Offences of Violence against Women ”, the Ministry
of Women’s Affairs established a committee on 2 October to review the Elimination
of Violence against Women Law of 2009. The Directorate on Alternatives to
Imprisonment, established earlier in 2018 by the Attorney General ’s Office to develop
policy on non-custodial sentencing options, became operational in September. The
Mission continued its advocacy for a policy to include alternatives to imprisonment
for less serious criminal offences of violence against women. Women ’s protection
shelters were affected by decreased donor funding, with at least 2 of the 26 operations
in 21 provinces reducing their services.
37. On 25 November, the United Nations in Afghanistan commemorated
International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women, marking th e
beginning of the 16 Days of Activism against Gender-Based Violence global
campaign under the global theme “Orange the World: #HearMeToo”. UNAMA
convened 13 workshops, consultations, round tables, panel discussions and an art
competition, highlighting concerns regarding crimes of violence against women in
Afghanistan, such as harmful traditional practices, underreporting of crimes and the
implementation of the Elimination of Violence against Women Law of 2009.
38. Between 27 September and 15 November, UNAM A convened 10 Global Open
Day events across Afghanistan on the theme “Women’s participation in peace
processes”, engaging in dialogue with 224 Afghans (192 women and 32 men)
representing 16 of the 34 provinces and at least 37 districts. Women emphasized th e
importance of their participation in peace processes. The dialogues culminated in a
national event co-hosted by the United Nations on 4 December, where participants
underscored the importance of equal and meaningful participation of Afghan women
in peace talks.
39. On 16 October, the Government established the Journalists Support Fund for the
purpose of helping journalists and bereaved families of media workers. Journalists
and media workers continued to face intimidation, harassment and violence by
anti-government elements and pro-government forces. UNAMA documented four
incidents involving killing, beating and two threats against journalists.

18-20408

9/16

A/73/624
S/2018/1092

IV. Coordination of development assistance
40. Preparations for the Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan of
28 November accelerated with reference to key deliverables, including holding
parliamentary elections, finalizing all national priority programmes, achieving
International Monetary Fund benchmarks, promoting private sector growth, making
progress on anti-corruption and advancing security sector reform. On 23 September,
a preparatory meeting was held in New York, co-chaired by Minister Rabbani and my
Special Representative for Afghanistan and Head of UNAMA. On 8 November, a
senior officials’ meeting was held in Geneva, where discussions focused on the
Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework to be adopted at the Conference and
Afghanistan’s economic growth strategy.
41. During the reporting period, President Ghani’s team revised its anti-corruption
strategy, adding 52 new benchmarks while eliminating others. The Government
expanded the anti-corruption legal framework, recording progress on key pieces of
legislation. In September, the working group on criminal law reform finalized draft
laws on anti-corruption and whistle-blowing. On 9 October, the Government
submitted its draft anti-corruption law to the National Assembly for review. The new
law incorporates recommendations from the UNAMA anti-corruption report of 2018,
including the codification of the legal basis for the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre
and the establishment of a stand-alone anti-corruption commission. However, civil
society organizations expressed concern that the proposed selection process for the
commission was insufficiently independent. On 11 October, the draft whistle-blower
protection law was submitted to the National Assembly. On 5 November, the National
Assembly approved the Law on Declaration and Registration of Assets of State
Officials and Employees, which had been adopted by presidential decree in November
2017. According to the Assets Registration Administration, more than 16,000 asset
declaration forms have been registered, including 73 from members of the Upper and
Lower Houses of the National Assembly.
42. On 26 September, the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre convicted six high-ranking
officials from the Ministry of the Interior, including a former general and a former
Deputy Minister, of corruption-related offences. Three other former officials of the
Ministry were found guilty and sentenced to imprisonment on 9 October. Since
September 2018, the Centre has finalized three trials involving 16 defendants at the
primary level and two cases involving seven defendants at the appeals court level,
representing a gradual decline in the number of cases compared with previous periods.
Judges and prosecutors from the Centre cite the lack of enforcement of summonses
and arrest warrants as the main reason for the decline. In total, the Centre has finalized
42 trials involving 169 defendants and 41 cases involving 128 defendants on appeal.
43. Efforts to implement merit-based recruitment in the public sector continued. In
August, the Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission
reported that based on its provincial assessments, it had identified 2,533 senior
provincial line directorate positions, of which 1,362 were occupied by acting directors,
while other positions were vacant. As a result, 114 high-level provincial line
directorate positions were opened up for competitive recruitment, and 158 applicants
sat a new standardized written exam for 35 senior provincial directorate positions,
administered by the newly established Exam Centre of the Commission.
44. The Government continued reforms to improve accountability in the security
sector, with a focus on the Ministry of the Interior. On 30 August, the Government
completed the personnel asset inventory for existing Afghan National Police
personnel, with the process to continue for new recruits. Further, the Governmen t
completed the verification of personnel asset inventory records against the

10/16

18-20408

A/73/624
S/2018/1092

Web-enabled payroll system. Out of 147,875 records, 106,189 personnel were
identified as legitimate for the payment of salaries. The remaining 41,686 records
were removed from the payroll for such reasons as retirement, desertion and attrition.
The Government continued reforms to its security leadership under the Inherent Law.
On 1 October, the Ministry of Defence announced a third tranche of retirements from
the Afghan National Army under the Law, comprising an additional 22 generals. In
total, some 1,800 Afghan National Army personnel, including 380 generals, have been
retired since the Inherent Law was decreed in November 2017.
45. The Government continued its efforts to promote private sector growth. On
8 October, the Council of Ministers endorsed Afghanistan’s first national trade policy,
which is aimed at enhancing export competitiveness and implementing the
commitments resulting from the accession of Afghanistan to the World Trade
Organization in June 2016. On 31 October, the World Bank announced that
Afghanistan had risen 16 places in its global ease of doing business rankings, bringing
the country’s ranking to 167 out of 190. The Bank highlighted reforms, including
reductions in the cost of starting a business and the adoption of a new tax
administration as factors behind the improved ranking.

V. Humanitarian assistance and refugees
46. Between 16 August and 31 October, 38,558 people were newly displaced by the
conflict, bringing the total number of displaced persons to 289,866 in 2018 (60,720
women, 167,342 children and 61,804 men). Although conflict-related displacement is
down by more than two thirds compared with the same period in 2017, many
displaced families continue to have no immediate prospect of returning to their areas
of origin in safety and dignity. During the reporting period, humanitarian partners
provided food and other life-saving assistance to 165,759 people displaced by
conflict.
47. The number of trauma cases that received treatment in the period from
16 August to 31 October was 34,242, an increase of 21 per cent compared with 2017.
The need for trauma care was especially high in Helmand, Kunduz, Takhar, Ghazni,
Kunar, Zabul and Kabul Provinces, where clashes took heavy tolls. During the
reporting period, the 15 partners of the health cluster provided consultations to
897,353 people, of whom 53.4 per cent were women and girls.
48. After the crisis in Ghazni in August, the United Nations deployed teams to
remove 106 explosive remnants of war that posed a threat to community safety and
security. The teams provided risk education to more than 8,000 people. From January
to September 2018, the teams visited 188 communities, removing 1,611 explosive
remnants of war, surveying hazardous areas and providing risk education,
cumulatively reducing the risk of death and injury to approximately 810,239
individuals. Over the same period, the United Nations and partners cleared 4.9 square
kilometres of high-impact explosive contamination, benefiting 67 communities.
Responding to the protection concerns of returnees from Pakistan and the Islamic
Republic of Iran, approximately 180,304 people have received risk education at
centres across the country.
49. In recognition of the global role of Afghanistan in mine action, the Government
presided over the 17th meeting of the States parties to the Anti -Personnel Mine Ban
Convention, held from 26 to 30 November in Geneva.
50. During the reporting period, eight new cases of polio were confirmed, bringing
the total number of cases in 2018 to 19. The epicentre of the ongoing outbreak,
Kandahar, accounts for 9 of the 19 cases. Owing to a ban on hou se-to-house

18-20408

11/16

A/73/624
S/2018/1092

vaccination in the southern provinces (Kandahar, Helmand and Uruzgan), since May
2018, 846,000 children have not been vaccinated. With an additional 200,000 children
in Ghazni not reached, the total number of children not vaccinated in the east ern and
southern regions during the reporting period was approximately 1 million. The
Ministry of Public Health and the United Nations developed contingency plans using
other approaches to reach those children with vaccines.
51. As at 31 October, drought had affected 229 out of 401 districts across the
country. In western Afghanistan, more than 250,000 people have now been forced
from rural areas to urban centres since the beginning of the year. Most of the newly
displaced people live in informal settlements with few, if any, basic social services.
Many rural communities have depleted their assets, selling off livestock to buy food
and consuming the coming planting season’s seeds. According to the United Nations,
3.5 million people are severely food insecure as a result of the drought and in need of
life-saving food and livelihood assistance. According to the Integrated Food Security
Phase Classification analysis conducted in October, 10.8 million people are at
emergency or crisis levels of food insecurity.
52. The United Nations and partners are working to enable communities to cultivate
crops for the 2019 harvest and supporting those who have already been forced to leave
their homes. Families displaced to urban centres by drought received the same
emergency food assistance as people displaced by conflict. Food was provided to
families in rural areas to prevent further drought-related displacement. By October,
the United Nations and its partners had distributed food assistance to 706,000 people
in the worst-affected provinces of Badghis, Faryab, Ghor, Herat and Jowzjan.
53. In October, the United Nations and partners began to expand support for at least
six months to all of the estimated 3.5 million people in need in 20 provinces owing to
drought. The United Nations distributed assistance to more than 1 million people in
October and is on course to reach 2.5 million before the end of the year, while partners
are to reach the remaining 1 million people. In addition, work has been initiated to
reach 1.4 million people before winter with concentrated animal feed, fodder seed
and wheat seed in 21 provinces. The Government has mobilized 60,000 tons of wheat
grain from its own reserves. The United Nations has transported 30,000 tons to date
and is procuring complementary commodities from international markets.
54. A total of 110,954 Afghan citizens, including spontaneous returnees, deportees
and refugees, returned to Afghanistan during the reporting period. From 16 August to
31 October, 4,400 undocumented returnees arrived from Pakistan and 103,146 from
the Islamic Republic of Iran. In the same period, the United Nations assisted in the
return of 2,692 refugees from Pakistan, 694 from the Islamic Republic of Iran and
22 from other countries. The number of registered refugees returning to Afghanistan
is significantly lower than in 2017 (10,596 from Pakistan, 419 from the Islamic
Republic of Iran and 68 from other countries). The number of undocumented returns
from the Islamic Republic of Iran has soared, with more than 60 2,524 returnees and
deportees in 2018 (January to September) compared with 382,003 in 2017 (January
to September), in an apparent response to the worsening economic situation in the
country. Humanitarian agencies are trying to reach returnees and provide t hem with
a package of food, cash and other basic necessities to facilitate their reintegration. In
October, the Government of Pakistan extended proof of registration cards for some
1.4 million Afghan refugees in Pakistan until 30 June 2019.
55. Constraints on humanitarian access continued, with a total of 69 incidents
affecting the United Nations and partners from 16 August to 31 October. Since the
beginning of the year, a total of 318 incidents have been recorded, including the
killings of 26 aid workers. Moreover, 48 aid workers were injured, 76 were abducted
and 46 were detained. Deminers continue to face a risk of kidnapping and armed
12/16

18-20408

A/73/624
S/2018/1092

violence. Humanitarian access in contested areas and areas under the control of
anti-government elements remained a persistent challenge. In October, the Taliban
renewed its guarantees for the safe passage of staff of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, two months after it had been withdrawn. The Committee subsequently
welcomed the renewal of its security guarantee.
56. As at 31 October, humanitarian activities in Afghanistan had received
$312.8 million in funding, including $248.2 million for activities included in the
humanitarian response plan.

VI. Counter-narcotics
57. The Government, supported by international partners, continued its counternarcotics operations. From 16 August to 31 October, law enforcement authorities
conducted a total of 835 operations leading to seizures of 2,646 kg of heroin, 9,060 kg
of morphine, 12,578 kg of opium, 941 kg of methamphetamine, 4,040 kg of hashish,
16,256 kg of cannabis, 11,787 tablets of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine
(MDMA), 4,417 kg of solid precursor chemicals and 14,344 litres of liquid precursor
chemicals. In total, eight heroin manufacturing laboratori es were dismantled;
1,017 suspects were arrested; and 86 vehicles, 140 weapons, 341 mobile telephones
and five radios were seized. One officer of the Afghan Counter-Narcotics Police was
killed while carrying out operations.
58. The 2018 report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
on opium cultivation and production in Afghanistan was finalized and released in
November. Its findings show a moderate decrease in opium cultivation and production
compared with 2017, with significant decreases in culti vation and production noted
in the northern and western regions owing to the drought. In a joint initiative by the
Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock, the Ministry of Counter Narcotics
and UNODC, a two-day national conference on the role of agricultural extension in
the promotion of alternative development in Afghanistan was held on 1 and 2 October
in Kabul City. The event was attended by 150 farmers and extension workers and
showcased agricultural inputs and technological advances by the pri vate sector, as
well marketing opportunities for crop and livestock products.

VII. Mission support
59. As at 31 October, the Mission’s vacancy rates were 7 per cent for international
staff, 5 per cent for National Professional Officers and 3 per cent for local-level staff,
compared with the approved rates of 11.1 per cent, 8.5 per cent and 3 per cent,
respectively. The proportion of female staff remained very low. As at 31 October, the
percentage of women in each category of staff stood at 36 per cent for international
staff, 37 per cent for United Nations Volunteers, 13 per cent for National Professional
Officers and 7 per cent for local-level staff. Between 1 August and 31 October,
UNAMA conducted 197 road and 23 air missions, as well as 1,004 reverse outreach
missions, during which district representatives visited UNAMA field offices.

VIII. Observations
60. Noting the many security, logistical and political challenges facing the electoral
management bodies of Afghanistan, I welcome the timely conduct of parliamentary
elections under difficult circumstances. The elections once again demonstrated the
commitment of Afghan citizens to participating in democratic processes. I am
heartened by the courage and determination shown by the millions of Afghan women
18-20408

13/16

A/73/624
S/2018/1092

and men who turned out to vote across the country, often overcoming significant
obstacles and defying serious security threats to elect their representatives. I condemn
the deliberate acts of violence against civilians perpetrated by anti -government
elements throughout the electoral process, including the spike in attacks against
electoral and related targets on 20 October, which resulted in the highest number of
civilian casualties recorded on a single day in 2018. Apart from inflicting serious
harm on civilians, such violence represents a clear attack on the constitutional right
of Afghan citizens to political participation. Recalling the stated commitment of the
Taliban to protect civilians in armed conflict, I call upon all parties to respect the right
of Afghans to participate in all stages of the electoral process freely and without fear
or threat of violence.
61. At the same time, it must also be acknowledged that the elections and their
aftermath were marred by technical shortcomings, some of them preventable and
some resulting from an overstretched Independent Electoral Commission. Delays in
opening polling centres, problems associated with the late introduction of biometric
voter verification and administrative errors in voter lists led to serious delays on
election day, causing some voters to turn away without casting their ballots. These
frustrations, together with delays in vote counting and tabulation since the elections,
have weakened the credibility of the country’s electoral institutions at a critical
moment in the electoral cycle. I call upon the electoral management bodies to
safeguard the transparency of the process during the post-election phase as a first step
towards regaining the confidence of the Afghan people, including by providing clear
information on all aspects of the process. Recalling that the elections could not be
held in Ghazni Province, I encourage the Government and the Independent Election
Commission to give due priority to resolving outstanding security, political and
logistical issues to enable the people of Ghazni to elect their parliamentary
representatives. For the rest of the provinces, the Independent Election Commission
and the Electoral Complaints Commission must do everything possible to accelerate
the process of vote counting and tabulation of results in a credible, transparent and
timely manner.
62. With the approach of the presidential elections in April 2019, I encourage the
electoral management bodies to take appropriate measures based on lessons learned
from the parliamentary elections to ensure coherent decision -making and the timely
implementation of all necessary procedures. Equally, it is imperative that all political
stakeholders assume responsibility for the electoral process. The blocking by political
parties of the offices of the Independent Election Commission prior to the elections
in order to force the introduction of biometric technology led to serious delays in the
completion of key preparatory activities. The late accession by the Government to the
demand for biometrics overloaded the Commission’s capacity in the crucial weeks
before the election. While peaceful protest is the constitutional right of all Afghans, I
am concerned about the use of obstructive tactics by some political parties and
candidates. Such tactics can deprive other citizens of their right to vote and, if pursued
systematically, threaten to undermine the electoral system. As the Government and
the electoral management bodies continue preparations for the presidential elections,
I call upon all stakeholders, including candidates, political parties and civil society
organizations, to engage constructively in all aspects of the electoral process. Only
through the sincere and united efforts of the leaders and institutions of Afghanistan
will its citizens be granted the opportunity to vote in elections worthy of their
participation, with guarantees that their votes will be respected.
63. I am deeply concerned about the worsening impact of the armed conflict on the
civilian population, as UNAMA continues to document record -high numbers of
civilian deaths. While efforts on the battlefield have led to some reductions in civilian
casualties from ground engagements, the continued rise in civilian casualties from
14/16

18-20408

A/73/624
S/2018/1092

suicide and aerial attacks is worrying. Of the utmost concern is the increased targeting
of civilians by anti-government elements, exemplified by the violence directed at the
Afghan population participating in the electoral processes. I urge parties to the
conflict to respect their obligations under international human rights law and
international humanitarian law and anti-government elements to cease all attacks
against civilians and civilian infrastructure.
64. The high and rising cost of the conflict in civilian lives is a stark reminder that
ending the conflict through peace negotiations must remain the foremost imperative
guiding all efforts in Afghanistan. In keeping with the principle of Afghan ownership,
I encourage the Government to strengthen the inclusivity of the peace process,
ensuring that a diverse range of views is taken into account at every stage. Noting the
recent expansion in contact between the Taliban and members of the international
community, I underline the necessity for the Taliban to engage in direct talks with the
Government of Afghanistan with a view to reaching a solution to the conflict. The
United Nations stands ready to support all peace efforts through any available means.
65. I remain deeply concerned about the prevalence of violence against women and
girls in Afghanistan. Such violence causes profound human suffering, inflicts grave
harm on families and inhibits the full participation of women in public life. In this
light, the establishment by the Government of a technical committee to review the
Elimination of Violence against Women Law of 2009 is an encouraging step. I am
optimistic that the review will result in stronger and rights-based legal protection from
violence for all Afghan women and girls.
66. Humanitarian, health and education workers continue to face unacceptable risks
as they undertake critical tasks across Afghanistan. I am deeply concerned about the
increase in attacks against health facilities and health-care personnel, as well as
attacks against school facilities and disruptions to the educational process. Such
attacks and activities are unjustifiable under any circumstances. I urge parties to the
conflict to take measures to allow health facilities to function without interruption
and to respect the right to education for both boys and girls without interference.
Similarly, the recent spate of efforts by anti-government elements to hinder
humanitarian demining operations, including through threats and intimidation against
and the kidnapping of deminers, have delayed and derailed life -saving projects. All
parties must allow humanitarian demining teams unimpeded access to affected areas.
67. Notwithstanding the volatile environment, Afghanistan made progress in the
past year in improving the investment climate, moving from 183 to 167 in the ease of
doing business rankings of the World Bank. A first for Afghanistan, this climb puts
the country among the top improvers globally. This commendable result signals
progress towards the goals of the Transformation Decade (2015–2024), including
generating economic growth to achieve self-reliance. The revision of the
anti-corruption strategy provides a valuable opportunity for the Government to clarify
the institutional framework guiding anti-corruption efforts, in line with the
commitments of Afghanistan under the United Nations Convention against
Corruption. I encourage the Government to continue its construc tive engagement with
civil society organizations and international partners throughout the process.
68. At the ministerial conference on Afghanistan held on 27 and 28 November in
Geneva, the international community demonstrated its continued commitment to
Afghanistan, and discussions were focused on the Government ’s reform agenda. As
noted at the Conference, the Government has made progress on key elements of this
agenda, including the finalization of 10 national priority programmes, the
implementation of far-reaching fiscal reforms and the promotion of the participation
of women in public life. In other areas, progress remained limited. I welcome the
adoption of the Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework by Afghanistan and
18-20408

15/16

A/73/624
S/2018/1092

international donors. The Framework provides a clear road map for mutually agreed
reform priorities over the next two years, in alignment with the Afghanistan National
Peace and Development Framework. The United Nations will continue to provide
coherent support to the Government as it implements its reform agenda for the benefit
of all citizens, with a view to achieving peace, development and self -reliance during
the Transformation Decade.
69. I thank all the United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative, Tadamichi Yamamoto, for their continued dedication under
challenging conditions to fulfilling our commitments in support of the people of
Afghanistan.

16/16

18-20408
