UNITED NAT....OlVS

SECURITY COUNCIL

250011

MEETING:

NEW

i
UNUSED
,trL~~C3;‘i10W
18 NOVEMBER

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2500)

. . . ..*...............................

Adoption of the agenda . . . ..s..........................................

1
1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/16147);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the. President of
the Security Council (S/16150);
:
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Greece to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16151). .

1

NOti
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
;:.: ,,;; ; = : .‘. ’
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supjtements ,of the Oj’kial, Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in’ which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Restilutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2500th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 18 November
President: Mr. Victor J. GAUCI

Yemen, India, Romania, Seychelles, Sri Lanka and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

(Malta).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

Provisional
I.

Adoption

1983, at 3.30 p.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Iacovou (Cyprus),
Mr. Dountas (Greece) and Mr. Kirca (Turkey) took places at
the Council table; Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria), Mr. Woolcott
(Australia), Mr. Pelietier (Canada), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba),
Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Krishnan (India),
Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr.
Fonseka (Sri Lanka) and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2500)

of-the agenda

2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/16147);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Charge
d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16150);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Greece to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16151)

I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Egypt in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representative of
Egypt to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote,. in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
2. The PRESIDENT:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Moussa (Egypt)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.
Mr. SINCLAIR
(Guyana): Permit me, Sir, to extend
to you my warmest congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of November.
Your experience and diplomatic skill give us the assurance
that our work will be properly and efficiently guided during this month. You may be assured of my delegation’s
fullest co-operation and support. May I take this opportunity also to pay a special tribute to your predecessor, Mr.
Salah of Jordan, whose great skill and ability were tested
to the utmost during the month of October. He gave proof
on$e again of the qualities of leadership and dedication to
hard work for which he has become so well known among
us.
3.

The meeting was called to order at 4.30 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/16147);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Chargg d’Affaires’ a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Cyprus to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16150);
Letter dated 15 November 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16151)

4. The efforts of the international community to promote non-intervention and non-use of force, already
against great odds, suffered a serious setback in Cyprus on
15 November with the declaration by the Turkish Cypriot
community purporting to create an independent State.
5. My delegation cannot separate that declaration of I5
November from a wider international context in which we
have recentiy been witnessing increasingly frequent resort
to the threat of use of force, and even the actual use of
force, to settle disputes and to dominate others. Prepara-

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken by the Council at its 2497th and 2498th meetings,
I invite the representatives of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey
to take places at the Council table. I invite the representatives of Algeria, Australia, Canada, Cuba, Democratic
1

tions for war are intensifying, proxies are being armed and
trained and military solutions are being openly promoted,
while political means are being ignored and played down.
The action of 15 November is an attempt to consolidate
and give legitimacy to a situation created by invasion and
occupation. In the context I have just described, that
action causes my delegation gravest concern, as it must
surely do all States sharing a commitment to peaceful,
stable and harmonious international relations.

it. My delegation will for its part certainly not extend any .
recognition to this so-called Turkish Republic of Northern
Cyprus, and we call on other Member States to ‘take a
similar attitude.
12. Despite the fact that that document does not reflect
what our delegation considers should be the appropriate
response of the Council in the case under consideration,
we wish to make it very clear that we sincerely appreciate
the effort made by its authors. In a spirit of compromise,
we shall vote in favour of it.

6. The Security Council has an obligation to discourage
the use of force in international relations. It must be
unequivocal in its rejection of international lawlessness. It
must so respond that military adventurism, intervention
and occupation are clearly seen as unacceptable and as
unlawful practices, and peaceful settlement is more frequently and more actively pursued.

13. -There is no justification whatsoever for the recent
action by the Turkish Cypriot community of Cyprus. The
excessesof the past are not a justification. There have been
excesseson both sides. But the way to a solution in Cyprus
lies forward. While no side can be expected to forget or to
ignore that past, there is certainly an obligation on both
sides to prevent the memory of past experiences from
influencing perceptions of present intentions. The past cannot be invoked in defence of the status quo or of ambitions
inconsistent with the Charter and with General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions and decisions on the
question of Cyprus. My delegation calls again for the withdrawal of the declaration of 15 November and urges the
two communities henceforth to co-operate actively and in
good faith with the Secretary-General in his efforts to
revive the intercommunal negotiations with a view to a
peaceful solution of the problem of Cyprus.
.

7. Quite apart from these considerations, the action of 15
November adds a new dimension of complication to the
already complicated search for a solution to the question
of Cyprus at a moment when a renewed and determined
effort was being actively pursued by the Secretary-General
to introduce some momentum into the search for a
solution.
8. What is more, General Assembly resolution 3212
(XXIX) calls upon all States to respect the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and non-aligned character of Cyprus.

-_

:

14. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe): I wish first of
all, Sir, to add my own voice to the many others that have
already congratulated you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. This is indeed a busy month, but we are confident that your well-known diplomatic skills, wide and long
experience and patience, as well as personal charm, will be
brought to bear upon and facilitate our present deliberations. Through you, I also wish to pay a very welldeserved
tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Salah of Jordan, for the
most admirable manner in which he guided the Council’s
deliberations during the month of October.

9. Security Council resolution 367 (1975) called on the
parties concerned to refrain from any action which might
jeopardize the negotiations between the representatives of
the two communities and to take steps which would facilitate the creation of the climate necessary for the successof
those negotiations.
10. As recently as March this year, the heads of State or
Government of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
reiterated their support for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity of Cyprus. The Non-Aligned Movement has consistently called for, and sought to promote,
the withdrawal of all occupation troops from Cyprus as an
essential basis for the solution of the Cyprus problem. The
unity of the island is a goal to which the Movement has
been passionately dedicated. My own country has the
honour of serving as a member of the non-aligned contact
group on Cyprus, and ours is an irrevocable commitment
to that goal.

15. My colleague and dear friend the Permanent Representative of Sri Lanka, as well as several other friends and
colleagues, have asked me to draw parallels between the
Turkish Cypriot unilateral declaration of independence of
15 November 1983 and the Rhodesian unilateral declaration of independence of 11 November 1965. The temptation to do this and to draw the lessons learnt and/or
missed from the Rhodesian declaration is indeed very great
and almost irresistible. Nevertheless, I shall resist it and go
straight into the question before the Council.

11. In light of the foregoing, my delegation considers
that the response by the Council contained in the draft
resolution [S/16149] now before us is inadequate. We
believe the Council should condemn the declaration in
categorical terms as being in defiance of the United
Nations, in particular of Council resolutions 365 (1974)
and 367 (1975): My delegation also believes it would have
been consistent with the gravity of the situation just
created by the Turkish Cypriot authorities for the Council
to declare that the United Nations would not accord any
recognition to the socalled independent entity. An appeal
should also be.directed to Member States not to recognize

16. However, before doing so, I would only observevery sadly-the fact that, in spite of the ugly and tragic
lessons of the unilateral declaration of independence by
Ian Smith’s Rhodesia, the Council should add yet another
item of unilateral declaration of independence on its
agenda so soon thereafter. To say the least, this is indicative of mankind’s inability-or
is it refusal-to learn from
its own past experience.
2

members of the United Nations not to grant recognition to
the so-&led Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, as it
would be a grave threat to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity, unity and non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus, a Member of this Organization.

17. The violation of international law and treaties and
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations by any country or community is and must always
be viewed with the gravest concern by all civilized mankind. It is not surprising, therefore, that the illegal unilateral declaration by the Turkish Cypriot leaders on 15
November, which was aimed at. establishing’an independent state on the territory of the Republic of Cyprus, is
being roundly and soundly condemned and rejected by
world leaders.

21. Finally, the Council should call upon the Turkish
Cypriot leadership immediately to withdraw its illegal declaration in order to create conditions conducive to, the
resumption of the Secretary-General’s efforts in search of a
peaceful, just and lasting solution to the question of
.Cyprus.

18. For the record, I should like to read out to the Council my own Government’s position on the matter, as stated
by the Prime Minister of Zimbabwe, Mr. Robert Mugabe:

22. Mr. NATORF (Poland): At the very outset, Sir, I
should like to congratulate you warmly on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of November. Knowing your diplomatic abilities
and experience, we are convinced that the Council will be
able to discharge its duties. I wish you every success in
your difficult work. At the same time, I want to assure you
of the co-operation of my delegation. I should also like to
pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Salah of Jordan,
who presided over the meetings last month with impartiality, wisdom and efficiency.

“The Government of Zimbabwe was dismayed by
the illegal declaration of independence by the Turkish
Cypriots on 15 November. This unilateral act of
attempted secession by Turkish Cypriots exacerbates
the grave problems facing Cyprus. It is a direct attack
on the territorial integrity of Cyprus which is sure to
cause serious harm not only to the delicate peace
obtaining in that country but also to the initiatives of
the international community to seek, through the
United Nations, a negotiated solution to the problem
facing the Turkish and Greek communities of Cyprus.

23. The Council is faced with an alarming development
in Cyprus owing to the proclamation of the self-styled
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. This regrettable
event adds a new dimension to the crisis in Cyprus, as it is
increasing tensions in the area and posing a threat to international peace and security. This unilateral step by the
Turkish community leaders of the island is prejudicial to
the painstaking efforts to find a peaceful solution to the
conflict and is disrupting the Secretary-General’s negotiations at a delicate stage. Particularly disturbing is the fact
that this step has been undertaken at a moment when the
negotiations seemed to justify the hope for a summit meeting between the President of the Republic of Cyprus, Mr.
Spyros Kyprianou, and the Turkish community leader,
Mr. Rauf Denkta?.

“The Republic of Zimbabwe unreservedly condemns
this unilateral and illegal declaration of independence
by the Turkish Cypriot community as a misguided and
provocative act which violates United Nations resolutions on Cyprus and constitutes a serious threat to the
security of the Republic of Cyprus and the stability of
the whole eastern Mediterranean area. Zimbabwe will
continue both within the Commonwealth and the
United Nations, as well as in other forums, to work for
a peaceful reversal of this act of rebellion and to call for
negotiations to bring about a just and lasting solution.
“It is the ardent hope of the Government of Zimbabwe that those external forces which instigated this illegal and dangerous course of action will immediately
work to reverse it and proceed to cooperate with the
rest of the international community in efforts to restore
the legality and constitutional oneness of Cyprus. Zimbabwe believes in the unity and indivisibility of the
Republic of Cyprus and refuses to recognize Denktas’s
unilateral declaration of independence.*’

24. My Government learned with grave concern of the
declaration of 15 November. It was at once rejected by the
overwhelming majority of the international community.
We deplore this declaration, which violates Council resolutions, in particular, resolution 367 (1975) of 12 March
1975.

19. It is clear from the statements made by the SecretaryL;eneral [see2497th meeting,pura. P] and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cyprus [2497th meeting]
that the illegal declaration by the Turkish Cypriot leadership on 15 November came at a’ time when the SecretaryGeneral’s own personal efforts in search of a peaceful
solution to the Cyprus question were under way. This fact
is also amply confirmed by Mr. Denkta$s own statement
to the Council yesterday [2498th meeting].

25. The Polish Press Agency has been authorized to issue
the following statement, which I would like to read to the
Council for the record:
“The years-long Cyprus conflict, which constitutes a
dangerous hotbed of tension in that region of the world,
has frequently been the subject of debates in the United
Nations and the object of efforts undertaken by the
Secretary-General aimed at its peaceful, just and lasting
solution. Both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have adopted a number of resolutions the
implementation of which would increase the chance of
finding such a solution.

20. This move.was thererore utterly unjustified. It is also
a rude and intolerable slap in the face for the international
community. The Council must therefore condemn and
reject it as null and void. It must also call upon all the
3

“Poland participated in the elaboration of those resolutions, and it supports the steps undertaken by the
Secretary-General v&h a view to their implementation.
“The proclamation of a separatist State of Cyprus
constitutes a unilateral, arbitrary decision which makes
agreement between the Greek and Turkish corn&m&
ties more remote. It is aimed at the partition of Cyprus
and is therefore objectionable and unacceptable.
“If talks +th a view to a peaceful, just and lasting
resolution of the Cyprus crisis are to continue, that
decision must be reviewed and reversed. This decision is
in contravention of United Nations resolutions and is
becoming an additional source of tension both in
Cyprus and in the whole region suirounding it, which
must give rise to justified concern.
“Poland consistently maintains its position on the
Cyprus question. We are in favour of its resolution by
Cypriots themselves through negotiations between the
two communities, taking due account of their legitimate
interests and without interference by other States. The
problem should be solved with respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus, as well as for its non-aligned
status.”
26. We are deeply convinced that the way to achieve a
prompt solution to the problems of Cyprus is through the
comprehensive and effective implementation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and the Political
Declaration of the Seventh Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries [see S/2567.5
and Corr. I and 2, annex, sect. I, paras. I28 to 1311, held ,in
March 1983 at New Delhi. Given the necessary political
will, it would be possible to work out,, within the framework of the internal constitutional order of the Republic of
Cyprus, a solution acceptable .to all.
27. My delegation listened with attention to the statements of the parties concerned and took note of their
declared intention to resolve their ‘problems without
recourse to force. In our view, efforts to exercise the maximum restraint and refrain from any action that might
aggravate the situation are a sine qua non of a negotiated,
mutually acceptable settlement.
28. Speaking in the 117th meeting of the Gene91
Assembly’s thirty-seventh session, in May of this year; the
Polish representative emphasized, inter alia, his belief that
the intercommunal
talks represent the best available
means to achieve a just settlement of the Cyprus question.
We have also supported a call for the cessation of all
foreign intervention in the internal affairs of the Republic,
as well as the right of the Republic and its people to full
and effective control over the entire territory of the island.
We continue to maintain this position.
29. In conclusion I should like to emphasize that my
delegation is ready to support the draft resolution aimed a-t
the reversal of the unilateral declaration of 15 November,
expressing support for the legitimate Government of the

Republic of Cyprus and requesting the Secretary-General
to pursue his mission of good offices in order to find a
negotiated settlement and restore unity, peace and coexistence in the island. We will support this draft resolutibn,
which ,also calls upon all States to respect the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment of
the’ Republic of- Cyprus.
,
f
30. Mr. AMEGA (Togo) (interpretation from French):
My delegation was astounded to learn of the proclamation
of the socalled Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.
Does this spell the end of all the efforts that the Organization has constantly made to resolve the unhappy problem
of Cyprus? Are all the sacrifices made by the SecretaryGeneral to be in vain? Will the international community
once again be powerless to deal with a flagrant violation of
one of its fundamental principles?
31. Before going on with these questions, however, all of
which stem from my state of amazement, I should like to
extend to you, Sir, my very warm congratulations on your
assession to the presidency of the Council for the month of
November. Having already seen you in action at various
meetings in the course of which you have always displayed
outstanding diplomatic talents and demonstrated a great
mastery of international matters, as well as a profound
devotion to the principles of the Movement of NonAligned Countries, to which both of our countries belong,
my delegation cannot but feel confident of the success of
our work. My delegation would also like to pay a welldeserved tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Salah, who presided’ over the Council’s work during a particularly
arduous month with the tranquillity, thoughtfulness and
farsightedness characteristic of him.
32. My delegation is still wondering. Are the SecretaryGeneral% efforts to settle the question of Cyprus to be in
vain? Does the proclamation that has been made threaten
to complicate further the mission of good offices the Council has entrusted to him? How can we now approach the
entire question of settling the question of Cyprus, the
essential facts of which we might recall at this juncture?
33. The question of Cyprus is rooted in the difficulties
encountered by two peoples that have been condemned by
history to live together on one and the same territory.
When it acceded to independence on 16 August 1960 the
island of Cyprus became a bicommunal republic pursuant
to the Zurich and London Agreements’ reached in February 1959 between the parties, those parties being the Greek
Cypriots, the Turkish Cypriots, Greece, Turkey and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Notihem Ireland.
34. The Constitution adopted at that time iecognized the
existence of two communities, the Turkish Cypriot &nd the
Greek Cypriot, whose interests were to be safeguarded by
that Constitution. Furthermore, the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee* signed by Greece, the United Kingdom bf Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Turkey and Cyprus further
guaranteed the Basic Articles of that Cdnstitution and the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the new Cypriot
State, and at the same time it guaranteed a balance
between the ititerests of both communities.’

35. The recognition of the existence of both communities
in the .Constitution and in existing treaties is rather signilicant and is a clear expression of a certain political reality.
Because of that situation each Cypriot community feels
itself much closer to its nation of origin, Greece or Turkey,
both of them countries that are by no means indifferent to
the fate of the populations of the Cypriot State who are
embroiled in political and religious struggles. What ensued
is familiar to everyone, with the bloody events of 1963 that
resulted in the creation of a peace-keeping force following
the adoption of Security Council resolution l-86 (1964)
which, inter alia, asked the Government of Cyprus to take
all additional measures necessary to stop violence and
bloodshed in Cyprus. That request was fruitless, in spite of
the pressure and intervention of the United Nations and
certain States to induce the parties to negotiate and to
restore peace. It was not until 6 June 1968 that intercommunal talks opened in Beirut and were continued in Nicosia a week later. Those talks went on sporadically until
1973, with a glimmer of hope that the events of 1974
extinguished.

39. That proclamation not only flouts the General
Assembly’s 1974 resolution on the territorial integrity of
Cyprus, but also violates the 1960 Cypriot Constitution
and the Treaty of Guarantee regarding the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Cypriot State. That proclamation can in no way be justified by the existing
constitutional provisions and treaties governing the political life of the State of Cyprus, and it cannot be accepted by
the international community.
40. In the view of my delegation, the settlement of the
question of Cyprus must necessarily be based on strict
respect for the Constitution and for the treaties signed at
the time of fhe accession of Cyprus to independence. The
two Cypriot communities, Greek and Turkish, should
work together to build a Cyprus with full territorial integrity. Neither of them should take advantage of certain de
facto situations in order to modify unilaterally conditions
which are the subject of treaties guaranteeing the rights of
each of those communities.
41. My delegation remains convinced, having listened
here to the statements made by the parties concerned, that
the desire for negotiations and for peace still exists on their
part. It is therefore to be hoped that all the parties will
shortly return to the negotiating table to find, with the
assistance of the good offices of the Secretary-General, a
satisfactory solution to this very disquieting problem of
Cyprus.

36. Those events once again highlighted the essential
involvement of Greece and Turkey in Cyprus ‘and must
clearly be regarded as acts in violation of the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
37. This is why, in November 1974, the General Assembly, in resolution 3212 (XXIX), called upon all States to
respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence
and non-alignment of Cyprus. That resolution also urged
the withdrawal of foreign armed forces and the cessation
of all foreign interference. In addition, while reaffirming
the constitutional nature of the two communities, Turkish
and Greek, the resolution called upon the two communities to continue negotiations under the auspices of the
Secretary-General in order to reach a mutually acceptable
political settlement based on their fundamental and legitimate rights.

42. Mr. NGUAYILA
MBELA KALANDA
(Zaire)
(interpretation from French): I wish to begin my statement,
Sir, by congratulating you on behalf of my delegation on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
November. Your well-known qualities as a seasoned diplomat guarantee the success of our work. I wish also to
thank the representative of Jordan, Mr. Salah, for the
excellent work he did last month.
43. The United Nations. has been dealing with the question of Cyprus for a considerable number of years. Many
resolutions have been adopted by the Security Council and
by the General Assembly in an attempt to find a just,
negotiated solution of the problem of Cyprus. The Republic of Zaire commends the efforts made by all the parties
concerned and by the United Nations, especially its
Secretary-General, who is playing the leading role in the
search for a just and lasting solution to the problem before
the Council. We fully support all his efforts. In no circumstances, however, can we support a solution dictated by
the use of force, much less by a policy of secession.

38. The General .Assembly’s resolution of November
1974 not only called for respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Cyprus but also called upon. both
communities to continue their negotiations. Those negotiations, which were resumed in 1977 through the personal
efforts of Mr. Javier Perez de CuCllar, now SecretaryGeneral, to whom we should here pay a special tribute for
his personal efforts devoted to achieving a settlement to
the problem of Cyprus-those negotiations were sus- .
pended and eventually resumed in 1979, without any noteworthy progress having been made. In 1980 they were
reopened, and since then they have been pursued intermittently. It was with a view to reviving them and-to reaching
a speedy solution that the General Assembly last May
adopted resolution 371253, confiiing
the provisions of
resolution 3212 (XXIX). Recently the Secretary-General
has nourished considerable hope, in view of the felicitous
outcome to negotiations designed to reopen the talks
between the two communities. We can thus understand the
extent of his disappointment at the proclamation of the
self-styled Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.

44. We therefore remain firmly committed to the idea of
the need for. the continuance of the intercommunal talks
under the auspices of the Secretary-General, in order to
achieve a just and lasting solution of the problem of
Cyprus.
45. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Democratic Yemen. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.,
5

46. Mr. AL-ASHTAL
(Democratic Yemen) (interpretationfiom. Arabic): It gives me much pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I am confident that, with
your well-known diplomatic skill and wide experience, you
will guide the work of the Council to a successful conclusion. I must also pay a tribute to Mr. Abdullah Salah for
his efforts as President of the Councii last month.

differences should not be allowed to justify fragmentation
and partition.
52. It is truly regrettable that a political entity is declared
in northern Cyprus while the Secretary-General pursues
his efforts and initiatives to restore peace and harmony
between the two communities in Cyprus. We hope that the
Secretary-General will pursue his good offices, and we
hope that the Security Council will take a firm stand condemning this artifidial entity and take action that will guarantee the unity of Cyprus and its national independence.

47. I have come to the Council to state my Government’s
position regarding the declaration by the Turkish Cypriot
community of the establishment of a new political entity
which they call the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.

53. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

48. The Government of Democratic Yemen condemns
that action, which is in complete contravention of Council
resolutions on the question of Cyprus .of the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. Those resolutions call for respect
for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Cyprus. My Government calls on all members not to
recognize or establish relations with this entity, which has
no basis in international legality. It must be noted here that
the Turkish community’s invocation of the right of selfdetermination as the legal basis for their declaration of the
political entity is groundless. It is a distortion of the historic General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), which
affirms. the right of peoples to self-determination, not on a
factional, religious or sectarian basis, but on the basis of
national unity and territorial integrity. Moreover, no
people can exercise its right of self-determination under
occupation and foreign domination.
..
49. The seeds of the partition of the non-aligned Republic of Cyprus were sown when Turkish forces invaded and
occupied northern Cyprus in 1974. That invasion, which
was condemned by the Security Council and the General
%Assembly, posed a grave threat to the unity and independence of Cyprus and was a flagrant violation. of the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international
law. It was therefore not surprising that Turkey immediately declared its recognition of this entity. What arouses
our concern is that these events are taking place in an
international climate fraught with threats and crises, especially in the eastern Mediterranean region, where the largest American armada has been deployed, and in the
Middle Eastern region, where tension grows daily.

54. Mr. MOUSSA (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Mr. President, I would like at the outset to express to you
the pleasure of the delegation of Egypt upon your assumption. of the presidency of the Security Council for this
mon,th. We are confident ,that under your presidency the
Council will be able to live up to its important task, at this
critical stage, in the best possible way. I would also like to
pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Abdullah Salah of
Jordan, who conducted the business of the Council last
month very firmly, impartially and with the great capability for which he is known.
55. The latest developments in the question of Cyprus
and the problem of Cyprus itself constitute a source of
grave concern, because of the threat their continuation
represents to the security and stability not only of the
island itself but because they increase tension in the eastern
Mediterranean as a whole. This is a matter which Egypt
views with grave concern and which it is following with all
the seriousness that it deserves.
56. Egypt’s position concerning the question of Cyprus
and its developments, including the declaration of a separate independent republic in northern Cyprus, which is a
grave development m this situation, is based on the principles and objectives of the Charter of the United Nations, as
well as on the resolutions of the United Nations and those
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. Therefore,
Egypt believes that the question before the Council today,
which has previously been considered in the Council many
times, calls for the application of all the factors agreed
upon by the international community in its resolutions
concerning both the development and the exacerbation of
this problem, also bearing in mind the far-reaching effects
that could result from this situation.

50. We Arabs have suffered, and continue to suffer, from
the colonialist policy of fragmentation. The troubles and
crises in our region are the result of Zionist occupation and
the policy of annexation and expansion.

57. The factors are the following. First, the political independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and the nonaligned status of the Republic of Cyprus are the
foundations on, which all serious attempts to solve the
problem must be based. Secondly, there is a need to settle
the problem without undue delay in accordance with the
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations. Thirdly,
the human rights and fundamental freedoms for the
members of the two communities in Cyprus must be
respected because they represent the sound basis for understanding and coexistence in the single State of Cyprus.

51. The grave precedent being set at this very moment in
northern Cyprus is having a profound adverse effect not
only in the Middle East but on the world as a whole. The
establishment of political entities on the basis of religious
or sectarian homogeneity not only undermines the
national unity and territorial integrity of States but also
leads to war and destruction. Cyprus was, like Lebanon,
an example of national harmony and religious and confessional pluralism within a single State, and confessional
6

whole, set up a bicommunal Republic and thus enshrined
the joint exercise by ,the two co-founder communities of
the right to self-determination.

58. The national unity and territorial integrity of Cyprus
is the formula that has to be protected, and we urge a
return to and development of that formula so as to enable
Cyprus to continue its national march as a sovereign State
in the whole of its territory, in accordance with the resolutions of the General Assembly, the Iatest of which is
37/253 of 13 May 1983. We are convinced that the taking
of steps that are long range in effect reduce and curtail the
possibilities for reaching a just, peaceful solution for the
question of Cyprus. Therefore; we call for the immediate
resumption of the serious efforts to reach a just settlement
and to take bold and immediate steps towards the solution
of the problem of Cyprus so as to avoid any further deterioration of the situation. Therefore, we urge the parties
concerned to consider the threats that could affect the destiny of Cyprus and the destiny of peace based on justice
and equality, which we, in the framework ,of the United
Nations, strive to establish in that part of the world, in a
manner that guarantees equal and just rights for all.

64. Since the bicommunal ‘constitutional
system was
destroyed by the Greek Cypriot community, the right to
self-determination
came into being once again for the
Turkish Cypriot community. It has exercised that right
and created its own independent State, which will
remain such until both- communities agree to come
together again on an equal footing in the Republic of
Cyprus in a bicommunal, bi-zonal and federal framework.
This proclamation cannot ‘therefore be regarded as null
and void. The decision was taken in accordance with the
principle of self-determination, in order to re-establish the
state of affairs established by the Basic Articles of the
Constitution as envisaged in the Treaty of Guarantee, and
as a means of remedying the continuous usurpation by the
Greek community of fhe title “Government of the Republic of Cyprus”. The Council would have done better to
recognize the legal truth and declare null and void the
illegal amendments made unilaterally by the Greek
Cypriot community to the unalterable Basic Articles of the
Constitution, in violation of that Constitution and of the
Treaty of Guarantee, and all similar actions undertaken by
that community.

59. We listened to the statement made by the SecretaryGeneral yesterday [2497th me&g], and we would like to
atErm his proposal to hold a high-level conference under
his auspices and his continuation of the mission of good
offices. The delegation of, Egypt believes that it is very
important that this action be taken immediately and that
the Secretary-General invite the parties who are present
here in the Council to start the ,negotiations in good faith
without any preconditions and under equal obiigations
and rights for the ions of Cyprus in the two communities,
so as to enable the country to remain as one State, as called
for in the resolutions of the General Assembly and of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

65.‘ Therefore Turkey is forced to reject the second, third
and fourth pmambular paragraphs and paragraphs 1, 2
and -7. of this draft resolution. ‘In this connection, I
solemnly declare that, since there can be no question of the
Turkish community+ revoking its proclamation of independence, it would be absolutely unthinkable for Turkey
to withdraw recognition of the Turkish Republic of Northem Cyprus.
I
‘
rs
66. Furthermore,.my Government is astonished to see
that, contrary to the Council’s normal practice of making
a clear reference in all its resolutions on this matter to
‘negotiations between the two. communities, in this draft
‘resolution’ ‘this ~funda~mental reference is omitted.

60. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Turkey, on whom I now call.
61. Mr. KIRCA (Turkey) (interpretation from Frrech): -I
should like to inform the Council of the views of my
Government on draft resolution S/16149, which we have
before us. In the ultimate hope of being in some way useful
to the Council, I chose to take the floor at this particular
stage.

67, However, in order. io solve the problem of Cyprus
there are only two possible courses within the context of
the Secretary-General’s mission of good offices: negotiations between the two co-founder communities, or negotiations between two independent States of Cyprus. If
paragraph 4 is to be construed as providing the SecretaryGeneral with the&pportunity of using his mission of good
offices outside the fratiework of intercommunal negotiations, particularly by carrying out shuttle diplomacy
between the two parties, this method, or any other procedure outside ,the framework of inter-communal negotiations, could only be conceivable between two independent
Cypriot States and with their prior consent.

62. For the reasons which I explained yesterday, there is
no legal or legitimate government of the Republic of
Cyprus. The team at present in power in the Greek
Cypriot zone can only claim. to speak for the Greek
Cypriot community of the island. That community, .in
1963, overturned the constitutional order of the Republic
by means of a coup d&at, contrarl to the Basic Articles of
the Constitution and the I960 Treaty of Guarantee.2 The
administration which ensued therefrom is not authorized
to represent the Republic of Cyprus either constitutionally
or from the point of view of international law. For that
reason, Turkey rejects the first preambular paragraph of
this draft.

68. I should like to take this opportunity to repeat that
the positions and reservations expressed by Turkey on the
Council’s ‘resolutions 365 (1974) and 367 (1975) remain
entirely in force.

63. The proclamation of independence by the Turkish
Cypriot community is not contrary to the 1960 Treaty
concerning the Establishment of the Republic of Cyprus’
and the Treaty of Guarantee, The agreements’ and the
Constitution of 16 August 1960, which must be seen as a

569. Finally, I shouid like to inform the Council that,
since the text.of this draft resolution is, in my Govem7
:

. .

‘ment’s opinion, based on a distortion of historical events
and a misreading of legal facts, and since it shows not the
slightest concern for an evenhanded and equitable
approach to the two communities of Cyprus, if it is
adopted as a Council resolution, then, in accordance with
the position of the Turkish
Republic of Northern
Cyprus-which
has been offtcially communicated ,to me
by its President-Turkey
will have no choice but to reject
it in its entirety.
70. The ‘PRESIDENT:
of Greece.

titular resolutions 365 (1974) and 367 (1975). France
wishes to recall that the Government of President Kyprianou is the sole legitimate Government of the Republic of
Cyprus, and we call upon the members of the international
community not to recognize the illegal action of the
authorities of the northern zone of Cyprus.
77. My country has always maintained that the required
solution of the problem of Cyprus must include respect for
the unity, integrity, ,sovereignty and independence of the
Republic of Cyprus and implies the withdrawal of the foreign occupation forces. France recently recalled its position on this issue, at the time of the adoption by the
General ‘Assembly of its resolution 37/253, of 13 May
1983, for which France voted.

I now call on the representative

71. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece): I shall be very brief,
because at this late hour I do not want to prolong this
debate and delay further its most crucial phase, the adop
tion of the draft resolution. My statement is for the record.

78. The Security Council requested the SecretaryGeneral, in its resolution 367 (1975), of 12 March 1975, to
undertake a new mission of good offices in close cooperation with the representatives of the two communities.
The intercommunal talks have been carried on for nine
years, under the auspices of the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative, without any success in achieving
an equitable solution, needed to resolve the distressing
problems created by the situation. France had welcomed
with hope the recent initiatives of the Secretary-General,
proposing a method of negotiation and defining a framework for the resumption of the intercommunal talks.
France. also welcomed the idea of holding a meeting’
between the President of the Republic of Cyprus and the
head of the Turkish Cypriot community. That meeting
might have made it possible to make progress towards a
settlement in keeping with the interests of the two communities of the Republic of Cyprus.

72. Mr. Kirca time and again harps with a certain relish
on the theme that Greece purportedly is pursuing the goal
of enosis, namely, the union of the Republic of Cyprus
with Greece. Since this is not the first time that this statement has been made, I took the opportunity of addressing
a letter dated 18 October to the Secretary-General
[S/16079] refuting this allegation. The letter stated in part:
“any reference to the goals of the anti-colonial struggle
of the people of Cyprus during the 1950s is of a purely
historical nature and can in no way be construed as
constituting a policy statement. The people and the
democratic Governments
of Greece have genuinely
accepted and have been unwaveringly supporting the
independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. If there is a country that
is violating each and every one of these principles, it is
Turkey, by its invasion of Cyprus in 1974 and by its
continuing occupation of one third of the territory of
the Republic.*’

79. The decision taken by the authorities of the northern
zone of Cyprus jeopardizes those prospects for a settlement, and it must be rescinded. France places its hopes in
the mission that the Security Council could ask the
Secretary-General to undertake to enable the resumption
of the intercommunal talks so that rapid progress can be
made towards a just and lasting settlement in Cyprus that
is in conformity with the fundamental principles to which
we are firmly attached.

73. It has also done this more recently through the creation of this novelty, this Turkish Cypriot pseudo-State,
which Turkey has also recognized. As for this recognition,
I have to admit my sympathy, because since this pseudoState is the creation of Turkey it would be really cruel of it
not to have recognized its illegal offspring.

80. The PRESIDENT:
Turkey.

74. As for another statement by Mr. Kirca made yesterday [249&h me&zg]~namely,
that the difference between
Turkey and Greece since 1959 is that Turkey has continued to support the idea of an independent Republic of
Cyprus-an
extensive reply was given by the representative -of Cyprus this morning [24992/r meeting].

I call on the representative

of

8 1. Mr. .KIRCA (Turkey) (interpretation from French): I
wish to make only a brief statement. The representative of
Greece has just stated that his country refuses union
between Greece and Cyprus. I take note of that important
statement. The Council will undoubtedly remember it.
Turkey hopes that the policy of Greece in future will conform strictly with the statement made by Greece today.

75. Mr. de La BARRE de NANTEUIL
(France) (interpretation from French): The authorities in the northern
zone of Cyprus have just proclaimed the independence of a
so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. France
has unreservedly denounced this grave violation of the territorial integrity,. sovereignty, unity and independence of
..
the Republic of Cyprus.

82. Sir John THOMSON (United Kingdom): Mr. President, my delegation warmly congratulates you on your
assumption of your important office. We know from experience that you have precisely the talents which are necessary to guide our deliberations and to help us to come to
constructive and agreed conclusions. We are glad that you
preside over the Council at any time and notably at

76. _, France ‘cannot accept this fait accompli, which is contrary to all the resolutions of the Security Council, in par8

moments when we have difficult matters before us. We
have not been short of difficult matters. Your predecessor,
Mr. Salah, had some exceptionally ‘tricky ones to deal’
with, and he conducted our affairs with outstanding skill,
calmness and success.We are grateful to him. His reputation stands all the higher in consequence of his conduct of
the presidency.
:

89. My Government believes that the best way to do this
is through the activities of the Secretary-General. We have
always given our full support to his efforts to seek a solution to the Cyprus problem in the framework of the mission of good offices given him by the Council. We believe
that the present Secretary-General, by virtue both of his
outstanding ability, and his personal experience of the
Cyprus problem, is uniquely fitted to undertake this very
difficult but extremely important task. We warmly welcome his statement of 17 November [2497th meeting] in
which he said he was in constant contact with the parties
and was determined to pursue his mission of good offices,
to weather this crisis and to pursue the search for a settlement, using to the utmost the current presence of highranking representatives of the parties in New York.

83. The British delegation warmly welcomes the presence
in the Security Council of the Foreign Ministers of Greece
and of Cyprus. They have both made notable contributions
84. My Government formally requested you, Mr. President, to hold this meeting of the Security Council. We did
so because of our deep concern at the action taken by the
Turkish Cypriots purporting to declare unilaterally the
establishment of an independent State in the Turkishoccupied part of the Republic of Cyprus and because of
our belief that this might escalate into an even more
serious situation. In view of these inherent dangers my
Government believes that the Council should forthwith
adopt a clear and measured resolution.

90. We believe that the Council is united in favour of this
proposition, and we hope that it will give the SecretaryGeneral its full backing and unstinting co-operation in the
difftcult days ahead. I now invite the Council to support
the draft resolution.
91. The PRESIDENT:
It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.There being no objection,
it is so decided.

85. The draft resolution [S/161493 which we put forward
reflected my Government’s views: My Foreign Secretary
has said in Parliament that the British Government
deplores this action by the Turkish Cypriot community.
We recognize only one Cypriot State, the Republic of
Cyprus, under the Government of President Kyprianou.
The Turkish Cypriot action is incompatible with the state
of affairs brought about by the treaties governing the
establishment of the Republic of Cyprus. My Government
has treaty obligations in this respect which we share with
the Governments of Greece and Turkey. It is not only our
position in the context of the treaties of 1960 which specially involves Britain in this problem. We are also concerned because of our long historical links with Cyprus,
continuing into the present with our mutual membership
of the Commonwealth and with the settlement in Britain
of many Cypriots from both communities.

92. I shall now call upon those representatives who wish
to explain their -votes before the voting.
Arabic): I
93. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretutionfimz
should like to affirm Jordan’s full commitment to the’sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence and nonaligned status of Cyprus. I should also like to record our
satisfaction at the fact that we have not heard any of the
previous speakers expressing objections or doubts in this
regard.

94. Although this has been the point of departure for all
those concerned with the question of Cyprus, starting with
the Treaty of Establishment and the Treaty of Guarantee
of 1960, this problem has persisted in its two dimensions,
the internal and the regional. The recent developments in
the island, of which we disapprove as a means of solving
this problem, are a case in point. While the Security Council and the General Assembly have dealt appropriately
with the regional aspect of this question, it is clear that
there has perhaps been a kind of lacuna in the treatment of
the internal aspect, which is without doubt one of the
fundamental dynamics of the question of Cyprus regionally and internationally. At least in one regard, the recent
developments are perhaps a reaction to the lack of movement and of sufficient dynamism in dealing with the masons for the dispute between the two communities of the
island on the basis agreed to by all parties concerned.

86. The Council is aware of the process of negotiation
which took place and which has now resulted in the draft
resolution that is before the Council to be voted upon.
Therefore I do not need to go into detail in introducing the
draft resolution.
87. Nevertheless, we should be aware of the context’ in
which this draft resolution is put forward. The draft resolution .is’directed at the present deplorable action. It does not
purport to deal with the whole problem of Cyprus. We all
know that the present action by the Turkish Cypriot
authorities is not the only wrong of one kind or another
that has been done since the treaties were signed in 1960.
88. The Council’s responsibilities require it to address
itself to the future. We have noted that, amidst the gloom
cast by the Turkish Cypriot action, both communities have
expressed support for the Secretary-General’s mission of
good offices. Similarly, they both say that they support the
1977 and 1979 high level agreements. It remains just as
necessary as before to make every effort to bring the two
sides together. We hope that intercommunal talks, which
we have strongly supported, will be resumed.

95. The draft resolution in document S/16149 of 17
November is a continuation of the Council’s previous
approach, to which we do not object in principle. On the
one hand, the draft resolution calls for respect for the
sovereignty of a united and independent’ Cyprus and
9

affLms its non-aligned status. This is for us a so&e of
satisfaction and an incentive not to object to it. On the
other hand, however, it unfortunately fails to take into
‘account the internal aspect of the problem of Cyprus,
which in our view is very important. It will be difficult for
any effort to achieve a peaceful solution to this problem to
succeed if it does not take that into account and if it does
not give that aspect enough attention. But, much as we
regret the failure of this draft resolution to deal with the
reasons for and the aspects of the dispute between the two
communities of the island, we also regret the circumstances that led to the declaration of the establishment of an
independent State in northern Cyprus. The predominance
of such an approach-and while we are not fully familiar
with its aspects or the motives behind it-is a grave threat
to the territorial integrity, independence and stability of
many States inside and outside the region.

101. First, Pakistan has always supported the indepen:
dence, sovereignty, territorial integrityand unity of Cyprus
in a bicommunal, bi-zonal and federal framework. This
consideration has always remained foremost in our minds.
Secondly, Pakistan attaches the highest importance to the
promotion of intercommunal talks and the need to support and encourage the initiatives of the SecretaryGeneral. Thirdly, at this critical juncture when events have
taken a dramatic turn in Cyprus, the Security Council has
the responsibility to preserve and promote the objective of
a united Cyprus within a bicommunal, bi-zonal and federal framework, which can be achieved only through
reconciliation between the two communities and the intercommunal talks. Any decision by the Council which fails
to appreciate the point of view of one community and
results in its further disenchantment will not serve this
objective and may even press matters to a point of no
return.

96. Hence we find that one aspect of the problem of
Cyprus’ has suffered as a result of the failure to allow
things to reach their logical conclusion, on the one hand,
and of inadequate treatment, on the other. Therefore there
was a continuing dichotomy and inconsistency between
the steps taken in the context.of the internal dimension and
those taken in the context of the international dimension
of the problem. Within the framework of the Security
Council and the various international efforts, the intemational aspect of this question prevailed, while recent developments in the island represent the emergence of the
internal aspect in a one-sided manner.

102. Motivated by these considerations, Pakistan had
proposed certain amendments to the provisional draft
resolution circulated on 15 November by the United Kingdom. The suggested amendments were intended to bring
about a balance in the text and to provide a comprehensive
perspective of the events in Cyprus which go back to 1963.
Regrettably, our proposals did not receive the attention
they deserved from the membership of the Council.
103. The revised draft resolution which is now before the
Council omits an essential element which was present in
the provisional draft of 15 November and which, in our
view, was vital to the settlement of the Cyprus issue. This
element was in paragraph 4 of the provisional draft resolution, which read as follows:

97. We would have lent our support to any initiative or
action within the Security Council or outside it that would
have broken the deadlock that has characterized all efforts
and initiatives relating to the question of Cyprus. We had
thought that in its original version of 15 November, the
draft resolutibn before us would probably provide an
acceptable basis for such an initiative, especially since it
would enhance the role of the Secretary-General and
accord with the spirit of resolutions 365 (1974) and 367
(1975). However, the majority decided not to open what
has been described as a “Pandora’s box”. That is, the
majority preferred-perhaps
some found it easier-to
adopt this approach. Hence the dichotomy that has character&d the past approach to the problem of Cyprus has
persisted on this occasion also.

“Requests the Secretary-General to pursue his mission of good offices and to discuss urgently with the two
communities and with the Governments of Greece and
Turkey ways by which the intercommunal negotiations
may be resumed in order to achieve early progress
towards a just and lasting settlement in Cyprus”.
104. In the revised draft resolution this paragraph has
been modified to exclude any reference to the intercommunal negotiations, which touch the very core of the Cyprus
question. Deletion of this reference robs the draft resolution of the only element which could have constituted an
explicit mandate for the Secretary-General to promote
intercommunal talks and conciliation between the two
communities. The provisional draft resolution had many
shortcomings with which we might yet have b&en able to
live. However, its revised version, with the deletion of the
vital reference to intercommunal talks, cannot be acceptable to US. Accordingly, we are left with no choice but to
vote negatively on the draft resolution in order to register
our view that this draft resolution in its present form will
not serve the cause of peace and harmony in Cyprus nor
be instrumental in promoting its unity.

98. Finally, I wotild repeat that the approach that led to
the declaration of the establishment of an independent
State in northern Cyprus constitutes a grave precedent in
the region, and it is difficult for us in principle to sympathize with such an approach.
99. Hence the position of Jordan on this draft resolution
stems first from our non-acceptance of the continued onedimensional approach embodied in this draft resolution,
and, secondly, from the fact that we do not support the
step taken in northern Cyprus.
100. Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): In explaining our
vote on draft resolution S/16149, I wish to state that our
position’ has been determined by the following considerations.

105. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution contained in document S/16149.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
10

In favour: China, France, Guyana, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire, Zimbabwe.

aligned status. Since the draft resolution put forward by
the United
Kingdom
refers to respect for the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and nonalignment of the Republic of Cyprus and calls upon the
parties to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in
his mission of good offices, the Chinese delegation voted
in favour of the draft resolution just adopted.

Against: Pakistan.
Abstaining: Jordan.

112. We sincerely hope that the indigenous Greek and
Turkish Cypriots will exercise restraint, persevere in the
spirit of patient consultation, avoid an aggravation of the
situation and settle their disputes at an early date on the
basis of the progress already achieved, so that they can live
together in harmony and jointly build a prosperous Cyprus.
__
113. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretationfrom Rlrrsian): The Soviet delegation voted for draft resolution S/16149. We believe that it
adequately meets the needs of the situation which has
arisen as a result of unilateral action by the leadership of
the Turkish community in Cyprus. We were also guided
by the fact that the text of this resolution is acceptable to
the Government of Cyprus. At the same time, we feel that
we must make the following statement.

The &aft resoktion was adopted by 13 votes to I, with I
abstention [resolution 541 (1983)].

106. Mr. LING Qing (China) (interpretation from Chinese): First of all, please allow me, Sir, warmly to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for November. We are convinced that
your wisdom and diplomatic skill will guide the Council in
discharging its functions smoothly this month. At the same
time, I wish sincerely to express my appreciation to your
predecessor, Mr. Salah of Jordan. Because of his unremitting efforts, the Council during the busy month of October
was able to function effectively.
107. I wish to take this opportunity to welcome the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus and Greece to these
meetings of the Security Council.

114. The Zurich and London Agreements’ that were
imposed upon Cyprus, which are referred to in the preambular part of the resolution, are a serious curtailment of
the sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus. The “guarantees” envisaged therein are essentially used to serve interests which are alien to the Cypriot people. These
“guarantees” failed in the past to prevent armed intervention in Cyprus and this time once again have failed to
prevent the performance of further acts which are aimed at
splitting up the State of Cyprus.

108. The question of Cyprus has all along been a matter
of concern to the international community. For many
years the countries concerned and the international community at large have made unremitting efforts to find a
peaceful solution to the Cyprus issue. Under his mandate
from the Security Council, the Secretary-General has been
engaged in active mediation between the Greek and Turkish Cypriots with the aim of achieving a fair solution to
the .problem. Regrettably, however, so far no satisfactory
solution has been found.

115. The PRESIDENT:
Mr. Denktag, to whom the
Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure, wishes to make a statement. With the consent of the Council, I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and make his statement.

109. The development of events in the past few days has
further complicated the question of Cyprus and caused
deep concern in the international community. In recent
years, through the joint efforts of both the Greek and the
Turkish Cypriots and with encouragement from various
quarters, there have been repeated contacts and meetings
between the Greek and Turkish Cypriots to seek measures
to solve their disputes peacefully, which constitutes a good
beginning for negotiations between them. Naturally,
people are well aware of the fact that the question of
Cyprus is a complicated one left over from colonialist rule
and that there may be twists and turns, and even setbacks,
in the course of negotiations which take time and require
mutual accommodation.

116. Mr. DENKTAS: I thank you for this opportunity to
add a few more words which I shall make as short as
possible at this late hour in order to make the position of
my community clear. I was really touched to see all the
representatives so keenly interested in the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of my country.
Cyprus is my country. We did nothing to destroy its sovereignty, independence or territorial integrity. We defended
it when it was attacked by Greek Cypriots and when the
bicommunal character of its independence and of its
Government was destroyed.

110. Nevertheless, we believe that so long as both the
Greek and the Turkish Cypriots set store by the overall
interests of the country and continue with the negotiations
in a spirit of mutual understanding and accommodation,
they should be able to find a fair and just solution acceptable to both sides.

117. It appears that in these forums, Greek Cypriot word
is more important than that of Turkish Cypriots. I have
therefore brought with me a Greek Cypriot of distinction
to convince the Council that I am telling the truth. This
Greek Cypriot is Mr. Stanley Kyriakides, a professor from
Cyprus, living in America, who has written several books
on Cyprus.

111. The Chinese Government has all along supported
the Republic of Cyprus in its efforts to preserve its
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-

118. I want to stress that when the Council says that the
territorial integrity of Cyprus Should not be affected,
11

should not be divided, should be protected, it is talking
about my country, and from this territorial integrity my
people were ejected by force of arms and we had to be
given back this territory which was denied us for 20 years.
At the last moment we say: our territory now is our State
because we cannot live without the protection bf this State.
But we are ready to reestablish territorial integrity. We are
ready to re-establish bicommunal independence and sovereignty. Everybody thinks that we are destroying the territorial integrity of Cyprus. I demand my people’s right-I
demand it-because I am part of Cyprus and because .I
have been ejected from it. Greek Cypriot representatives
here are smilingly occupying our seat. It is the Cypriot
seat, not the Greek Cypriot seat, but for 20 years we have
been denied our say from it and they dare say to the
Council that I, with Turkey, withdrew my community
from the Government of Cyprus. The Secretary-General’s
reports are there. This kind of falsification to a body like
this should not be allowed to continue;lf the defence of the
world, if peace in this world is to succeed.

members of the.- Security
Council going to tell me that I am
--:
to become the SUbJeCtof the Greeks? By what right? Under
what law? Under what chapter of the United Nations rules
am I going to be asked to make my people the colonial
subjects of the Greek Cypriots?
123. The Council has no such right; it is misreading the
Cyprus problem; it is looking at it with Greek eyesbecause
for 20 years it did not listen to us For 20 years nonalignment was being used in order to destroy the independence of Cyprus. We shouted that this was so, but the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries continuously backed
the Greek Cypriots, who are on record countless times as
indicating that they want nothing but union with Greece.
124. This farce must finish. My people are entitled to
their rights, and that is why I have come here. Given our
rights and our equality we are ready to reestablish the
bi-zonal federal system. We appreciate the SecretaryGeneral’s work, initiative and efforts; we want him to continue because we have the utmost trust in him. But we
cannot do so if we are treated as a nonentity, asan ethnic
group that has no right of self-determination, as subjects of
the Greek Cypriots. Is the.Security Council .in the twentieth century, in 1983, going to create colonial subjects for
the Greeks? This is what the Council is being asked to do
and this is what all the efforts have been for the past 20
years. It is enough.

119. The Secretary-General knows the truth about the
past--everybody knows ‘it-but here we are told “we love
the Turks, we did no wrong to them”.
120. So it was we who killed ourselves and buried ourselves in common graves for ‘years and years; we denied
food, medicine and building materials to our people and,
having given the Greeks all our lands, were squeezed into 2
per cent of the area of Cyprus for 20 years. And when we
come to the point where Greece occupies Cyprus, overthrows Makarios and his illegal regime and Turkey comes
and stops this occupation while thousands of Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots are being killed, when we take
protection behind a line and we still seek to restore the
unity of the State of Cyprus, the unity of its sovereignty, its
territorial integrity, by establishing a bi-zonal federation,
we are told by the Greek Cypriots: no, this is too much.
Why? Because back in 1964 this body wrongly decided
that the Greek Cypriots themselves were the legitimate
Government of Cyprus.

125. I want to make one correction: it is not the leadership that has decided to establish a State; it is my people. I
respect their will and I hone the Council will also.
126. I come to Mr. Kyriakides.

In his book entitled

Cyprus: Constitutionalism and Crisis Government5 he writes:

“An analysis of the .Cypriot Constitution of 1960
reveals a strong bicommunal character. Its major provisions are directed toward establishing and regulating
bicommunal interests. The Constitution recognizes and
legitimizes bicommunalism; at the same time, it guarantees community interests through an intricate system of
constitutional devices.‘”

121. From that moment &ward, the chances of settling
the Cyprus problem were finished. Now, in good will, for
the protection of our rights, we take this tinal step and we
are the judges of whether the Greek Cypriots intended to
settle with us, whether they had good will in coming to the
conference table. We are in a position to judge it; we have
our information and our contacts. When we decide to take
the step, the whole world is up in arms. Why? What have
we done? What were we expected to do? To become the
colonial subjects of the Greek Cypriots? To abandon all
‘our rights and bow to them? This is the question before the
Council, and this is the crucial question to be decided.

He continues:
“With the two ethnic communities institutionalized
and given respective communal recognition, the framework of the 1960 Constitution ensures bicommunal participation in all spheres and levels of government.“’
127. Where have we been for the last 20 years? Where is
this Government? Is any Government that robs its people of
their constitutional rights, ejects them from the Govemment and from the State, treats them as rebels, kills them,
bums down their houses, steals their lands and reduces
them to living in 2 per cent of the land area a Government to
be respected by this Organization? And when we say
“Come and see us”, does the non-aligned group come to us?
Because of their respect for this Government they make
conditions. They say, “We will come to you, but can we not
see you in our hotel7 We do not want to come to your
office.” Then we compromise. They come to my house. We

122. Now, I shall refer to my Greek witness because I
have to prove that a bicommunal partnership State was
shattered, that I am part of it and that the State which my
people have just established is a part of the territorial integrity, part of the independence, part of the sovereignty of
Cyprus if federal bi-ionality is to be established-as I
agreed with Makarios, and later confirmed with Mr.
Kyprianou. But if it is not, to be established, are the
12

say to them: “Come and see the common graves.*’ They
reply “No.” We say, “Come and meet our refugees.” “No.”
“Come and see the relatives of the persons missing since
1963.” “No.”

133. There are two units in Cyprus, as Mr. Kyriakides
proves, the Turkish unit and the Greek unit. If Yugoslavia
had started talking about minorities and majorities there
would be no Yugoslavia today. Them are no such words in
the Yugoslav language as “minority’* and “majority”.
Decisions. are made by consensus because the Yugoslav
people want to be united, they do not want to be divided.
So I ask the Greek Cypriots, do they accept federalism,
bi-zonal federalism such as I agreed with Makarios, or are
they for a unitary State, as Mr. Ky@ianou said yesterday7
This is the question before the Council.
‘,

128. This is the treatment we receive. And then you talk
here about human dignity, sovereign rights,. peace, equality. This is the treatment we have received for 20 years, and
my people say, we are tired of it. We are going to be
non-aligned if they will accept us. We are going to support
sovereignty over Cyprus if the Greeks will establish the
bi-zonal Republic. But if they do not, what are we going to
do-live stateless? Are we going to be the subjects of the
Greek Cypriots? No.

134. I promised not to be lengthy. I have many papers. I
shall not read them to the Council. I shall not waste its
time, for members have tired themselves in a very important affair. I shall end my statement by referring to the
resolution adopted today because I want to be absolutely
honest with the Council. If we have survived for 20 years
and not gone down it is because we have been correct and
consistent all the time.

129. I shall continue with the words of Mr. Kyriakides:
“It appears that in all spheres of government, regardless
of whether the character is national or local, the Constitution recognizes the Turks and Greeks of Cyprus primarily as members of their respective communities with
political and constitutional rights, that is, not as citizens
of Cyprus but as members of one or the other community. The constitutional bicommunalism becomes more
evident in the analysis of communal participation in the
executive, legislative and judicial branches.“s

135. To us, there is no Government of the Republic of
Cyprus. The Government in the south represents Greek
Cypriots; the Government in the north represents Turkish
Cypriots. Together, bicommunally,
they become the
Government of Cyprus, and I extend an offer to the Greek
Cypriot side to sit down at the table and to m-establish this
bicommunal, bi-zoiral federal system.

130. Yes, but for 20 years this Constitution, this agreement, was in the wastepaper basket. It is still there: We
appeal to the guarantors to come and help us. No one
remembered the Treaty of Guarantee when we were cut
down. When the Constitution was in the wastepaper
basket for 20 years, where were the guarantors? Greece
was with them trying to destroy the constitutional set-up,
trying to grab Cyprus, Secretly, 20,000 Greek soldiers
entered Cyprus. They attacked defenceless Turkish villages. Where were the guarantors? Where were the others?
Had Turkey not been there to help us, Cyprus’s territorial
integrity;‘independence and sovereignty-about which everyone talks so warmly-would
have been finished long
ago. We defended it. We know its value, and we are not
going to give it up.

136. The Council says that it is concerned at the declaration by the Turkish Cypriot authorities about our independent State. I hope it is equally concerned that one part of
the bicommunal Government has for 20 years been robbing the other part of all its rights, has not given them back
and does not intend to give them back because it gets all
this confirmation from the Security Council that it is the
legitimate Government of Cyprus.
137. The whole world may regard these individuals as
the legitimate Government of Cyprus, but if the population in Cyprus regards them as robbers of their rights, they
are not the legitimate Government of Cyprus. They have
to be decent to the other part of the Government. They
cannot continue this armed robbery at our expense and
then rouse the whole world against us, claiming that a
legitimate. Government of Cyprus has been disrupted.
Where has legitimacy been for 20 years?

131. Makarios stated that not an inch of this land will be
given to the Turks; al! of it, the whole of it, will be given to
Greece. No. That is why the set-up of our State is a direct
obstacle to enosis. It shall continue to be so. We are not
going to allow Cyprus to be Hellenized. We have died in
the cause of defending Cyprus’s territorial integrity and its
independence; we intend to keep it. It is ours; we are not
going to give it to Greece, never.

138. That our declaration is !‘incompatible with the 1960
Treaty’* we reject. The 1960 Treaty brought about an independent, sovereign Cyprus in which two communities
shared all governmental institutions, shared the executive,
shared everything. So if we cannot continue like that-it
was the Greek Cypriots who threw it over-then we must
find another way in a guaranteed, independent, nonaligned island of Cyprus. And this is the alternative we
found after 20 years, as I have said.

132. I therefore call upon the representative of the Greek
Cypriot side to tell this body today whether he agrees that
we are going to talk on the basis of the 1977 and 1979
high-level agreements and of the Secretary-General’s “evaluation” paper and the opening statements of 1980 and 1981,
leading to a bi-zonal federal system, or whether, as he said
earlier today, 10 per cent, as he calls us, cannot be equated
to 82 per cent? If.we are talking federalism, we are not
counting heads, we are looking at how many units there are.

139. The Council considers the Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus to be “invalid”. As I said yesterday, it
considered China non-existent for 30 years and East Germany non-existent for 25 years.. It does not matter; they
are now here among us, and I greet them with respect.
13

140. We are not seceding from the independent island of
Cyprus, from the Republ; of Cyprus, 0; will not do so if
the chance is given to us to.re-estabiish a bi-zonal federal
system. But if the robbers of my rights continue to tiist
that they are the legitimate Government of Cyprus, we
shall be as legitimate as they, as non-aligned as they, as
sovereign as they in the northern State of Cyprus, but we
shall keep the door wide open to re-establishing unity
under a federal system.. It is up to them to decide; they .
must not be allowed to get away with this highway
robbery. They have done so for too long, and now they are
so confident that they can get atiay with it that they,recognize none of our rights. That is why they led us into our
present position. Please understand us; they left us no alternative. We hope that this will ,%e such a weight on the
scales in favour of continuing the talks in a meaningful
way that they would come to the negotiating table.
141. I wanted the Council to encourage them in that
direction by not condemning us, or at least by telling them,
after condemning us, “We see you, Mr. Kyprianou, as the
legitimate President of Cyprus. Very well, but are you not
missing one leg? Are you not hopping without the Turkish
leg which you cut off and threw into the dustbin 20 years
ago? Why do you not put it back and be a proper iegitimate Government?” No one has said that to them for 20
years, so they think they can get away with the highway
robbery they have committed.
,
142. By what we have done we h&e prevented theti
from running away with our sovereignty, with our independence, with our freedom. They have no right to touch
it. Thousands of my peopie are dead and buried because
they objected to enosis, because they did not recognize the
unconstitutional rule of Makarios. What do I care if the
whole world, ignorant of what is happening
- in Cyprus,
tells them that they are the legitimate Government of
Cyprus? I do not recognize them. My people does not
recognize them. We shall not recognize them. The only
way is to re-estabiish the bicommunal, bi-zonal federal
system, with the aid and help and good offices of the
Secretary-General. We are: ready for .that.
143. We hope that the procedures thus far agreed upon.
will be followed. If a new procedure is to be found, I am
sure that the two Governments wili.meet and decide atid
agree upon a new procedure and @en continue their talks
in the framework of the good offices of the ‘SecretaryGeneral.
144. I am sorry that I talked very excitedly, but I am
excited. When the Council is excited abdut my Government’s integrity, independence and sovereignty, I .h@e it
will grant me the right to be a little more excited than it is.

Litho in United Natlon~. NOW York

145. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus. I invite him to make a
statement.
146. Mr..IACOVOU
(Cyprus): The dignity of the Council prevents me from making a reply to what we have
heard. My only task at this late hour is to thank the Council for its adoption, of today’s resolution, which fully vindicates the position of my Government, the Government of
the Republic of Cyprus. I wish also to thank you very
tirmiy,
Mr. President, for the expert way in which you
guided the .work of this Council and for your personal
contribution to the success of its deliberations today.
147. We now hope that Turkey and the Turkish Cypriot
leadership will obey the call of the Security Council and
withdraw the declaration of 15 November, and thus open
the road to a just settlement of the Cyprus problem.
148. We shall await eagerly the ‘&ports of the SecretaryGeneral to the Council about the progress in the impiementation of the resolution it has just adopted.
149. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Turkey
has asked to make a statement, and I call on him now.
150. Mr. KIRCA (Turkey) (interprerarion from French):
If the Greek Cypriot representative expects Turkey or the
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus to give up independence, or expects Turkey to withdraw its recognition, he
must really be ignorant of the Turkish dictionary: certain
words cannot be found there.
151. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council has now
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item
on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.

NOTES
’ Conference

on Cyprus:

Documents

signed and initialled

at Lancaster

House on 19 February E959, Cmnd. 679 (London, Her Majesty’s Stationery Oilice, 1959).
2 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 382, No. 5475.
.’ 3 Ibid.,
4 Ibid.,

vol. 382, No. 5496.
Nos. 5476 to 5486.
’ Stanley Kyriakides, Cyprus: Constitutionalism
and Crisis Governm&t (Philadelphia, University’ of Pennsylvania Press, 1968).
6 Ibid., pp. 55-56.
’ Ibid.., p. 56.
s Jbid., p. 57.

00300

90-6020SNvvember

i992-2.050
