UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
d
MEETING:

25 MARCH

1983

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/24231
Adoptionoftheagenda

..*,*...........

. . ..*a......

.*..a...,**....

1
1

. . . . . ..~........o............,.......................~

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of
Nicaragua addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15651) . . . . . . . . ..I.

WPV.2423

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

with

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the OfJcial Records of fhe Security Council. The date of the document indicates

the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given,

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system adopted in
1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council. The
new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965,
became fully operative on that date.

2423rd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 25 March 1983, at 3.30 p.m.
Presjdent; Sir John THOMSON

(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, the Dominican
Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany and the Islamic Republic of Iran in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2423)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Miss Dever (Belgium),
Mr. Salazar Paredes (Bolivia), Mr. Bittencourt (Brazil),
Miss Castillo (Dominican Republic), Mr. Jelonek(Federal
Republic of Germany) and Mr. Serajzadeh(IslamicRepublic of Iran) took the placesreservedfor them at the sideof
the Council chamber.

2. Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/15651)
The meeting was called to order at 4 p,m.

Adoption of the agenda
3. Mr, SINCLAIR
(Guyana): Sir, representing, as you
do, a country with which Guyana enjoys cordial and
friendly relations, it gives me special pleasure to welcome
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March. You bring to this high office,
in addition to your well-known qualities as a diplomat,
your methodical, efficient manner, which together give
us assurance that under your stewardship the Council
will effectively and successfully discharge its responsibilities.

The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 22 March 1983 from the Deputy Minister for
External Relations of Nicaragua addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15651)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken at previous meetings on this item [242&h to 2422nd
meefings], I invite the representative of Honduras to take
a place at the Council table; I invite the representatives of
Algeria, Barbados, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Ecuador, Grenada, India, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Mexico, Panama, the Philippines, Spain the United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela
and Viet Nam to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber,

4. I must also take this opportunity to express to your
predecessor, Mr. Oleg Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union,
my delegation’s appreciation for the very capable and
smooth manner in which he conducted the business of
the Council during February.
5. It was exactly one year ago that the Government of
Nicaragua requested the convening of the Council
[S/14913] to consider the dangerous situation existing in
Central America. In the course of the meetings following
that request, our attention was drawn to the overt threats
of destabilization and harassment being made against
Nicaragua and the preparations being made for intervention through the equipping and training of members of
the former Somoza National Guard in a territory neighbouring Nicaragua. The Council was warned on that
occasion that this situation posed a serious threat to the
peace and security of the region, with consequences
extending even beyond it.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ortez Colindres
(Honduras) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Abada
(Algeria), Mr, Moseley (Barbados), Mr, Sunz de Santamaria (Colombia), Mr. Zumbado Jimenez (Costa Rica),
Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Al-Alji (Democratic Yemen),
Mr. Albornoz (Ecuador),
Mr. Taylor (Grenada), Mr.
Purushottam (India), Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Maudave (Mauritius), Mr. Mun”oz Ledo (Mexico),
Mr. Ozores Typaldos (Panama), Mr. Arcilla (Philippines),
Mr. de Pinib (Spain), Mr. Rupia (United Republic of
Tanzania), Mrs. Coronel de Rodriguez (Venezuela) and
Mr. Hoang Bich Son (Viet Nam) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

1

from outside and involving the use of the territory ofs
neighbouring State as a springboard for attacks by mer.
cenaries and dissidents against the political in&pendence, sovereignty and territorigl integrity of Nicaragua,

Recent events have served to give even further confiriation of the correctness of the analyses made in 1982.
The fears we expressed then are being vindicated by the
actions of the same. States which were then accused of
aggressive and threatening behaviour. As a State of the
Latin American and Caribbean region, Guyana has been
following with concern the marked deterioration in the
situation in parts of Central America, and it is with compelling necessity that we join our voice with those of the
delegations which have preceded us in making that
concern public.
6

11. It was little more than two months ago that the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of member States of the
Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries met
in the Nicaraguan capital in extraordinary session,from
10 to 14 January, to address their attention to the situp.
tion in Latin America and the Caribbean. The preoccu.
pations expressed by the Ministers were sustained by the
Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, which met at New Delhi from 7
to 12 March and in relation to the situation in Central
America denounced, in paragraph 136 of the Political
Declaration [see S/1567.5 and Con.1 and 2, annex]:

7. My delegation listened with care as the Deputy
Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua recounted
[242&h meeting] recent developmerits in, and in rel;ttiqn
to, his country, We have taken note of the massive infiltration of members of the former Somoza National
Guard from across Nicaragua’s northern border, some
penetrating as far as Matagalpa, in the vicinity of Rio
Blanco. My delegation sincerely regrets the loss of Nicaraguan life which has followed these infiltrations and
fully shares the assessment of the Nicaraguan Government regarding a possible internationalization of the
conflict in the region.

“the new and increasing threats and acts of intimidation and the growing seriousness and increased
number of acts of aggression against Nicaragua, particularly the violation of its airspace and territorial
waters, the utilization of the territory of foreign countries in and outside the region as bases for aggression
and the training of counter-revolutionary forces, the
commission of terrorist actions and sabotage, particularly the attacks of armed groups of ex-Somoza
guards through its northern border, which had resulted in considerable loss of life and property, as well as
measures of economic pressure at the international
level. These were considered part of a deliberate plan
to harass and destabilize that country, as has been
acknowledged by a foreign Power.”

8. I wish to state at the outset that it is my delegation’s
understanding that the Council is convened, not to sit in
judgement against the institutions or the policies which
the Government of Nicaragua has decided to put in place
or to implement in order to secure the political, social
and economic advancement of the people of Nicaragua.
To advance a criticism of any such internal arrangements
as a reason, or even a justification, for harassing the
Nicaraguan Government constitutes a flagrant violation
of the sovereignty and independence of Nicaragua, an
interference in that country’s internal affairs and a
breach of the Charter of the United Nations, No State
has the right to dictate to the people of Nicaragua how
they should organize their internal affairs, The political
reality of the Latin American and Caribbean region is
one of ideological pluralism. Any attempt to impose
hegemony or ideological conformity on the States of the
region constitutes a violation of our sovereign independence and is bound to lead to relations of tension, distrust and instability.

12. The heads of State or Government also called on
the Governments of the United States and Honduras to
adopt a constructive position in favour of peace and dialogue, in conformity with the principles of international
law, and called on all States to avoid any act of policy
that might increase tensions in the region.
13. In relations between States, the principles of international law must be inviolate and scrupulously respo
ted. That is our only guarantee of peaceful and stable
inter-State relations, The international community long
ago outlawed intervention as an instrument of State
behaviour, More recently, in 1970, the General Assembly
adopted the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.’ That Declaration, taking the Charter as
its point of departure, solemnly proclaimed, inter ah,
the principle that States shall refrain from the threat 01
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations. The
Declaration on Friendly Relations also set forth the principle that States shall settle their international disputes
by peaceful means in such a manner that international
peace and security are not endangered.

9. At any rate I must recall, asa parenthesis, that for 45
years the people of Nicaragua endured Somoza’s
tyranny, with no corresponding concern being raised in
the Council for democratic freedoms or for a more even
distribution of the country’s wealth. Now that for the
first time the people of Nicaragua are given an opportunity to organize their affairs for their own benefit and
advancement, attempts are being made to frustrate and
divert those efforts.
10. What the Council is convened to consider is the
complaint by the Government of Nicaragua regarding
the dangerous situation created by the intensified
attempts at destabilizing the Government of that country
and at destroying its successful revolution-attempts
organized, financed, supported and loudly proclaimed

14. In December 1981, the General Assembly adopted
the Declaration on the Inadmissibility
of Intervention
2

and Interference in the Internal Affairs of States.z The
Declaration set out in clear language the duties comprehended in the principle of non-intervention and noninterference. Those duties include:

Nicaragua, with the increased danger of an armed conflict which could engulf the entire subregion, with dangerous consequences for the peace and security of the
Americas and the Caribbean.

“(a) The duty of States to refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force in any
form whatsoever to violate the existing internationally
recognized boundaries of another State, to disrupt the
political, social or economic order of other States, to
overthrow or change the political system of another
State or its Government, to cause tension between or
among States or to deprive peoples of their national
identity and cultural heritage;

17. The grave nature of the present situation notwithstanding, my delegation nourishes the hope that there is
still a chance for reason to prevail and for the voices of
moderation to be heard over the shrill clamour of intervention and belligerence. My delegation makes a solemn
appeal for an end to all aggressive actions and attitudes
towards Nicaragua and the Sandinist revolution. We
appeal for full respect for the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Nicaragua. We appeal for
peace to be given a chance in Central America.

“(b) The duty of a State to ensure that its territory
is not used in any manner which would violate the
sovereignty, political independence, territorial integrity and national unity or disrupt the political, economic and social stability of another State; . . .

18. In this context, Guyana would like to express its
appreciation and support for the efforts of States in the
region to find peaceful solutions to the crises prevailing
in Central America. We make special mention of the
proposals of the Governments of Colombia, Mexico,
Panama and Venezuela4 articulated earlier this year in
the Panamanian island of Contadora. Guyana expresses
its positive encouragement of this initiative.

“(c) The duty of a State to refrain from armed
intervention, subversion, military occupation or any
other form of intervention and interference, overt or
covert, directed at another State or group of States, or
any act of military, political or economic interference
in the internal affairs of another State, including acts
of reprisal involving the use of force;

19. My delegation also welcomes the reiteration by the
Government of Nicaragua of its willingness to enter into
a dialogue on Central American problems, its readiness
to tackle immediately
the problems and differences
which have resulted from military actions in its border
area with Honduras and its open, constructive attitude to
the peaceful settlement of the crises in Central America.
My delegation urges all States, in the interest of the wellbeing of the Nicaraguan people and of peace and stability in Central America, to abandon postures of intervention and destabilization and instead to seek political
solutions to whatever differences may exist between them
and Nicaragua, I also wish here to reiterate Guyana’s
unswerving solidarity with the Government and people
of Nicaragua in their struggle to defend their independence, their sovereignty and their territorial integrity.

“. ..
“(e) The duty of a State to refrain from any action
or attempt in whatever form or under whatever pretext to destabilize or to undermine the stability of
another State or of any of its institutions”.3
This Declaration enjoys the total support of the members
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, because its
principles have historically been a corner-stone of our
Movement. We felt it was necessary to set them out in
clear, declaratory form as further protection for small
States, which are invariably the victims of aggression and
intervention.

20. Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): It gives me special
pleasure, Sir, to join my colleagues who have spoken
before me to extend our congratulations on your assumption of the office of President of the Security Council and
to express our appreciation for the exemplary manner in
which you have conducted the deliberations of the Council during the past three weeks. We feel confident that the
Council will continue to benefit from your wide experience, ability and diplomatic skill in the consideration of
the issues before it. May I also take this opportunity to
express our appreciation of the excellent manner in
which your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky, the representative of the Soviet Union, conducted the proceedings of
the Council last month.

15. It must be emphasized here again that the people of
Nicaragua are striving for nothing more than their political, economic and social advancement. Their efforts are
not aimed at proving or disproving the superiority of one
ideological world view or another. It is dangerous,
unrealistic and self-serving to seek to distort and misrepresent the domestic impulses for change in Central
America and to seek to explain them in terms of an
East-West confrontation.
16. The infiltration of counter-revolutionary forces into
Nicaragua, in addition to constituting an attack against
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
that State, is causing great loss of life and damage to
property and is diverting the efforts of the Nicaraguan
Government from its most important task of nationbuilding, What is more, this action leads to a heightening
of the tension in the relations between Honduras and

21. The fact is not disputed that the situation in Central
America remains deeply disturbed. The growing dislocation of political, social and economic life in that region,
resulting from ideological confrontations and foreign
interference, is a cause of profound concern and deep
3

anxiety to all of us who profess our commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. The worsening situation in the Central American
region is of immediate concern to the Security Council,
which, under the Charter, has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

We wish them well and we feel confident that, left alone,
they will be able to achieve their objectives without causing anxiety or concern to any of their neighbours.
27. Pakistan is deeply interested in the demonstration
of respect for the principles of the Charter by all concerned in the Central American region, even though we are
situated at a distance from that region. Our experience in
our own region convinces us that unquestionably the
Charter principles are of universal applicability and that
no State can escape the consequences of the violation of
those principles, no matter how distant the region in
which they occur.

22. We have listened with close attention to the statements made by the representatives of the countries
directly involved and also to statements by others deeply
interested in the situation. The factual situation in the
region may look somewhat blurred, but not totally obfuscated, in the light of the passionately held views of the
protagonists. There is no doubt that the situation on the
Nicaraguan border with Honduras has greatly worsened
in recent days and threatens to develop into an armed
conflict between these two States, the consequences
of which are bound to extend beyond their territories.

28. It is highly satisfying that the representatives of
Nicaragua and Honduras have both expressed a desire
on the part of their Governments to engage in a dialogue
in order to seek a negotiated settlement of their differences. In this context, we welcome the initiatives taken
by the regional States, which can effectively contribute
towards the reduction of tensions and the settlement of
the disputes between the neighbouring States. The Council has a great opportunity to encourage such initiatives
for peace. It should also take an active interest in promoting a process of peaceful negotiation in fulfilment Of its
responsibilities under the Charter, As a first step, it might
consider sending a fact-finding mission to the region to
assess the situation on the ground and to report its findings to the Council. The dispatch of such a fact-finding
mission would in itself serve to reduce tension and would
be in conformity with the recommendation
in the
Secretary-General’s report on the work of the Organization to the thirty-seventh session of the General
Assembly.5

23. The process of change in developing countries in
recent times is a familiar phenomenon. It is also a familiar development
that outside interested parties have
sought to distort or thwart this process in the pursuit of
goals and objectives which have nothing to do with the
interests and aspirations of the peoples directly involved
in the process of change. It is as much a travesty to present foreign armed intervention in the affairs of other States
as an internal uprising as it is to describe a genuine liberation struggle as a manifestation of foreign interference.
24. It is the sovereign right of all free peoples to decide
their own form of government and the political, social and
economic structures best suited to their genius free from
foreign intervention and to shape their destiny in accordance with their own free will. It is also vital for the peace
and security of all States that the process of change within
a country not be exploited by any other country for its
own purposes, nor should any other country seek to prescribe that process as an unsolicited panacea for the
problems of other countries. It is not permissible for any
outside Power to attempt to capture the process of change
with a view to predetermining its course or changing its
direction in its own interest.

29. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Permit me first of
all, Sir, to congratulate you, no longer merely upon the
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month but also in connection with the fact that, for
almost a month now, you have successfully and effectively been dischafging these functions. Permit me also to
thank those delegations that have complimented the representative df the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Mr. Troyanovsky, on the discharge by him of his functions as President of the Security Council last month.

25. The people of Nicaragua courageously overthrew the
oppressive Somoza rCgime and are, poised to pluck the
fruits of their revolutionary struggle. They deserve our
help and support to complete the process of change ,in
peace and to consolidate the foundations of a better life for
their present and future generations. They have a difficult
road to traverse, and it will take time before they achieve
total harmony and the fulfilment of their hopes and aspirations, They can do so in peace and with a senseof responsibility if they do not feel threatened by external aggression.

30. At the request of the Government of Nicaragua, the
Council has been urgently convened to consider the question of the expansion of acts of aggression against that
State.
3 1. The Soviet delegation has listened attentively to the
cogent statement of the Deputy Minister for External
Relations of Nicaragua, Mr. Victor Hugo Tinoco. He
made a broad and well-developed case confirming the
justness of the appeal by the Government of Nicaragua
to the Security Council. The numerous facts contained in
that statement incontrovertibly dempnstrate that direct
armed intervention is being waged against the Republic
of Nicaragua from the territory of neighbouring Honduras, and that the United States is the prime mover behind

26. During our visit to Nicaragua on the occasion of
the Extraordinary
Ministerial
Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Managua from 10 to 14 January 1983, we had the opportunity to meet the leaders and people of the country and
to witness their efforts to rebuild their homeland, SO
recently
ravageA by internal strife and natural calamity.
4

that intervention, Accordingly, there has arisen in that
area an extremely serious situation which poses a direct
threat to international peace and security.

American diplomacy in the United Nations is not new.
As recent history has shown, such movement is a prelude
to large-scale intervention. By means of precisely such
verbal cover Washington prepared an intervention in
1954 against Guatemala and another in 1961 against
Cuba. It is worth dwelling on this in further detail.

32. There can be no doubt that the incursion into Nicaragua of gangs of counter-revolutionary mercenaries is
the most recent act in an undeclared but none the less
dangerous war which the United States has for some
years. now been waging against the Nicaraguan. people
and its revolution.

37. Almost 30 years ago Washington embarked on a
slander campaign against the progressive regime in Guatemala. Formerly secret material of the White House and
the State Department that has since been published
makes irrefutably clear the hypocrisy and cynicism of
this diversionary operation. Under cover of it-as
emerges clearly from these documents; I stress “documents“ -the United States organized and trained interventionist forces for use against Guatemala, primarily on
the territory of Honduras. By way of a direct pretext for
intervention, as it were, to lend verisimilitude, the CIA
even at that time organized bombings of the aerodrome
in Honduras. At the same time the CIA introduced into
Guatemala itself a number of radio stations which were
represented as being “rebel” radio stations. How reminiscent of this is the style of today’s American operation
against Nicaragua. The same leading figures are
involved-counter-revolutionaries
armed from abroad,
from the United States and Honduras,

33. The Republic of Nicaragua is appealing to the
Council and bringing to it a complaint against actions of
the United States by no means for the first time. These
actions of the United States have created a threat to Nicaragua’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence. Precisely one year ago [2335th to 2337th
2339th 2341st to 2343rd and 2347th meetings] this question was the subject of careful consideration by the
Council. At that time the United States blocked the
adoption by the Council of a draft resolution [S/14941]
designed to bring about a peaceful settlement of the
problems of Central America, a draft resolution that condemned intervention in the internal affairs of the States
of that region and called for a renunciation of the threat
or use of force. In retrospect it has become exceedingly
clear that the United States veto of that Security Council
draft resolution last year was by no means an accident.
The United States was thus reserving its right to have
recourse to armed force in the struggle against the Nicaraguan revolution,

38. I should, however, like to add that immediately
after the conclusion of the 1954 coup in Guatemala the
United States Ambassador to that country, Mr. Puerifoy,
presented to the new authorities an extremely cynical
document. It was a list of names of Guatemalan citizens
who were to be shot within 24 hours at the request of the
United States Ambassador-I
repeat, at the request of
the United States Ambassador. Here you have the true
position of United States diplomacy in the matter of
human rights, a position that is now a matter of historical record. After that one may ask what value we are to
attach to the homily delivered the day before yesterday in
the Council by the United States representative regarding
what was described as the concern of the United States
about human rights in Nicaragua.

34. The current invasion of Nicaragua by the Somozist
mercenaries, prepared and instigated by the United
States, is the direct continuation and consequence of this
United States policy. From the political standpoint the
United States has unleashed against Nicaragua a low and
base slanderous campaign in which the highest ranks of
the American Administration
are involved. Militarily
speaking, on United States territory, particularly in
Miami, but also in Texas and in California, bases have
been set up for the military training of Nicaraguan
counter-revolutionaries.
Similar camps have been set up
in Honduras, where former Somozists are being armed,
trained and equipped through the use of Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) funds. Today-and here lies the particular danger of this new stage-these mercenaries
trained and nurtured by the United States have been
released from their chains and thrown against the Nicaraguan people.

39. Finally, there is the cynical outcome of the United
States operation against Guatemala in 1954, intended to
stifle the progressive regime there. The chief of the mercenaries who had been instructed to carry out the coup by
the CIA, Castillo Armas, stated at the time to the then
Vice President of the United States, Mr. Nixon: “Tell us
what you want us to do, and that is what we will do.”
Those words were uttered in fact after the mass executions carried out on the basis of the lists delivered by the
United States Ambassador.

35. It is instructive to note that in her statement to the
Council [242&h meerjng] the United States representative
was entirely silent about these facts, She did not deny
them. In that statement the representative of the United
States even attempted to wax ironical at the allegedly
unjustified “obsession” of the Nicaraguans with the danger of invasion by the United States. If we are to believe
her assertions, what is happening in Nicaragua is nothing
more than a matter of internal complications.

40. These facts are incontrovertible, and I am basing all
that I say on United States documents that reveal the
true face of United States policy in Latin America.
41, I would like to mention one further interventionist
operation by the United States, one that failed. That is
the operation against Cuba in 1961. The United States
President, as far back as March of 1960, had ordered the
CIA to prepare that intervention; this is a fact that has

36. However, we should like to draw particular attention to one ominous circumstance, This manoeuvre of
5

now been fully documented. The representatives of the
United States in the United Nations were at the time busy
slandering Cuba. The United States was already organizing and arranging
the financing and training of mercenaries against
Cuba on Guatemalan territory, while
Washington’s
diplomats
were still holding forth on the
“Red threat”.
IS it not one of the bitter ironies of history
that this time preparations
for intervention against the
PrOgresSiVe r&gime in Cuba were carried out on Guatemalan territory,
where the United States had earlier overthrown another
progressive regime? That is the real
“domino
theory” -counting
upon overthrowing progressive r6gimes
one after the other. And United States
Practice is in accordance with it.
42.

Finally,

the

invasion

of Cuba by mercenaries

46. The architects of this kind of United States policy,
however, should have understood long ago that the days
of Somoza, Batista and Trujllo have disappeared into
oblivion for ever. Neither the support of anti-popular
dictatorial regimes nor intervention on the part of
mercenaries will be able to prevent the peoples themselves from determining their own fate, nor will they succeed in breaking the people of Nicaragua.
47. At a meeting held today in Moscow with the Coordinator of the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction of Nicaragua, Mr. Daniel Ortega Saavedra, the
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Andropov, stated
the sincere solidarity of the Soviet Union with the Nicaraguan people and expressed his conviction that Nicaragua
will succeed in defending its freedom and independence.

in

April 1961 was also begun under cover of the pretext of
the alleged beginning
of an “internal uprising” inside
Cuba. Washington,
for example, declared that Cuban
airports were being bombed by Cuban pilots who were
supposedIy
“disiIlusioned
with the regime”. The then
United States representative
to the United Nations-and
many will have a personal memory of this-displayed to
representatives
photographs of those aircraft bearing the
identification
markings
of the Cuban armed forces. All
of this, as we know today, was the crudest of counterfeits. The aircraft,
the pilots, the bombs and even the
photographs
themselves were all the work of the CIA.

48. The Soviet delegation vigorously condemns the
intervention against Nicaragua prepared and carried out
by the United States and its mercenaries. It supports the
appeal contained in the statement made by the representative of Nicaragua to the Council [ibid.] to call on the
United States to put an end to acts of provocation
against Nicaragua and to halt the undeclared war being
waged against that country by the United States
Administration.
However, what makes the current phase of the
interventionist activity of the United States particularly
dangerous now is the fact that we are not talking here
about an isolated operation against Nicaragua.

49.

43. After aI this, after such a record of service in Latin
America by Washington,
the United States representative is still trying to discredit the fears of Nicaragua.
Now, however,
we know. This may very well be another
cover operation,
and particularly because the United
States representative
has made no secret here of her
hatred of the Sandinists.

50. The aggressive interventionist policy of the United
States against Nicaragua is part of its overall policy of
stepping up international tension and escalating threats
to independent States in various parts of the world.
These actions are aimed directly at all non-aligned and
other developing countries which are pursuing an independent foreign and domestic policy and do not wish to
follow in the wake of Washington.

44. Thus recent history and actions of the United States
in Latin America
have shown that it is not a matter of
misguidedly
and wrongly fearing interNicaragua’s
vention on the part of the United States. The fact is that
the United
States has been suffering to a dangerous
degree from a disease called “power mania”, a mania of
disrespect
for the freedom and independence of Latin
American
countries,
an intervention mania. In the final
analysis, the so-called
“big stick” policy is an invention
of the United
States linguistically, politically and militarily to be a means of resolving the problem of human
rights.

51. Just a month ago the United States had recourse to
flagrant acts of armed provocation and military pressure
against Libya. Today it has raised to a new stage intervention against Nicaragua. Tomorrow the target of
American blackmail could be any other non-aligned
State whose policy is not to Washington’s liking.
52. That is why now that Nicaragua is calling upon
fraternal non-aligned countries and other States Members of the United Nations for support in this hour of
trial for that small country, it is the duty of all countries
which love peace and freedom to give Nicaragua that
support.

45. If today the United States is openly arming and
Somozists and sending them onto
training
former
Nicaraguan
territory,
the prime motive here is simply to
overthrow
a progressive
national regime in that country
and set up a puppet, pro-American regime. It would
appear that there are some in Washington who lose sleep
at the thought
of how obedient a tool the dictator
Somoza was in their hands. It is known that Somoza
once cynically
told the President of Mexico, Luis
Echeverrja,
literally
the following: “YOU should envy

53. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
The delegation of Jordan is primarily concerned at the
tension existing inside and around Nicaragua’s borders
and in the Central American region. Our concern is due
to three main factors.’

me. I have no problems.
All I have to do is what Washington wants
me to do.”
6

54. First, the last thing needed by Nicaragua and certain Central American countries affected by the present
crisis is tension characterized by fear and the danger of
armed conflict. The first thing the people of that region
need is stability and tranquillity so that they can concentrate all their efforts and means on development and
construction. Exhausting their means in a conflict would
hardly bring the kind of prosperity that the people of
good will of that region so ardently desire.

and more suffering for the people in that friendly region.
Such a situation would lead to more serious and more
widespread problems, and that would mean ignoring the
main disputes in order to deal with the emerging problems. Our region also has suffered from such a state of
affairs. We see a feverish attempt being made to disguise
the true source of tension by creating new problems as a
result of war and expansion.

55. Secondly, it must be realized that security cannot be
realized by force. That would be a vain policy. That policy has been and is being tested by one of the parties
in conflict in the Middle East, but the results of such
conduct are obvious to all: there has been an increase in
tension, an excess of violence and a lessening of the
chances for peace and security. Furthermore-and
this
increases our concern-the party in question is becoming
involved in the affairs of the region that is under consideration; that party is intensifying its various policies in
the region and taking advantage of certain social contradictions and the economic gaps that exist.

61. Countries must avoid cold war policies, they must
promote detente, and they must cease using small States
to test and implement their policies. We feel that the
major Powers, which bear a special responsibility vis-civis security and stability throughout the world, have a
better course to follow, instead of pursuing the unacceptable interventionist policy or being indifferent. They
must stand by the small countries. They must help them
build their democratic and modern institutions and help
them develop their productive potential so that they, too,
can exercise self-determination without foreign interference. All that would certainly help all the parties to
create an atmosphere, regionally and internationally, full
of understanding, co-operation and mutual respect.

56. That type of sabotage in the region confirms what
we have said on a number of occasions about our concern. The country in question is pursuing an expansionist
policy against Arab countries too and is intervening in
the internal affairs of others. This has disturbed the international atmosphere, accentuated tension and caused
much turmoil in international affairs. The persistent
attempts of that State to control that part of the world
and use it as a theatre for its plans require that the international community act with caution in view of the dangers inherent in that policy.

62. To believe that “He who is not with me is against
me” is wrong policy, It ignores the principle of nonalignment, which is followed by more than two thirds of
the countries of the world, including Nicaragua, whose
people have suffered for more than half a century from
one-man dictatorship and who now, more than ever
before, need security and peace so that they can devote
themselves to security and development. That, if
achieved, would be the main guarantee for human rights
and would ensure a life of dignity for the citizens of the
country.

57. The enormous arms transactions and the sending of
military experts to that part of the world will certainly
not help to consolidate peace and security among the
peoples there. We believe that security and war are in a
sense inversely proportionate.

63. I should like to appeal to all the parties concerned,
an appeal that has been repeated by many of those who
have spoken before me, to follow a policy of self-control,
avoid escalation and settle disputes peacefully by means
of a constructive dialogue and quiet diplomacy. We have
been encouraged by the declarations of the representatives of all parties concerned in which they expressed
their countries’ readiness to continue a policy of dialogue
and negotiations in an effort to agree on a friendly settlement of the existing dispute. We also hope that efforts
made by leaders of States in the area, in particular those
of the Presidents of Mexico and Venezuela, will be continued, to bring viewpoints together and to arrive at a
common denominator. We believe that if confidence and
co-operation prevail, if everyone shows patience and
calm, then a spirit of moderation and understanding will
prevail and the reasons for tension will disappear.

58. Thirdly, what accentuates our concern is how frequently there has been recourse to violence and force in
international affairs, and insufficient attention has been
given to the effects of that negative policy internally and
externally. Also, there has been a failure to recognize the
results of intervention in the internal affairs of others and
the need for good-neighbourliness among States.
59. I have referred to the Middle Fast in my statement
about Central America, not only to point out that those
at the source of tension in our region play a role in
complicating the problems of our brothers in Central
America, but also to recall the consequences of these
policies for security and stability not only on the internal
affairs of the countries in question but at the regional and
international levels as well.

64. In conclusion I should like to recall what may be
known to all, that is, that violence has never succeeded in
solving any problem.

60. The likelihood of the conflict spreading beyond the
bilateral or regional framework and becoming internationalized has accentuated our concern; that could very
dangerously polarize affairs, resulting in greater hardship

65. Mr. LOUET (France) (interpretution from French):
I should like to say how pleased my delegation is at
seeing the representative of a country so close to ours
presiding since the beginning of this month over the
7

Security Council. Our work has been particularly heavy,
and under your enlightened direction, Sir, we have been
able to make progress.
66. I should like also to pay a tribute to the representative of the Soviet Union, who presided with such wisdom
over our work last month.
67. My delegation has listened with the closest attention to the representatives of Nicaragua, Honduras and
the United States. We listened also with particular interest to the representative of Mexico, who made a remarkable speech, as well as to the statements of representatives
of Colombia, Ecuador, Costa Rica and Spain.
68. We had already met a year ago [2335th lneeting] to
hear Nicaragua’s statement about threats to its security,
Today that same country is complaining once again at
having to face an armed struggle that imperils its stability. Quite clearly the problems have not been solved and
the letter sent to you by Nicaragua, Sir, demonstrates the
deterioration of the situation in Central America.
69. Very much concerned by this rising tension, the
French Government appeals for moderation. It rejects
recourse to force and would like to see the establishment
of a climate of understanding, which would make it possible to resolve all the problems of the region by dialogue
and negotiation.

number of official documents from our Government giving information about the situation in the border area.
These documents have been annexed to the letter, and we
understand they may be available in a few hours to the
members of the Council.
74. The annexes are the following. Annex I is a message
from the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction
dated 21 March 1983, to which I referred last Wednesday
in my introductory statement [2420fh meeting]. Annex II
is a note of protest sent to Mr. Edgardo Paz Barnica,.
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Honduras, by Mrs. Nora
Astorga, Acting Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua, referring to a certain border incident which I also
mentioned in my introductory statement. This has to do
with certain attacks from Honduran territory by the
Honduran army against a Nicaraguan military observation post. The third annex is an official communiqut
from the Ministry of Defence of Nicaragua about
another incident, Annex IV is the text of another note of
protest sent to Mr. Paz Barnica by Mrs. Astorga, dated
24 March. I should like to read a portion of it aloud to
bring members of the Council up to date and to go a little
further into the situation as it exists at present in Central
America.
“The purpose of this note is to bring the following
to your attention:
“At 8:lO a.m. today, 24 March 1983, troops of the
Honduran army opened fire from their positions in
Honduran territory on the Nicaraguan armed forces’
observation post on La Zopilota hill, 2 kilometres
south-west of San Pedro de Potrero Grande, department of Chinandega. The attack, in which gunfire
from various types of weapons was used, lasted 15
minutes.

70. In this regard we welcome the initiative put forward
last year by Mexico and Venezuela to find a solution to
the problem of the conflict between Honduras and Nicaragua, and we regret that this initiative was not followed
up. We also welcome last January’s Contadora declaration,4 and we support its principles, in particular its condemnation of interference in Latin American disputes
and its refusaf to situate these disputes within the framework of the East-West confrontation. This declaration is
in any case in no way in contradiction with the Honduran peace plan of March 1982 [S/14919, annex], in
which, at the time, we stressed our interest.

“Later that day at noon, another Honduran military unit made an attack with gunfire on a patrol of
the Sandinist People’s Army at a place called El
Oyate, 6 kilometres north-west of the frontier post at
El Espino, department of Madriz, wounding one
member of the Nicaraguan patrol.

71. Dialogue can start only in the absence of external
interference. Anxious to see Central America recovering
the calm and stability necessary to strengthen democracy
and respect for human rights, France rejects any interference, whatever its source. France is convinced that the
countries of the region can find, through dialogue and
concerted endeavour, ways and means of restoring
peace.

“Moreover, at 9:30 a.m. yesterday, 23 March, troops
of the Sandinist People’s Army intercepted a unit of
Somoza counter-revolutionaries who were attempting
to infiltrate into Nicaraguan territory from Honduran
territory. As a result of this engagement, three of our
soldiers were killed, and 15 FAL automatic rifles, one
RPG-7 rocket launcher. . . and several kilograms of
C-4 plastic explosives were seized from the counterrevolutionaries.”

72. Mr. TINOCO
(Nicaragua) (interpretation
from
Spanish): The delegation of Nicaragua wanted to speak
to present some information and to bring the situation
up to date somewhat as it continues to develop. It is a
tense situation in the border region between Nicaragua
and Honduras. We hope that we will be constructive.

That is the main information contained in the diplomatic
note sent by Mrs. Astorga to Mr. Paz Barnica regarding
these border incidents. There are a number of political
considerations following upon the above text, but I need
not go into them because these matters have already in
one way or another been pointed out in this chamber.
Annex V is the text of a note of protest sent to Mr. Paz

73. About an hour ago we submitted a letter [S/156.54
to you, Sir, in your capacity as President of the Security
Council, in which the delegation of Nicaragua presents a
8

Barnica by Mrs. Astorga, also dated 24 March. The text
of that note reads as follows:
[The speaker read annex V to document S/15656.]

75. I wanted to introduce and read out these documents, which will be in the hands of Council members in
a few hours, precisely to emphasize the fact that the existing conflict in the border region between Nicaragua and
Honduras has taken a dangerous turn, that is, towards
the possibility of an internationalization
of the conflict,
which, as we said last Wednesday, could be part of a
more comprehensive plan to attempt to overthrow the
revolutionary Government of Nicaragua.
76. In contrast to this official information which I have
just transmitted to the Council and which reflects the
seriousness of the border situation with Honduras, the
attacks that are occurring and the danger of escalation of
this conflict, I should like to read out a very small part of
an article which most Council members have probably
already read, it having been published in today’s edition
of The New York Times. It was written by the well-known
American correspondent and specialist in Latin American affairs, Mr. Alan Riding, who is now in Managua.
One of the most important parts of this background article by this writer well known in the United States is as
follows. Referring to a press conference by the Interior
Minister of Nicaragua, Commander Tomis Borge, Mr.
Riding wrote:
“Mr. Borge estimated that some 2,000 ‘counterrevolutionaries’ were now inside Nicaragua. But he
said most were operating in the northern provinces of
Nueva Segovia, Jinotega and Zelaya, which border on
Honduras.

Somozist forces. That is to say that, on the one hand, the
falsity of the information and propaganda about the
counter-revolutionary forces and their control or activities inside the country has been clearly confirmed; on the
other hand, it has been reaffirmed that the counterrevolutionary activity is mostly in the border area, where,
as we said, the majority of the counter-revolutionary
troops are located and precisely where the incidents with
some Honduran military units are taking place. In conclusion, the facts tend to confirm our fears that, because
of forces outside the region, the conflict is being converted into an international conflict which will have a
destabilizing influence and create even greater problems
for the Sandinist revolution.
78. I should also like to present some specific facts
concerning the information that has been referred to by
delegations that have already spoken in this forum in
relation to events and talks that should be taking place
in Central America.
79, My delegation wishes to repeat that it considers it
vital and urgent to continue to take up bilateral problems between Honduras and Nicaragua, precisely in
order to prevent the escalation of a bilateral conflict.
Therefore we repeat that we are ready and willing to
revitalize the Mexican-Venezuelan proposal, which calls
for negotiations and dialogue between Honduras and
Nicaragua in the presence of the initiative’s two sponsor
countries. We repeat Nicaragua’s willingness to go
further into these bilateral negotiations that we regard
as fundamental, and we call on the initiative’s sponsor
Governments to approach the parties involved’in the
conflict to sound them out and see if they are prepared
for dialogue.

“ ‘Matagalpa is merely diversionary to make us
lower our guard in the north’, he declared.

80. The delegation of Nicaragua also wishes to stress
that our country is willing to move forward in consideration of the regional problem in Central America. We
repeat that we are prepared to listen to initiatives from
the sponsor countries of the Contadora initiative4-the
Governments
of Colombia,
Mexico, Panama and
Venezuela-in
order to begin those steps that can lead
us to serious and profound consideration of the Central
American crisis, its origins, its factors, its worsening,
those responsible for it and the steps to be taken to
resolve it. We insist therefore that, as we move along
bilaterally, we begin to tackle the more complex problems of the regional crisis,

“The news conference was held as the situation in
the country as a whole appeared calm. Travelers to
Matagalpa Province found that roads were open to
ordinary traffic and that none of the towns claimed to
be controlled by rebels-San Ramon, Muy Muy,
Matiguas or San Dionisio-had
even been attacked.
Army patrols, though, had apparently been stepped
up in the area.“*
77. I wanted to read out some of this article from an
American source well versed in the region precisely to
contrast this with other reports and point out that the
facts tend to confirm the fears expressed by Nicaragua
last Wednesday that the Somozist counter-revolutionary
forces infiltrated inside Nicaragua do not in themselves
represent a military threat for the stability of revolutionary power, but that they could play a co-operating role as
part of broader aggressive action against Nicaragua
whose goal would be to strike militarily against Nicaragua in the Pacific region or other regions, with the participation of other forces in the area that are not only

81. But what we do not accept-and what we regard as
very dangerous-is
that the urgency of bilateral dialogue aimed at resolving urgent problems, such as the
threat of an international war, should be denied under
the pretext that efforts are being made at the regional
level to find solutions for the region. Solutions to the
region’s problems must be found because that is the only
way to spare the people of Nicaragua and the people of
Central America further hardship. A regional solution
must be sought step by step, as the problem is exceedingly delicate.

* Quoted in English by the speaker.

9

82. Of course we shall talk about an arms buildup; of
course we shall talk about advisers; of course we shall
talk about significant factors and incidents in the crisis
in the region; of course we shall talk about an excessive
arms buildup. However, in order to define something as
excessive we must define the threat that is facing us, and
before qualifying a cpuntry’s arms buildup as excessive
we must qualify the threat hanging over that country, the
determining factors, the political will of the Governments inside and outside the region that are involved in
this conflict and the readiness of the countries hostile to
the country being accused of an excessive arms buildup
to respect territorial integrity and sovereignty and publicly to commit themselves not to commit aggression
against that country.

ble as to believe ndively that arguments are being put
forward just to increase the military budget of the United
States.
87. As the representative of Grenada said yesterday
[2422nd meeting], the history of the United States in
Latin America has shown clearly that the aggressive acts
of the United States against Latin American countries
have been preceded by such political publicity campaigns
to prepare American public opinion to accept this kind
of military involvement in the region. Thus we should
like also to express our concern over these references
which not only are baseless and devoid of material
content but constitute a threat to our country.
88. In addition, and still in this connection, we wish to
point out that we continue to be concerned at the lack of
response to our specific charges in respect of the involvement of the Government of the United States in the destabilization efforts against Nicaragua. There has been a
silence, and that has been pointed out by a number of
representatives in this chamber. Will the silence continue? Will the delegation of the United States continue
to remain silent, and in its silence will it reaffirm that a
Government which is not democratic, according to the
values, canons and interests of the empire, should be
overthrown and that it is thus proper to destabilize such
a Government and to do what is now practically being
publicly accepted?

83. Therefore Nicaragua repeats that it is prepared to
move forward on the regional level in a serious and sustained manner. But in order to prevent internationalization of the war, it urges the taking of steps to deal
bilaterally with the problems between Honduras and Nicaragua and halt the campaign of aggression against Nicaragua that is being waged across our borders and against
our peopIe.
84. At the same time, the delegation of Nicaragua
wishes to stress that it is prepared to consider any other
specific suggestion that the Council believes should be
considered or explored, in the Council or by any other
means. The delegation of Nicaragua has an open mind in
this respect; our interest in convening this meeting,was to
call attention to the seriousness of the situation, and for
this reason we are prepared to examine any means bf
finding a solution.

89. I have three concrete questions that need replies.
First, is the delegation of the United States here publicly
going to deny that there are links between the CIA and
counter-revolutionary bands that have infiltrated Nicaragua? Secondly, is the delegation of the United States
going to deny that it is giving money and that there exists
an official economic budget for the promotion and support of the counter-revolutionary bands that are taking
action against Nicaragua? Thirdly, is the delegation of
the United States going to deny officially the existence of
training camps for Somozist counter-revolutionaries
on
United States territory?

85. In conclusion, we believe it important to refer to
another matter, in connection with the position of the
Government of the United States, We should recall that
the President of the United States has, to all intents and
purposes, repeated the accusations of an arms buildup by
Nicaragua in his press conference of two days ago, which
we are all familiar with. In order to accuse us of an arms
buildup he showed a satellite photograph of August0
CCsar Sandino International Airport, where there were
three Soviet-made MI-8 helicopters for civilian use. One
of those helicopters is the one the Pope used to go to
Le6n on his recent visit. What are they trying to prove by
showing a photograph of August0 CCsar Sandino International Airport with three helicopters that cannot even
fly as far as Miami or any other place in the United
States?

90. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
We do not live or act, as Jacob Burckhardt observed, for
ourselves alone, but for the past and the future as well.
What happens here in the Security Council reflects the
expectations and hopes of those who framed this institution and defines as well the hopes and expectations that
may be reasonably attached to it for the future. It is at
best ironic that the interactions of the past days should
have coincided with the Council’s ongoing discussion of
the Secretary-General’s report on the work of the
Organizatiom6

86. The general view seems to be that President Reagan, by presenting a series of misinterpreted facts, simply
wanted to justify an increase in the military budget he is
requesting at home. That is one view that has been
widely disseminated. However, for those countries that
are being singled out, there could be an explanation other
than the mere domestic use of this accusation for reasons
concerned with the military budget, and that is that the
political conditions are being prepared for acts of aggression against those countries. We cannot be so irresponsi-

91. We have witnessed in the so-called consideration of
the Nicaraguan complaint the kind of cynical debasement of the process of conflict resolution which underlies
and largely explains the various specific failures that are
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report.
92. Nicaragua’s new dictators-who share their mentor’s preference for wearing military uniforms, carrying
10

guerrilla tire-power. Individual
units also regularly
received tens of thousands of dollars for routine purchases of non-lethal supplies on commercial markets and
for payments, including bribes, to enable the clandestine
munitions pipeline to function,

weanons and calling each other by military titles-have
come to the Council seeking international support for
their policy of internal repression and external aggression, They appeal to the Council to guarantee their right
to continue these policies without fear of opposition
from other Nicaraguans who, finding all means of peaceful political competition closed to them, seek to open
their political system and reclaim their society from the
strangulation of totalitarian controls and foreign exploitation For let us be clear that Nicaragua has closed its
poiitical system and that Nicaragua does engage ever
more openly in aggression against its neighbours.

98. Following the set-back caused by their overwhelming repudiation in El Salvador’s elections, the FMLN
leaders repeated what they had done following their 1981
failed final offensive, this time with still more help.
99. After two years of combat, the FMLN headquarters in Nicaragua has evolved into an extremely sophisticated command and control centre. Guerrilla planning
and operations in El Salvador are guided from this headquarters by Cuban and Nicaraguan officers. FMLN
headquarters co-ordinates logistical support for guerrilla
units widely spread throughout El Salvador, including
food, medicines, clothing, money and-most importantweapons and ammunition.

93. I spoke earlier about the systematic effort of Nicaragua to consolidate totalitarian control over Nicaraguan society, about the silencing of criticism, the
destruction of indigenous societies filled with people who
ask only to be left alone, about the use of “divine mobs”
to intimidate opposition and about the crude attacks OD
the Catholic and other churches, extending even to the
Pope himself. I did not mention yesterday that this
repression is carried out by a new secret police
apparatus-the
Sandinist State Security-whose thousands of recruits have been trained by Cuban professionals in the suppression of internal dissent. Thus do
fraternal “socialist” societies of the totalitarian variant
assist one another. Nicaragua’s new dictators not only
receive help; they also offer fraternal assistance to armed
guerrillas seeking to overthrow the Governments of
neighbouring States.

100. On 14 March 1982, the FMLN clandestine radio,
“Venceremos”, then located in El Salvador, broadcast a
message to the guerrillas in El Salvador urging them “to
maintain their fighting spirit 24 hours a day to’carry out
the missions ordered by the FMLN general command”in Nicaragua, that is.
101. Thus, the Nicaraguans provide the arms and weapons to destroy their neighbour’s economy, and they direct
the effort from their territory. But their activities arenot
restricted to El Salvador. They also seek to subvert their
democratic neighbours Honduras and Costa Rica, while
using their territories as intermediate points to channel
and disguise outside support for the Salvadoran guerrillas. In Honduras, Nicaraguan agents and Salvadoran
extreme leftist groups have maintained links with almost
all the Honduran terrorist groups to assist them in subversive planning, training and operations, They have played
a role in the increased terrorism in Honduras. Discussions
were held in mid-1982 among the Cubans, Sandinists and
Salvadoran insurgents about steps to take against the
Honduran Government. Captured Salvadoran and Honduran terrorists have admitted that explosives used in
bombing attacks in the Honduran capital were obtained
in Nicaragua. Other information indicates the Cubans
had a hand in planning the seizure of 108 hostages in San
Pedro Sula in September 1982.

94. Indeed, the representatives of Nicaragua no longer
even bother to deny that they train and export guerrillas
and arms to and through neighbouring countries, though
it has not been long since they answered with wide-eyed
lies evidence of their many activities aimed at the destruction of the economies and the overthrow of the Governments of El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and other
neighbouring States.
95. Between them, Cuba and Nicaragua have managed
enough fraternal help to the guerrillas of the region to
bring to a halt the economic development that was steadily improving life and prospects in the area, to sow death
and destruction in El Salvador and to reap insecurity in
Honduras, Costa Rica and elsewhere in the region.
96. Examples abound of the systematic creation and
support by Cuba and Nicaragua of war against the other
Central American States, In December 1981, after meetings at Havana with Salvadoran guerrilla leaders, Fidel
Castro directed that external supplies of arms to El Salvador’s units of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN) be stepped up to make possible an
offensive to disrupt any chance for a peaceful vote in El
Salvador’s March 1982 elections.

102, The Morazanist National Liberation Front of Honduras was described in the pro-Government Nicaraguan
newspaper El Nuevo Diario by “Octavia”, one of its
founders, as a political-military
organization formed as
part of the “increasing regionalization of the Central
American conflict”, As a result of a raid on 27 November
1981 the Honduran police ultimately captured several
members of this group. The captured terrorists told Honduran authorities that the Nicaraguan Government had
provided them with funds for travel expenses as well as
explosives. Captured documents and statements by
detained guerrillas further indicated that the group was
formed in Nicaragua at the instigation of high-level Sandi-

97. In addition to vitally needed ammunition,
these
supply operations included greater quantities of more
sophisticated, heavier weapons. Deliveries in 1982
included M-60 machine-guns, M-79 grenade launchers
and M-72 antitank weapons, thus significantly increasing
11

nista leaders. The group’s chief of operations resided in
Managua, and members of the group received military
training in Nicaragua and Cuba. Other captured documents revealed that guerrillas at one safehouse were
responsible for transporting arms and munitions into
Honduras from Esteli, Nicaragua.

China. Sandino fought against the United States
Marines, but he did not bring Russian Cossacks to
Nicaragua as Fidel Castro did in Cuba. There is a
great difference in the communist Fidel Castro, who
in his false battle for the independence of his country
has filled it with Russian rockets, soldiers, planes and
even canned goods, and a Sandino, who defended the
sovereignty of his ground with home-made bombs but
without accepting the patronage of another Power.
For this reason, Sandino was great-because he was
not handed over to communist treason like Castro,
but fought within an Indo-Hispanic limit.

103. In Costa Rica, where the Government has attempted to stop the continued use of its territory for
supplying weapons to the region’s Marxist-Leninist guerrillas, Cuba and Nicaragua targeted the Government’s
efforts. During 1982, for example, the Cubans and Sandinists provided weapons and training for Costa Rican leftist terrorists. Nicaragua has instigated terrorist actions
in Costa Rica, leading to increased tensions between the
two countries. Although the Sandinistas denied complicity, the 3 July 1982 bombing of the Honduran airports
office in San Jos6 took place at Nicaragua’s direction,
according to Germin Pinzbn, a Colombia M-19 member
who was arrested by Costa Rican authorities on 14 July.
Pinzbn, who confessed to placing the bomb, said that
Nicaraguan diplomats in Costa Rica had recruited and
trained him for the bombing operation. With the help of
Pinz6n the Costa Rican Government caught the Nicaraguan diplomats in flagrante. They were declared persona
non grata and expelled from Costa Rica on 17 July. Since
the beginning of 1982 several guerrilla arms caches and
safehouses have been uncovered in Costa Rica. Some
arms may be for use by radical groups inside Costa Rica,
as well as for shipment to guerrilla movements in El
Salvador.

“Naturally the communists who attacked and slandered Sandino when he was in the mountains now try
to use him, because they have no moral scruple to
restrain them. Sandino was a pure product of our
land, very different from the products exported by
Russia or China, and as such we must exalt and preserve his memory. The value of his exploits has a Nicaraguan value, not Soviet, and his nationalism is
indigenous, not Russian.
“Sandino is a monument to the dignity of our country and we must not permit the communists, with
whom he never communed, to besmirch his memory
in order to use his prestige and to succeed some day,
on the pretext that they are fighting imperialism, in
delivering our land over to Russia, as Castro did with
Cuba.”
107. We should not deny, however, that Nicaragua’s
dictators derive as many benefits from its incorporation
into the Soviet bloc as her people derive sorrows. In the
Council in the last days we have observed the fraternal
support Soviet puppet States provide one another in this
arena. We have also observed how they mock the Council’s values and procedures.

104. The evidence of systematic, continuing aggression
by Nicaragua against its Central American neighbours is
as clear as the evidence of Nicaragua’s repression of its
own people and the betrayal of the solemn promises
made by its military rulers to the Nicaraguan people, the
Organization
of American States and the world. Of
course, massive intervention in the internal affairs of its
neighbours is not the only evidence of the junta’s contempt for the principles of non-intervention, respect for
territorial integrity and sovereignty, self-determination
and the non-use of force.

108. When such basic values of international order as
respect for territorial integrity, national independence or
human rights are invoked by States such as Grenada,
Viet Nam and Cuba, which have already made clear their
support for the occupation of Afghanistan and Cambodia and their indifference to the gassing of those peoples;
when we hear the representative of the Soviet Union
speak of intervention, of mercenaries, of invasions, of
subservience, we know we are in the presence of an
attempt to sow confusion, not understanding-an
exercise in intellectual terrorism which mocks the values of
the Charter and, above all, the process of reason on
which this body must rely. The Council cannot be taken
seriously as a forum for the resolution of disputes if it
permits itself to be transformed into a weapon in an ongoing conflict.

105. Nicaragua demonstrates contempt for all these
principles of the Charter when it supports the Soviet
Union’s continued brutal occupation of Afghanistan and
the Vietnamese invasion and brutal occupation of Cambodia, When its so-called Sandinist governors support
the invasion and occupation of those countries and the
use of chemical weapons against those peoples, they demonstrate how little they deserve the name Sandinist, how
utterly they have betrayed the principles and legacy of
Sandino.
106. Pablo Chamorro, editor and publisher of La
prensa before his assassination and a writer whose name
is from time to time invoked by the leaders of the Nicaraguan revolution, wrote of Sandino-I
quoted this passage a year ago [2337rh meeting] but it is just as relevant
today:

109. We are aware of the theory articulated by Friedrich Engels, among others, that there are no neutral processes, that all notions of truth, law and fairness merely
reflect economically based power relations. We know
that according to this doctrine truth is what the most
powerful say it is, and fairness is whatever the most powerful define it to be. We believe that we are witnessing

“Sandino should be exalted precisely as a contrast
to the communists, who obey signals from Russia and
12

here an effort to transform the United Nations into an
arena where power, as measured by numbers and
volume, defines what is good, what is true, what is fair,
what is peace.

repeated indications of the corrosive effects of systematic
bias, systematic lies, systematic redefinition of key political values and distortion of the key political processes of
this body designed to support international peace,

110. What is true is what the so-called progressive
nations say it is. What is fair is what servestheir interests.
What is legitimate is what expands their power. Thus it is
legitimate for communist Governments to train and arm
guerrillas and make war on their non-communist neighbours. It is illegitimate for non-communists to attempt to
defend themselves or for others to help them to do so.
According to this logic, movements which expand communist power are by definition national liberation movements; everything is permitted to achieve their ends.
Nothing is permitted to their targets, not even the right of
self-defence.

118. In his Nobel lecture, Alexander Solzhenitsyn confronted again the relationship between ,tyranny and the
systematic distortion of reality. Solzhenitsyn commented:
“Whoever has once announced violence as his method
must inexorably choose lying as his principle. At
birth, violence behaves openly and even proudly. But
as soon as it becomes stronger and firmly established,
it senses the thinning of the air around it and cannot
go on without befogging itself in lies, coating itself
with lying’s sugary oratory. It does not always or
necessarily go straight for the gullet: usually it
demands of its victims only allegiance to the lie, only
complicity in the lie.”

111. We have seen in the past days discouraging indications that the confusion and intimidation have already
had insidious effects.
112. We heard Mexico [2421sr meeting] endorse Nicaragua’s right to self-determination and freedom from foreign interference. And in the same speech we heard the
same representative of Mexico call for an end to all military assistance to El Salvador, which presumably has no
right to self-determination or freedom from foreign
intervention.
113. We heard the representative of Zimbabwe [2422nd
meeting] identify his country and people and their problems with those of the Sandinists and allude darkly to
their common experience with powerful, unscrupulous
neighbouring nations. We listened to his concern for
Nicaragua’s independence and territorial integrity and
his indifference to the same rights for Nicaragua’s
neighbours.

119. Whoever in this arena supports Nicaragua’s right
to commit repression at home and aggression against its
neighbours, whoever is ready to respect Nicaragua’s right
to self-determination, self-government, non-intervention
and peace and takes no account of the rights of its neighbours to the same protections against Nicaragua, has
become an accomplice in the betrayal of these values and
this process. This betrayal is inconsistent with the search
for peace. It must be repudiated before this body will be
able to participate in the process of conflict resolution. It
is not too late for the nations of Central America to
forgo violence, to enter on the pathway of negotiations,
internal reconciliation, democracy and development. Let
us make certain that what happens in this body facilitates
that process.
120. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has asked to speak
on a point of order, and I now call on him.

114. We heard the representative of Tanzania [ibid.]
give a distorted account of who is infiltrating terrorists
and arms into whose territory and who is seeking peace.
We heard him invoke Nicaragua’s right to live in peace
and choose its own political, social and economic system,
without any indication that those rights extended also to
its neighbours.

121. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian):In the light of
the nature of the statement of the representative of the
United States I would request that I now if possible be
given the opportunity to exercise my right of reply. If,
however, there is a guarantee that the representative of
the United States will not flee the field of battle and will
remain until the end of today’s meeting, I am willing to
speak at that time.

115. We heard the representative of China [ibid.]
express his admiration for the “Nicaraguan struggle”
and call for an end to the intervention of “a superPower” in the region as though it were only “a superPower” that posed obstacles to the right of the people of
the region to solve their own problems.

122. The PRESIDENT:
The ruling of the President is
that the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics will speak at the end of today’s meeting.

116. We listened while the representative of Panama
12421st meeting] discussed the problems of Nicaragua
without ever mentioning Nicaragua’s massive continuing
efforts at destabilization of its neighbours.

123. I should like to inform members of the Council
that I have just received letters from the representatives
of Argentina, Peru and Yugoslavia in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discus-

117. We heard the Pakistani representative express confidence in the Nicaraguan Government’s will to peace
and non-intervention, its desire to live at peace with its
neighbours. In sum, we have heard in the past days
13

must do everything possible to defuse these tensions, Any
attempt to involve extra-regional or global forces can
result only in exacerbating an already difficult situation
in Central America.

sion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure,
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Muiiiz (Argentina), Mr. Pastor de la Torre (Peru) and Mr. SiloviC (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

129. The heads of State or Government of non-aligned
countries, meeting in their Seventh Conference, at New
Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983, had an opportunity to
address themselves to Latin American issues. They noted
that the final communique issued by the Extraordinary
Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries held at Managua
from 10 to 14 January 1983 once again confirmed the
universal applicability of the principles and policies of
non-alignment and took note with great concern of the
continuing tensions in the region. They went on to assert
that the processes of change in Central America could
not be attributed to or explained by an East-West ideological confrontation. Denouncing the new and increasing threats and acts of intimidation and the growing
seriousness and increased number of acts of aggression
against Nicaragua, particularly the violation of its airspace and territorial waters, utilization of the territory of
foreign countries in and outside the region as bases for
aggression and the training of counter-revolutionary
forces, and the commission of terrorist acts and sabotage
which had resulted in considerable loss of life and property, they considered these as part of a deliberate plan to
harass and destabilize Nicaragua.

124. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of India. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
I25 Mr, PURUSHOTTAM
(India): Permit me first of
all to extend to you, Sir, our felicitations on your
assumption of the important office of President of the
Security Council for the month of March. Allow me also
to add that we in the Indian delegation find special satisfaction in seeing in the Chair a distinguished diplomat
who has had a personal association with our country
very recently as High Commissioner of the United Kingdom to India. We are confident that under your stewardship the Council will be able to address itself in a
purposeful manner to the pressing problems of the present day. We wish you well in the discharge of your onerous responsibilities. May I also add a word of
appreciation for your predecessor in the presidency of
the Council, Mr. Troyanovsky of the USSR, who guided
the Council’s deliberations during the past month with
dignity and his customary competence.

130. The heads of State or Government also expressed
the view that the cessation of military manoeuvres or
demonstrations of force would reduce tension and facilitate the necessary dialogue for the achievement of political and negotiated solutions to the problems of the
region. They further reaffirmed the right of any State
freely to choose its own political, social and economic
system as of paramount importance. Commending the
peace initiatives presented by Colombia, France, Mexico,
Panama and Venezuela seeking to reduce tensions in
Central America, the Conference welcomed the positive
response of Nicaragua and called on all States concerned
to adopt a similar attitude. The heads of State or Government of the non-aligned countries further called on the
Governments of the United States of America and Honduras to adopt a constructive position in favour of peace
and dialogue, in conformity with the principles of international law.

126. A year ago, when the Council was seized of this
question, my delegation made [2339th meeting] an earnest appeal for a constructive debate directed not away
from, but towards, a dialogue aimed at understanding
and reconciliation. We expressed the view that the consideration of the question would have been in vain if it
resulted in inflaming passions, deepening mistrust and
engendering mutual recrimination,
127. The recent developments in Central America,
which the Council is discussing today, have caused all of
us deep concern and distress. Once again Nicaragua has
come before the Council, pointing out that a serious
situation exists in and around its borders as a result of
rebel activity. The possibility of a wider conflict in the
region looms large on the horizon. The Council has been
urged to assume the responsibility entrusted to it under
the Charter of the United Nations and to prevent any
further intensification of activities likely to result in a
breach of peace.

131. I can do no better than to reaffirm the sentiments
expressed by the heads of State or Government of the
non-aligned countries and reiterate the fervent call made
for constructive dialogue to find a peaceful solution to
the present tensions and conflict.

128. The objectives and principles of non-alignment
clearly lay down that every State has the right to pursue
its own political and social system and to determine the
destiny of its own people without any hindrance, interference or intervention. Nicaragua has a rightful expectation that by discharging its functions under the Charter,
the Council will help it preserve its independence and
territorial integrity. We sincerely believe that, by acting
now, the Council will prevent the tensions which have
been incipient in the region for some time now from
exploding into a horrible war which nobody wants. We

132. It is a matter of grave concern that there has been
a dangerous aggravation of the situation in Central
America so soon after the call had issued from the New
Delhi summit meeting. Nicaragua has come to the Council with a renewed complaint of further acts of intervention directed against its independence and territorial
integrity. The seriousness of the situation is such that the
Council should not lose time in endless debate but find
14

ways and means Of preventing a deterioration of the
situation and a deepening of the conflict, with more loss
ef innocent lives and property. It is imperative that a11
armed intervention and action be halted immediately
alId peace given a chance. Intervention or interference of
any kind is inadmissible. Failure to recognize this could
lead to incalculable consequences which all of us might
have cause to regret.

mon goal. In this connection we note in particular the
Fina1 *Ct forged in San Jose last 4 October 1982.7 We
find that the conditions set forth in that document provide a good basis for the peaceful resolution of the probIems and outstanding issues affecting the area. MY
delegation believes that no one can dispute the validity of
the conditions necessaryto achieve peace, as enumerated
in the San Jose document.

133. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Philippines. I invite him to take a place at
the CounciI table and to make his statement.

139. As members of the international community, it is
our solemn duty and obligation to promote international
Peace and security through the mechanisms provided for
under the Charter. It behoves the United Nations, in
Particular the Security Council, to undertake constructive measures that would assist the countries of Central
America to live in peace and in harmony with each other,
for the present situation in the area, unless defused, could
seriously threaten world peace and security,

134. Mr. ARCILLA (Philippines): Allow me to thank
YOU, Mr. President, and through you the other members
cf the Council for extending an invitation to my delegation to make a statement on the important issue before
US.

135. My delegation has requested to be allowed to
speak in this debate because of our grave concern over
the unfolding developments in Latin America, partlcularly in Central America, which have ominous consequences for international peace and security,

140. As it is not my intention to break tradition-a
worthy one, at that-allow me before concluding, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. Given the wealth of your experience and
your sterling diplomatic qualities, we are confident that
the Council will achieve constructive results under your
chairmanship. Allow me also to felicitate most warmly
your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union,
on the excellent manner in which he conducted the
affairs of the Council.

136. We have strong ties of friendship and co-operation
with the countries of the region arising from a common
historical past. It is therefore our earnest wish that the
sensitive issues facing the region-issues that have engendered an atmosphere of distrust, hostility and confrontation among the States concerned-can be resolved as
soon as possible. We believe that the time has come to
end mutual recriminations and the hurling of vitriol at
one another. While we are completely aware of the complexity and sensitivity of the issues involved, we venture
to say with a deep sense of conviction that the time has
come for all the parties concerned to sit down and engage
in dialogue with a view to forging a mutually acceptable
solution to the problems that beset the Central American
region. We are convinced that, given the political will of
the States concerned, a structure of peace can be
achieved. The resolution of the conflict could only
redound to the benefit of the man in the street on whose
behalf, after all, we all strive to create a world of peace,
freedom, social justice and prosperity.

141. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply, and I now call on him.
142. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretalionfrom Russian): In my statement
I have already said that when the representatives of the
United States speak about the “Red danger” it is a pretext
to divert our attention and to cover up their own interventionist plans. The representative of the United States
today inflated the “Red threat” to even greater proportions, extending it over practically the whole world. Rut I
will not be taken in by this attempt to disguise the true
intentions of the United States.

137. 1n this context, we would like to commend to the
parties concerned the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations on the peaceful settlement ,of disputes.
Non-intervention
and non-interference in the internal
affairs of States, respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of States, the inadmissibility of the threat or use of force in the settlement of
disputes and its corollary, the necessity to resort to Peaceful means in the settlement of disputes among States,
come to mind, These, we believe, are the basic elements
that could form the basis for meaningful and constructive negotiations among the parties concerned that would
lead to the lessening of tensions and, ultimately, to a
peaceful settlement of the conflict in the region.

143. I should like to say a few words strictly on the
agenda before us. On the agenda is one item-an accusation against the United States to the effect that it has
been preparing, has already unleashed and has been
responsible for interventionism againSt
a sms11 Latin
American country, Nicaragua.
144, Nicaragua and many other cOuntrieS
in Latin
America have genuine grounds to be apprehensive of
intervention by the United States. I have already given
two examples today of how the United States organized
intervention in 1954 against Guatemala and an unsuccessful attempt at invading Cuba in April 1961, but I
shou1d like to give the Council one more list, which must
m&e it evident to everyone why the Latin American
countries fear intervention by the United States.

138. At the same time it is incumbent UpOn US to seize
every opportunity to build upon the search for this com15

145. I should like to recount a list of cases in which the
United States used armed force against other Latin
American countries also, cases in which the overwhelming majority of interventions were carried out at a time
when the Soviet Union was not even on the map of the
world. Here is the list. Against Mexico, the United States
used force 14 times; against Cuba, 13 times; against Panama, 11 times; against Nicaragua, IO times; against the
Dominican
Republic,. nine times; against Colombia,
seven times; against Honduras, seven times; against
Haiti, five times; against Puerto Rico, three times;
against Guatemala, twice. Thus, against just 10 Latin
American countries, the United States has used force Xl
times. These are the grounds for the fears of the Latin
American countries in so far as concerns the current policy of the United States.

152. Mr. LIANG Yufan (China) (interpret&ion from
Chinese): Just now the representative of the United States
made an accusation with regard to the statement made
by China yesterday [2422nd meeting]. The Chinese delegation rejects this accusation by the United States delegation. It is not difficult for people to see that the
representative of the United States accusesall delegations
that do not agree with the mistaken policy of the United
States Government. This is the very repugnant style of a
super-Power. The interference by the United States in the
affairs of the countries of the Central American region is
known to all. It does not matter to what extent the
United States representative engages in sophistry. That
cannot change the tarnished image of the United States
Government as a super-Power.
153. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
United States has asked to speak in exercise of the right
of reply, and I now call on her.

146. But let us suppose for a moment that the United
States representative really believes what she says about
the “Red danger”. Let us suppose for a moment that
there is a genuine fear of the “Reds” and that it really
seems to them, as they say here in the United States, that
“there is a Red under every bed”. So the question arises,
what should these official persons in the United States
do? I have some advice for them. Experience here is the
best guide. Let these people take a look under their own
beds. Let them see that there are not any “Reds” there.
What, one may ask, quite understandably, should one do
after that? Pay a visit to the doctor.

154. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
I shall comment first of all concerning the Soviet representative’s exercise in cliometrics and say that it suffered
from what such quantitative historical analyses often do,
namely, the effort to add up non-additive-that
is, noncomparable-events.
Most of the non-comparable events
which he attempted to add were drawn from a really
quite remote past.
1.55. Fortunately, however, we are a new nation and his
list was relatively short, particularly since we left any
kind of interventionist habits in back of us a long time
ago.

147. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Zimbabwe has asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply,
and I now call on him.
148, Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe): The representative of the United States made reference to our
comparison of the situation in Nicaragua and Central
America with that prevailing in southern Africa and even
went further and accused those who support Nicaragua
of being accessories after the fact.

156. Now, if we were to attempt to do a comparative
kind of analysis of Soviet acts of aggression against
neighbouring peopIes, the job would, I am afraid, require
a computer, the quantities being so great. One would, of
course, begin with the peoples of the so-called autonomous Soviet Socialist Republics themselves-for example, the Ukraine-and
the peoples of Tashkent, Latvia,
Lithuania and Estonia. I am choosing almost at random.
There is, of course, more recently and miserably, the
people of Afghanistan. The truth is that the Soviet record
of armed aggression against the peoples of its own
empire is so well known that it does not really bear
repetition.

149. Much as we want to go further, we should not be
diverted from the item on the agenda, which really relates
to interference in the affairs of Nicaragua. We would
want to emphasize that our support, our championing of
this policy of non-interference, our upholding of this
principle, is guided by our desire to uphold the Charter
of the United Nations, and we shall continue to uphold
it. We shall never support interference by whoever it
might be, for whatever reason, in whatever country, at
whatever time and, allow me to underline, least of all in
this honourable chamber.

157. May I say that I am terribly pleased to hear the
representative of Zimbabwe affirm his dedication to the
universality of the principle of non-intervention, That is
in fact what the Charter of the United Nations requires
of all of us, something which, we hope, all of us are in
fact prepared to grant.

150, Our duty is to create an atmosphere conducive to
peaceful solution of the dispute in Nicaragua and to help
resolve that dispute. My delegation has, I think, voted
accordingly whenever we have seen that there was interference, no matter who had interfered, and we shall continue to do so.

158. In so far as the representative of China is concerned, one can hope that they too will affirm that same
universality in application of the principle of noninterference in the affairs of other nations.

151. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of China
has asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply, and 1
now call on him,

159. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply, and I now call on him.
16

160. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): I would therefore like to note that the representative of the United
States did not deny the list of 81 United States interventions against Latin American countries which I read out.
She simply said that something was in the past and that
now everything was new. So to supplement my own education, I should like, if possible, to receive from the representative of the United States an answer to such
questions as these, for example, The United States intervention of 1954 in Guatemala-was that an old intervention or a new one? The intervention of 1961 against
Cuba-was that an old one or a new one? The intervention of I965 in another Latin American republic-was
that an old one or a new one?

167. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
United States has asked to speak in exercise of the right
of reply. I call on her.
168. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
I should like to reply unequivocally that the United
States Government has no aggressive designs against the
Government of Nicaragua, against the Nicaraguan
people; that the United States indeed has no intention of
invading anyone or of conducting an armed action
against anyone, or of occupying any other country. The
United States Government, indeed, has no interest in any
territorial aggrandizement whatsoever, and as far as the
people of Nicaragua are concerned, we desire nothing
whatsoever for the people of Nicaragua except precisely
the fulfilment of those promises which the Government
of Nicaragua-the
Sandinist Junta of Nicaragua-made
to those people on its accession to power.

161. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
United States has asked to speak in exercise of the right
of reply, and I now call on her.

169. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. I call on him.

162. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
First I should like to point out to my colleague from the
Soviet Union that the country in 1965 for whose name he
was searching was the Dominican Republic, which today
enjoys independence and democracy.

170. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): We shall believe
in the sincerity of the statement of the representative of
the United States with regard to Nicaragua only when
that country calls a halt to the preparation, training, arming and equipping of the Somozist bands operating
against Nicaragua in its territory.

163. As one of my colleagues has pointed out to me
quite correctly, there is, of course, one very important
difference between those countries in which the United
States in an earlier time and in an earlier mode occasionally intervened and those Governments, States and
peoples in whose internal affairs the Soviet Union has
intervened. That difference, above all, is that, like the
Dominican Republic, the States which were the object of
United States intervention are today independent States,
largely democratic States, which enjoy self-government
and self-determination,
whereas those States, like
Afghanistan or Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia or any other
nations of Eastern Europe, which had the misfortune to
be intervened in by the Soviet Union have not to this day
re-established their autonomy.

171. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Honduras has asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I
call on him.
172. Mr. ORTEZ COLINDRES
(Honduras) (interpetation from Spanish): We have heard the two GoliathsGoliaths in terms of power and of intellect. Small
countries can learn a lot from them. They evoke all the
insight that can be brought to bear in order that those
they might regard as international pygmies in this forum
may be given the same international standing, even
though we do not have-like those who forged that right
after the Second World War-the privilege of vetoing
draft resolutions in the Council. That really destroys the
fundamental balance between a small country and a
Power. I refer to points on which there is a real imbalance in the international community, when the veto is
employed and the hopes and aspirations of the small
countries are dashed. But reality is almost always the
most tragic thing: they fight, they laugh and we provide
the dead.

164. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply, I call on him.
165. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Rlcssian): If I said something that was not quite correct and instead of “Dominican Republic” said something else, then I was properly
corrected by the representative of the United States.
After all, who but the representative of the United States
could know better exactly where the intervention of 1965
by the United States took place? I am therefore grateful
to her for this factual correction of my inaccuracy.

173. I should like to speak on behalf of one small country that is affected, solely to clarify our position in this
debate.
174. I should not like to tangle with my Nicaraguan
colleague in a theological or an ideological struggle or
one about alignment, because such is not our intention.
On the contrary, we should like sincerely to contribute to
providing the Council with all the necessary information
to prevent an international conflagration. He has made

166. But now I should like to put a key question to the
representative of the United States-key to this meeting
of the Security Council today. Can the representative of
the United States tell the Council here that the United
States has no aggressive designs whatsoever against the
Republic of Nicaragua? Can she say that, or not?
17

some officia1 charges, I have three more here, but I think
we have heard enough. One of them concerns the mobilization of Nicaraguan troops: yesterday, more than 100
lorries bearing armed troops arrived at our border, In
addition, boats were captured, and Honduran citizens
were arrested and taken to Nicaragua. However, we are
relating all this with, as the French say, un SenS de la
mesure, for the basic problem is something else; these are
incidents.
175. We are fulfilling our obligation to inform the
Council. The complaints will be circulated, and I have no
wish to return to the ping-pong game where Nicaragua
says that our soldiers are firing on them and we say that
Nicaraguan soldiers are firing on ours.
176. The fact is that my Government officially announces categorically that it has no wish to commit aggression against or to attack the Nicaraguan army. The
Council must realize perfectly well, because it is composed of persons versed in international law, that at a
time of tension one shot by a soldier is not international
aggression, People in our countries are nervous. The
armies are nearby, and the right attitude taken here
might prevent a conflagration there, because there people
are tense. There there is no laughter; there is no assumption of intellectual attitudes, nor any reviewing of the
history of invadons. We are ourselves experiencing the
additional problems of our poverty and our weakness,
serious armed confrontations and profound differences.
177. I am going somewhat to disregard specific complaints, which will be sent to the Council in writing.
178. The fears of the Government of Nicaragua that an
international war might be unleashed by Honduras are
groundless. We can give them our unqualified assurance
that the Honduran army is not going to attack or commit
aggression against Nicaragua. We have made a solemn
promise. This is a Security Council in which international history will record our words, as well as our attitude as a serious Government which is attempting to
forge credibility in the world. Consequently, I have
received precise instructions to inform the Council that
the army will not move in. Any troop movements on our
part will be to defend our sovereignty and our territorial
integrity. It is logical that we should take measures.
179. Everyone is talking about internationalization
of a
conflict. I do not believe that the parties involved in this
conflict are standing by with folded arms. Accordingly
my country’s attitude is one of peace.
180. The representative of Nicaragua says that he wishes
to participate sincerely in the search for peace, and he
reiterates that it is a matter of the utmost urgency that we
engage in bilateral negotiations. There he has a point of
agreement, Nicaragua wants negotiations. Honduras
also wants negotiations. Where does the difference lie?
The difference is that Nicaragua maintains its criterion
that those negotiations must be bilateral, because the
parties affected are those that, primarily and as a matter

of priority, have had their interests affected. My country
believes that our bilateral problems can on the contrary
be considered, but that the problem is not one between
Nicaragua and Honduras. We have just heard the representatives of the Soviet Union and the United States,
181. Let us ask ourselves a question and let us provide
the answer ourselves. Commander Ortega Saavedra
visited Moscow today, as was announced by the representative of the Soviet Union-Russia-and
that
Government offered its cordial support to Nicaragua.
We must take into account the fact that he is not walking
about in the harsh Moscow winter buying chestnuts, as
we are doing in New York, but that, in some form, he is
discussing questions of greater importance regarding stability and instability in the region.
182. We are seeking the point, the basic opportunity.
As intelligent and experienced persons, help us to see
how to structure this dialogue, which Honduras also considers to be vital and urgent, Why can we not accept the
notion of beginning solely with the bilateral approach?
That would be as if our problem were a crab which, with
two of its legs immobilized, could continue to move since
we know that six legs still remain, if it had eight legs to
begin with.
183. We believe that this is a regional problem and that
binding two legs of the crab will not enable us to resolve
it, because the crab will continue moving. Weapons continue moving through our territory with the aim of destabilizing the Government of El Salvador. We will
continue mobilizing troops to prevent the movement of
those weapons, and so on and so forth, so that once
again a state of confusion will reign. Consequently, let us
take a global and simultaneous approach to the problem
and speak of bilateral and regional matters. Why should
it be possible to speak of the white and not be possible to
speak of the black? Let us speak of the white and the
black at the same time. There is not just coffee and milk
in history; there is also coffee with milk. I think that
more coffee with milk is drunk than is black coffee or
pure milk. Accordingly, it seems to me perfectly proper
that, under the sponsorship of an international organization, under the auspices of a forum as solemn as this one,
it should be possible to find this SenSde la mesure, this
break-even point that would act as a link, the vital spark.
Let us not solely continue seeking negative angles that
are going to exacerbate the problem.
184. They refer to a very important point. Nicaragua
says that it wants to revitalize the proposal made by
Mexico and Venezuela. We certainly do not want to
weaken that proposal in any way. What do we understand by “revitalize”? Sometimes it is necessary to give to
words their true legal meaning and not their grammatical
sense. Every proposal has deep implications. In some of
these, proposals it is suggested that European countries
take part in the dialogue. I wonder if it will be necessary
for Europe to solve the problems of five countries that
once formed a federal republic, Can we as Central Americans be so incompetent that we are unable to converse as
18

we once did, as fivebrothers? Are we going to ask that
the dialogue be translated into German, Italian or
English when we share the same lineage, the same history, the same blood and the same suffering? It seems to
me that there is a constructive way of dealing with the
problem. Let us not make it worse than it is. We do not
want to extrapolate this problem and make of Central
America a Viet Nam. We do not want Central America
to become a Lebanon, a Middle East, a Poland. We do
not want to be a pawn on a chess-board. It is possible
that this will not be the case, but we pray and we agree
with what the Pope said and we listened seriously to what
was booed by the masses there, because we believe in
God, not in atheistic systems. But we respect atheists.
Before they have to face God, perhaps they will be convinced of His existence. Everyone has his own ideas and
the right to believe them in regard to where he comes
from and where he is going.
185. The representative of Nicaragua say‘s that we can
move step by step in regional negotiations. Wonderful.
Where do we begin? When do we begin? They say they
view with sympathy the proposal4 by four fraternal countries that have credibility for us: Colombia, a democracy;
Panama, a friendly country; and Mexico and Venezuelathat is to say, four ideal negotiating partners. However,
we should like it if democracy-and
we are not going to
judge Governments at the present time, but we do believe
in democracy as a system-could
somehow be established and strengthened in Central America and that Nicaragua might choose the type of government or the plan
of government it wishes. That is completely up to the
Nicaraguans; the choice is theirs.
186. I have great respect for Cuba. Cuba has said bad
things to us on several occasions, but they have given US
some good things. This tobacco which is bad for one’s
health is a Cuban vice. I was sympathetic to Fidel Castro
at university. I was happy to see his beard, as I am now
happy to see the beard of the Deputy Minister of Nicaragua and that which my friend its ambassador just shaved
off. But our sympathies don’t concern hair; our ideofogical interest is in a system, democracy, and we would have
put Fidel Castro on a pedestal and be admiring him
today if he had given his people freedom of choice. But
that is his business. It is the Cubans’ problem; it is not up
to me to judge. I am a romantic of history.
187. The representative of Nicaragua says that positive
steps should be taken. as a matter of urgency and that he
is open-minded about any consideration or proposal by
the Council. Well, we are too, What does the Council
want? We have asked the Secretary-General-a
serious
man, a Latin American who since his election has
enjoyed the confidence of the Soviet Union, the United
States, France, China, the United Kingdom-and
those
Latin American men in whom we believe and who are
moral forces whom you have chosen and respected, to
help us seek a balance so that we can put an end to this
ping-pong exchange and so that Nicaragua will not
return here tomorrow with three more complaints. My
secretaries are tired of typing out copies of these com-

plaints. Believe me, I do not want to continue
oil on the fire.

throwing

188. We respect the Council’s time. My country’s Foreign Minister has asked the President that we meet with
him on Monday so that we can settle this. I wish the
Foreign Minister of Nicaragua would come too, not
because we cannot do the job but so that he could see
that commitments are serious matters. I am not saying
whatever happens to pop into my mind. I smoke
cigarettes, not marijuana, I am speaking very seriously.
189. Let me be specific. How could we possibly not
want Nicarrigua, a brother of ours, to choose its Own
Government? How could we not respect its right to selfdetermination? Would it not be a sorry matter for a
country like Honduras to lend its territory for an invasion? We have a Government that was elected by more
than 82 per cent of our population. Our Political Constitution is the basis of everything. Any traffic in weapons,
any movements by armies, have to be considered by a
legislative body which is respected, just as the American
Senate and the ,Politburo-or whatever is the legislative
body in the Soviet Union-are
respected.
190. But, my Nicaraguan brothers, let us not pray and
light one candle to God and another to the devil. We
want you to be independent, but we also want El Salvador, a country we love, to be independent too, and out of
respect for the principle of non-intervention
we desire
you not to intervene in our territory. We will sign such a
bilateral or multilateral commitment, but only on condition that you do not destabilize the region.

191. I should like to end with a saying: “What is good
for the goose is good for the gander”. Help us to forge a
dialogue, since the basic corner-stone of such a dialogue
is accepted by both sides. We do not want internationalization of the conflict. We do not want armies clashing on
our borders. And if we all agree on the fundamental
point, what is missing? Perhaps the humility I must have
to seek your experience. Perhaps something positive
could come of it. Is there going to be condemnation of
the United States or of the Soviet Union? What help
would that be? Another piece of paper to veto? That
would be of no help at all; only $300 more for each page
in six languages. That is not what we want. I have just
come from my country believing in law. I studied public
international law because I truly believe that legal norms
do exist. But I do not want this conflict that I am today
experiencing to be an example of what my professor, the
great internationalist Charles Rousseau, taught in his
class on the United Nations. He said that the International Court of Justice, the international body that implements the principles of this sacred Organization, always
had to take into account three possible results in any
conflict. First, whenever there was a conflict between a
major country and a small country the big country would
win, Secondly, whenever there was a conflict between
two small countries, as in the case of Nicaragua and
Honduras, the conflict would disappear. Thirdly, whenever there was a conflict between two major Powers,
19

193. Mr. TINOCO (Nicaragua) (interpretation from
Spanish): I shall try to return to the tone of seriousness
that should characterize debates in the Council. I should
like to refer to one matter that was raised by the representative of the United States in one of her last statements. I
do not believe this will be an unnecessary exercise; I think
it will help the members of the Council to understand to
some extent the dilemma in which Nicaragua finds itself.
I think it will help the Council understand the problems
and dilemmas of the Latin American countries, the countries south of the Rio Grande.

Governments have forgotten that of the 21 Latin
American republics six have already lost their sovereignty: Panama, Puerto Rico, Cuba, Haiti, Santo
Domingo and Nicaragua are the six unfortunate
republics which have lost their independence and
become colonies of Yankee imperialism. The Governments of those six peoples are not defending the collective interests of their nationals, because they came
to power not through the popular will but through the
imposition of imperialism. Those who rise to the presidency supported by the magnates in Wall Street are
defending the interests of the North American
bankers. All that remains in those six unhappy Hispanic American peoples is the memory that they were
once independent and the distant hope of being able
to win back their freedom through the strength of a
few of their sons who are fighting tirelessly to loose
their country from the opprobrium into which those
renegades have plunged it.”

194. The representative of the United States referred to
the founder of the Sandinist movement in our country,
and quite rightly she said that Sandino was not a communist. Where there was a mistake, where there has always
been a mistake, a mistake that will continue into the
future, is that one does not have to be a communist to be
anti-imperialist,
to defend one’s homeland, to defend
national rights, to defend national resources and to speak
clearly and show unambiguously that one is opposed to
those who are committing aggression against the homeland and trying to destroy it.

Sandino, a man who was not a communist but a staunch
anti-imperalist, a man capable of defining the role of the
United States both then and in the future, also stated,
“We must think about our unification and understand
that Yankee imperialism is the most brutal enemy threatening us.” Elsewhere, he said, “The Yankees need
puppets to make presidents for our indohispanic peoples.” Perhaps even more emotionally, Sandino wrote on
another occasion giving an example of what has come to
be known as Sandinist rhetoric, a rhetoric inspired by the
hardship caused our people by American aggression.
Speaking about the Yankees, he said:

such as the Soviet Union and the United States, the
Court would disappear. Well, I hope that the Council
will not disappear on this occasion,
192. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Nicaragua wishes to speak in the exercise of the right of reply. I
call upon him.

195. Sandino, then, was not a communist. But he knew
what the United States stood for, and he knew that the
United States was imperialistic and would continue to be
imperialistic, He knew what harm was being done to the
peoples of Latin America and would continue to be done
to them. And for that reason I should like to read out a
few quotations from Sandino, who was not a communist
but a patriot, a nationalist, an anti-imperialist and a man
who understood the power that the United States has
historically exerted over our peoples.

“Come, you drug addicts, come and kill us, in our
own land, for at the vanguard of my patriot soldiers I
will wait for you, caring little for your numbers. But
when that happens, the destruction of your greatness
will shake the Capitol in Washington and your blood
will stain the famous White House, the den where you
plot your infamous crimes.”
197. Those were the words of August0 Cesar Sandino,
a patriot who championed the freedom and independence of Nicaragua. He was assassinated in 1934 in a plot
involving the then Secretary of State of the United States
and Henry L. Stimson, American ambassador to Nicaragua.

196. Sandino said, “The genuine criminals are in the
bowels of the White House in Washington, whence they
direct the plundering and destruction of our Hispanic
America.” On another occasion he wrote in his diary
about his fight against the Marines, who had intervened
in our country in 1934, “The last of my soldiers may die,
the soldiers of Nicaraguan freedom, but before that more
than a battalion of yours, the blond invader, will have
perished in our rugged mountains.” It is unfortunate that
the representative of the United States is not present to
hear these quotations, for they might have given her food
for thought. Sandino also said-and this is important for
Latin America-in
his message to the Presidents of Latin
America on 4 August 1928, at the start of his struggle
against American intervention:

198. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Cuba has
asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
199. Mr. ROA KOURi
(Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): I am truly afraid that the Council’s seriousness
may have been gravely compromised and its credibility
threatened after the unusual statements we have heard
this afternoon from one of its permanent members. At
the beginning of the debate, the representative of the
United States regaled us with a strange dissertation, the
smug, didactic tone of which .might perhaps have given
great pleasure to a group of American college freshmen
but which was obviously inappropriate in a gathering of

“I wonder whether the Governments of Latin
America believe that the Yankees will be satisfied with
the conquest of Nicaragua. I wonder whether those
20

sovereign and independent States and of adults who long
ago left the university classroom.
200. Curious theories were expounded earlier by the
representative of the United States on the subject of Nicaragua’s complaint to the Council, perhaps because the
need to become involved in theory is something she cannot eschew. But it is one thing to go into theory in the
ivory tower of academe and something else to examine
facts. The facts, as Vladimir Ilyich Lenin said-and I am
sure that Professor Kirkpatrick remembers-are actually
greater than the imagination, because life is simply richer
than theory. Nevertheless both in her earlier harangue
and in today’s peroration, the representative of the
United States has stubbornly resisted facing facts, carefully avoiding a reply to the specific charges levelled by
the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua.

tribute which the representative of the United States pretended to pay to Sandino. That Sandino’s murderers
tried to use his clean name to attack Cuban and Nicaraguan revolutionaries deserves our deepest contempt. But
the substance of the message is something else and very
different, It is not that they copied his anti-imperialist, let
us say anti-Yankee, struggle, which is what we revolutionaries of Latin America have all done, but that it
should be done with old revolvers, sticks and stones, in
order the better to murder them, as was the case with
Sandino.
205. All right, with old revolvers and shotguns we
Cubans faced the tyranny of Fulgencio Batista, who was
armed by the United States and advised by Yankee military personnel, and we defeated it, But we are not so
stupid-because stupidity is not really one of the defects
of revolutionaries-as
to confront the most powerful of
empires with home-made guns and shotguns, Let there
be no doubt on the part of the representatives of the
United States. Our people is armed, very well armed,
and, what is more, better prepared to make sure that
imperialism pays very dearly for any attempted aggression against our homeland,

201. Would the American representative be good
enough to tell us once and for all whether or not it is true
that there are camps for the training of Nicaraguan
counter-revolutionaries
on United States territory;
whether or not it is true that the CIA has received State
funds for the development of covert operations against
the Government of Nicaragua; whether or not it is true
that her Government is involved in attempts to destabilize the Sandinist Government of Nicaragua? We await
her replies with keen interest.

206. In a country where human brotherhood is something that exists only in museums and on paper, we
should not be surprised to hear ironic references to the
fraternal relations that exist between Cuba and Nicaragua and between my homeland and that of Lenin. We are
proud of those relations, and today more than ever we
strengthen our fraternal solidarity with the Sandinist
Government and the Nicaraguan people and the heroic
revolutionaries of El Salvador and Guatemala.

202, With regard to other matters I should like to say
the following, The Government of the United States
arrogates to itself the right to intervene in any part of the
world where its interests, as it perceives and defines them,
are threatened. Presumably it is for that reason that it
finances and arms the genocidal junta in El Salvador, as
it is undoubtedly for that same reason that it assists,
supports and financially and militarily helps the racists of
Pretoria and the Zionists of Israel. On the other hand,
they are indignant because Cuba considers that it has the
right to assist revolutionaries anywhere in the world. We
are speaking of double standards. Could it be because
Cuba is a small mulatto country, which from the time of
President Adams, through McKinley and Theodore
Roosevelt, was considered the private property of the
Yankee empire?

207. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
United States of America has asked to be allowed to
speak in exercise of the right of reply, and I call on him.
208. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): I
apologize if I begin this brief statement by sounding academic. It occurred to one of my colleagues to remind me
that the great Spanish philosopher Unamuno once said
that when he saw something that looked much like a
crab, walked like a crab, behaved like a crab, others
might call it a turtle but, for his part, he would call it a
crab.

203. The representative of the United States referred to
the so-called interventionist designs of Cuba and Nicaragua but arrogated the right to question the foreign policy
of both sovereign States and their right to support anyone, anywhere, in any international dispute or conflict.
What is more, like Cato, she thunders curses against
other States Members of the United Nations and of the
Security Council for daring to support tiny Nicaragua in
its complaint. Obviously, arrogance does not seem to be
giving her good advice, and it has very little to do with
Emerson’s spirit of temperance which, I presume, might
at some time have found its way into the lectures given
by the representative of the United States.

209. We did not claim-and we regard it as irrelevant
to claim-that
the great Sandino was a communist. We
say only that those today who use his name have
betrayed his fierce independence and have yielded their
sovereignty, indeed their national pride, to an outside
Power.
210. I wish to reiterate the finaf words of Mrs. Kirkpatrick in her last statement this afternoon. Our Government harbours no aggressive designs, on any country
within the hemisphere or outside the hemisphere. AS
between my country and the people I represent and the
people of Nicaragua, and indeed the people of Cuba,

204. Finally, I do not wish to omit something which is
simply infuriating to any Latin American-the
alleged
21

there are no-there
need not be-differences.
In so far as
the Governments
of Nicaragua and indeed of Cuba
enhance the freedom and the well-being of their people,
in So far as those Governments do not commit aggression against their neighbours, there need not be, and
there will not be, any differences, any divisions, between
their Governments
and mine, between their people and
mine.

NOTES

1General Assembly

1 General
Assembly
3 Ibid., part II.
4 See A/38/68,
annex.
5 See Ofj7cial Records
of the General Assembly,
Thirty-seventh
Session, Supplement
No. 1 (A/37/1),
p. 3.
6 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh
Session,
Supplement No. I (A/37/1).
7 Final Act of the Meeting
of Foreign Ministers
of the countries
interested in the promotion
of democracy in Central America and the
Caribbean.
For the text, see Jack W. Hopkins, ed., Lotin America and
Caribbean
Contemporary
Record (New York and London,
Holmes &
Meier, 1984), vol. II, 1982-1983, pp. 867-873.

The meeting rose at 7.20 p.m.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

resolution 2625(XXV), annex.
resolution
361103, anaex.

00400

h0205-July

1990--2,050

1
,
