S/PV.8675

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8675th meeting

Tuesday, 26 November 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Pierce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. Mogashoa
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Letter dated 13 November 2019 from the Special Adviser and Head of the
United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes
Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2019/878)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-38491 (E)
*1938491*

S/PV.8675

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
Letter dated 13 November 2019 from the
Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2019/878)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Karim
Asad Ahmad Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2379 (2017); and our civil society briefer,
Mr. Kachi, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Kachi is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Iraq.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/878, which contains the text of a
letter dated 13 November 2019 from the Special Adviser
and Head of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Khan.
Mr. Khan: It is indeed an honour to be able to
present the third report (see S/2019/878) of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD).
Since my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8573),
the Investigative Team has worked with some purpose
and continued to ensure that the experiences and needs
of the survivors of crimes committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), as well as their
2/17

26/11/2019

families and victims, are placed at the centre of our
work — and not simply by paying them lip service,
but through demonstrable action of members of the
Team. All communities, whether Shabak, Kaka’i, Shia,
Sunni, Christian, Turkmen or Yazidi, have suffered
the unbelievable brutality and cruelty of the most unIslamic State called Da’esh. It is, of course, essential
that their voices and experiences be heard as we conduct
our investigations to build credible cases in order to
ensure accountability.
In the past six months since my last report (see
S/2019/407), I have visited and met with tribal leaders
throughout Iraq, family members and survivors — not
only in Baghdad, but in Erbil, Tall Afar, Mosul, Ninawa
Plains, Diyala and elsewhere in Iraq — to ensure that
those accounts are recorded and that the interactions of
the Investigative Team can be as informed as possible
in order to understand the experiences of the victims
and witnesses and to ensure proper investigations.
Last week, I visited two displacement camps in
Dohuk and I saw women and children who had suffered
awful slavery and sexual abuse., as well as men, trying
to live with dignity in very difficult conditions. The
effects of Da’esh still linger. Not only have the crimes
been endured, but communities are still grappling with
the aftermath. The courage of the survivors gives one
pause for thought because in their engagement with us,
they had to speak and relive hell on Earth, which is what
they experienced. They spoke with such engagement
and willingness that it put into sharp relief the heavy
responsibility that lies with all of us to ensure that
their cries, their tears and their suffering are met with
purposeful action and credible investigations.
It is, of course, the responsibility of all of us — the
Security Council, me and the Team — to ensure that not
only are words spoken, but that we have the collective
stamina and focus to make sure that proper investigations
and accountability are realized in practice.
As reflected in my report, over the past six
months, the Investigative Team has sought to draw on
this imperative for urgent action in the delivery of its
mandate. One year after our deployment to Iraq, I am
pleased to inform the Council that the Team is now fully
operational. We had about five staff members when we
first deployed in Iraq, and we now have 107 members. I
am delighted that, as we have grown, we have managed
to maintain a good gender balance — 53 per cent of
our substantive and support staff are women, and more
19-38491

26/11/2019

Threats to international peace and security

than 50 per cent of our senior leadership positions are
occupied by women. At the same time, I am glad to
say that we have achieved geographical diversity — all
regional groups of the United Nations continue to be
represented in our Team.
The establishment of that core infrastructure
has provided a basis for significant progress in the
collection, gathering and analysis of digital, testimonial
and forensic evidence with respect to the three core
areas that I adumbrated in my previous report, namely,
crimes in Mosul, in Sinjar and in Speicher — the Tikrit
Air Academy. At the same time, we have ensured that we
have a responsibility to meet quickly and meaningfully
the requests that we have received from third States and
other domestic courts.
By using the trust fund, we have also ensured that
we have expanded the scope of investigations to make
sure that all the diverse communities — regardless
of race, religion, tribe or ethnic origin — that were
targeted by Da’esh will have investigations carried
out that focus on the crimes that they endured in order
to ensure criminal responsibility based on evidence.
The breadth of the field work conducted by the Team
during the reporting period has been reflected in key
evidence-collection activities, even in recent weeks.
We have managed, for example, to complete 3D laser
scanning of crime scenes, which will help bring to
life, by way of modern technology, scenes that may be
known in Iraq or unknown in third countries. It is also
a very useful aid when one is speaking to a witness,
who can, without going into areas that may still be
dangerous and traumatic, actually position themselves
in that 3D modelling in a way that will bring clarity to
their accounts and hopefully assist domestic courts in
assessing criminal responsibility.
We have continued to collect evidence and
interview witnesses, including witnesses who endured
sexual and gender based-violence, rape or slavery, as
well as other witnesses, from Dohuk and elsewhere.
We have managed to do that with full respect for
international standards — as the Council requires of
us — by way of our witness protection unit and our
clinical psychologists, who we recruited with the kind
assistance of the Netherlands. We have also garnered
together the successful use of social media and
reviewed some of the social media to put forward the
photographs of individuals who appear in the Da’esh
propaganda videos and elsewhere. We have received
thousands of responses that have helped us identify the

S/PV. 8675

names of those protagonists, which will further inform
the investigations of the Team. We have also worked
hand in glove with the Iraqi domestic authorities to
continue to gather DNA samples from the remains of
mass gravesites so that hopefully we can build cases, as
well as identify the remains and, together with the mass
graves directorate of Iraq, return them to their loved
ones for burial, in accordance with their religious and
cultural practices.
As I address the Council today, we have two
field-based missions that are actively conducting
investigations in the Ninawa governorate. In fact, at
this moment they are investigating crimes that targeted
in particular judges, religious clergy, journalists and
health-care professionals — because, as we see, among
many other aspects, Da’esh seems to have targeted some
of the leaders, some of the informers of Mosul, when
they strangled that city and then suffocated it when
they took over completely. Based upon those activities,
the Investigative Team has identified a number of
individual ISIL members as primary targets for further
investigations in relation to each of the areas that we
have previously identified — the three investigative
priorities that were detailed in my previous report. For
example, just in relation to the crimes that targeted
the Yazidi community alone, we have identified more
than 160 perpetrators of massacres against the Yazidis,
particularly in Kojo, and elsewhere, and we are focusing
our work to build solid cases, hopefully, in relation
to each of those that may be presented to domestic
courts — Iraq, of course, is the primary intended
recipient — but any courts that are willing and able to
hold members of Da’esh accountable.
The progress achieved by the Team in the past six
months has continued to build on our relationship of
mutual support and collaboration with the national
authorities of Iraq, and their support and assistance
has been exemplary. I used that word when I had the
honour of delivering my second briefing to the Council.
I am glad to say that that has continued to be the case.
Without the support and the real, meaningful assistance
of the Government of Iraq, this hope and prayer for
justice would fall on fallow ground. Only by that hand
guiding us step by step can we achieve on the promise of
justice that we all wish to see. Since my previous report,
over the past six months we have conducted 203 fieldbased investigative activities with the direct support of
the Iraqi authorities. These missions are planned and
facilitated with the support of the National Operations

19-384913/17

S/PV.8675

Threats to international peace and security

Centre within the Office of the Prime Minister. Once
again, without that support, which has been critical, we
simply could not move outside of Baghdad.
Our engagement with the Iraqi judiciary has been
essential. I think, personally, that it is one of the key
aspects that the Team has managed to move forward as
dynamically as it has done. While I must pay my thanks
to the Chief Justice, all the judges of Iraq who we have
dealt with have made meaningful contributions to allow
UNITAD, together with the Government of Iraq, to meet
the requirements of justice. An example of that is in
Mosul, where we have had quite extensive discussions
with the Counter-Terrorism Court in Tallkayf. We have
gathered thousands of pages of material pertaining to
37 case files, and further volumes of evidence are also
being digitized. That will be an advantage and an asset
to UNITAD, and it is also of mutual benefit to the Iraqi
investigative judges, so that they can actually access
the material that they have once it is digitized.
Similarly, in relation to Camp Speicher and the
awful massacre of mostly Shia cadets at Tikrit Air
Academy, we have had unbelievable support from the
national investigative commission that the Republic of
Iraq established to look into that. I will come back to
that a little bit later with regard to how we have managed
to work together and build cases. Following the
unanimous renewal of the mandate of the Investigative
Team in September, I have also reached out and tried to
ensure even closer communication and understanding
with the Government of Iraq. I am delighted to say that,
after the renewal, the Office of the Prime Minister set
up a new national coordinating committee within his
Office — it is a new composition — and includes a
representative of the Kurdish Regional Government. I
think that the Government of Iraq should be applauded
for that foresight as well. The mandate repeatedly talks
about the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq,
and it is important that we have representatives from
the entire territory of Iraq to make sure that we speak
and work with one voice as effectively as possible. I met
that new committee on 4 November in Baghdad and
will meet with it again on my return on 10 November.
Our recruitment is moving at a good pace. We
have completed a competitive recruitment process
in accordance with United Nations rules, identified
candidates for the posts that are to be occupied by Iraqi
candidates and now we are at a working group-level
stage of mutual consultations with the Government
of Iraq to make sure that the Iraqi experts that we
4/17

26/11/2019

recruit have the confidence of the Government of
Iraq and, again, that we work together in concert to
the greatest possible extent. That unity of purpose in
terms of collaboration and cooperation on logistics and
support for the investigations has been mirrored by
the cooperation and assistance given by the President
and the Prime Minister of the Kurdish Regional
Government. In the same way, I can only describe their
support as exemplary, which is extremely positive. They
have also set up an intergovernmental task force, which
was created in order to hopefully ensure the effective
transmission of requests from the Investigative Team
and an effective receipt of information as we try to
ensure accountability.
A technical assistance programme has also been
pursued. The mandate, of course, repeatedly emphasizes
that we are required to share knowledge with the Iraqi
members of the Team, who work on an equal footing
with us, but also to share our technical knowledge and
enhance some capacities. We have done so through a
number of measures — not only exhumations and the
identification of victims, but also with other trainings
and assistance, whether related to drones, 3D laser
scanners or rapid DNA machines. We have conducted
trainings for all of those.
We have an important aspect coming up: we have
received funding from the European Union. Together
with the Government of Iraq, we hope to create a
digitization programme that allows Iraq to have a
digitized version of its records and information that are
relevant to Da’esh crimes. It will also allow UNITAD
to harvest those and build cases in accordance with
international standards. In my previous report, I
intimated that UNITAD would imminently be feeding
into domestic courts, which we have done.
I am glad to report that we received a request from
Finland, which had a case relating to the Camp Speicher
massacre. It was before the court of appeal. With
the full support and knowledge and real meaningful
assistance of the Iraqi authorities — particularly the
judiciary — we managed to have eight witnesses give
evidence from the UNITAD headquarters in Baghdad
straight into the court of appeal in Turku, Finland, in
complete accordance with international standards. We
saw not only prosecution witnesses, but also defence
witnesses. It is a very real credit to my brothers and
sisters in Iraq and the Government that it even extended
to transferring people from custody to the UNITAD
headquarters. The authorities in Finland have formally
19-38491

26/11/2019

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8675

expressed their thanks to the Government of Iraq for
that facilitation.

the killings and mass graves in the in the devastated
village of Kojo.

Through this engagement, UNITAD has
demonstrated its ability and willingness to respond
to a requirement in the mandate to feed into courts in
Iraq or those of third States. We are currently in receipt
of three further formal requests from States to feed
into domestic prosecutions that they are conducting
in relation to Da’esh crimes. We have also received an
assortment of additional inquiries from other States that
believe that, with the assistance of the Government of
Iraq, we may be able to move forward. Over the past six
months, we have also received commitments of support
from Australia, Denmark, Germany, Finland, France,
the United States of America, the United Kingdom,
the United Arab Emirates, the Philippines, Sweden
and Uganda. Again, without both the assistance of
Government-provided personnel and contributions to
the trust fund, the operational activities of UNITAD
would be severely circumscribed.

On 3 August 2014, the terrorist gangs of Da’esh
took control over Sinjar and its villages, causing tens
of thousands of the Yazidi population to flee to Sinjar
Mountain. About 7,000 Yazidi women, children and
men were killed and captured that day.

The past six months have been characterized, in
my view, by a real move forward from start-up to real
operations. We have assisted in building case files
and fed into third-country courts. We are refocusing
our commitment to bring our communication with the
Government of Iraq ever-closer, while maintaining
the independence of our investigations, which, of
course, is absolutely essential. I am profoundly
grateful for the support not only from the Government
of Iraq, but for the support and the trust that we are
fostering and that we have been so generously given
by survivors. I am pleased that today, at the initiative
of the United Kingdom — and I thank you, Madam
President — the Council will have an opportunity to
hear from a survivor — Mr. Kachi — who is on screen at
the moment. I would humbly suggest that this precedent
is a very good one. I hope that, in future briefings, by
the leave of the Council, other survivors from other
communities in Iraq will also have the chance and the
honour to address the Council for a few moments.
The President: I thank Mr. Khan for his briefing.
We do indeed have a practice of trying to get civil
society briefers to come and address the Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kachi.
Mr. Kachi (spoke in Arabic): My name is Kachi,
a Yazidi from Sinjar, Iraq. I am one of the survivors of

After that, the village of Kojo — my village — was
besieged by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) for 12 days. It remained under siege until
15 August 2014. On that date a large numbers of ISIL
terrorist elements besieged the village of Kojo. They
assembled us inside the village school. We were around
1,250 persons, including women and children. As we
entered the school, we were searched by ISIL members
and our belongings were confiscated. They separated
men from women. They took the men — around 400 of
us — in groups to different locations on the outskirts of
the village, towards the orchards and farms. Later, they
began shooting at us, shouting Allahu Akbar — “God is
the greatest” — while carrying Da’esh flags.
After they were done with killing our group, the
ISIL members left for another place. I found myself
under a pile of dead bodies. I was not dead, but I had
minor injuries. When I opened my eyes, I saw three
of my brothers next to me, but they were dead. My
nephews and my cousins had also been killed. There
were about 50 to 60 men in this group. I managed to run
away for fear of being killed by ISIL, leaving behind
the remains of my brothers and their children in that
mass grave. I survived by God’s will, to be a witness
for the hideous crimes committed by the ISIL terrorist
group against the defenceless Yazidis. After all the men
were killed, members of ISIL kidnapped around 850 of
the women, girls and children. They took them to the
area of Solagh, to the east of the city Sinjar. The ISIL
members separated some 77 elderly women, including
my 90-year-old step-mother, from the rest of the group.
The ISIL members killed the elderly women or buried
them alive in a mass grave in Solagh area. They then
took other women, girls and children, including my
wife and daughters — Yara, Sara and Lara — to be sold
in slave markets in Iraq and Syria.
I speak before the Council today as someone who
lost some 75 members of my family and my brothers’
families, all of whom were killed on that day at the
hands of ISIL. The terrorist group exterminated the
village of Kojo, which had 1,250 people. Only 19 people

19-384915/17

S/PV.8675

Threats to international peace and security

survived those mass graves, including myself. I am one
of those survivors. I continue, however, to suffer from
the psychological aftermath to this day. Despite the fact
that five years have passed, I still remember the remains
of my brothers and nephews, and I can still hear them
calling me. More than five years have passed, but I still
hear my wife and daughters screaming as the members
of ISIL kidnapped them. I still hear the crying of my
daughter Lara, who was three-months-old when she
passed away in captivity, owing to thirst and hunger.
My life continues to be extremely hard.
I thank the Security Council today for establishing
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The Investigative
Team was established upon the request made by
the Yazidi and other communities in Iraq, as well as
by the Iraqi Government, to investigate and collect
evidence related to the crimes committed by ISIL
against the innocent people of the Yazidi and other
communities in Iraq, hold accountable and prosecute
those who committed these crimes. The ongoing work
of the Investigative Team to achieve accountability and
justice is therefore very important to me and to the
entire Yazidi community and other communities.
Today, for the Yazidi community, it is not enough
to hold those responsible accountable for their crimes
and prosecute them. The international community
must acknowledge that the crimes committed against
the Yazidi community amount to genocide. I also hope
that the Security Council will continue to support the
Investigative Team in establishing a fair accountability
mechanism to prevent similar crimes and genocide in
the future.
I would like to thank the Investigative Team and
Mr. Karim Khan for their efforts in overseeing the
exhumation process of the mass graves, including in the
village of Kojo, with participation of and in the presence
of survivors, the victims’ families, Yazidi clerics, the
Iraqi Yazidi Spiritual Council, national authorities
and others. I ask the Investigative Team to continue to
listen to the personal account of the survivors and the
families of victims.
Lastly, I believe that international recognition
of the conduct of fair trials, based on irrefutable
evidence, is a crucial principle to help us move forward.
The importance of that is not limited to the Yazidi
6/17

26/11/2019

community, but extends to all components of Iraqi
society that have been affected by ISIL crimes.
The President: I thank Mr. Kachi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Special Adviser Khan for being with us in person today.
I want to begin my remarks by paying tribute to the
13 French soldiers who died overnight in a helicopter
accident in Mali. Our prayers and deepest sympathies
are with the families and loved ones as they mourn
the loss of those most precious to them. We appreciate
Mr. Khan’s update on the collection of evidence by
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) of the
atrocities committed in Iraq by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS), as well as his efforts to fully staff
UNITAD’s team with international experts on Iraq.
The world witnessed ISIS target innocent Iraqis,
including diverse ethnic and religious communities,
in barbaric attacks. Lest we forget, ISIS is responsible
for the deaths of thousands of innocent Iraqi civilians.
It desecrated churches, mosques and other houses of
worship; it drove millions of Iraqis from their homes; it
held hundreds of women as slaves, subjecting them to
brutal assault. Those are acts of pure evil, and, as the
Security Council is the organ dedicated to maintaining
international peace and security, it is our solemn
responsibility to speak the truth about what ISIS did,
document this truth and answer the prayer for justice
for those whose lives have been turned upside down by
ISIS. That is what makes UNITAD’s work so important.
With the support of the Iraqi Government, UNITAD is
moving quickly, carefully and determinedly to create a
detailed record of ISIS’ appalling criminality against
Iraqis of all faiths.
To Mr. Kachi, I say that, in this season dedicated
to gratitude and generosity, as Americans celebrate
Thanksgiving, I cannot express to him how very brave
his testimony was with us today and what a stark
reminder that we cannot waver in our pursuit of justice.
Nothing the Council does will replace his family,
but by holding criminals to account for their heinous
actions, justice can be secured for victims and their
loved ones. The work of UNITAD aims to do just that
for Mr. Kachi, his family and the many Iraqis who have
endured experiences like that.
19-38491

26/11/2019

Threats to international peace and security

In September, the Security Council through the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2490 (2019) endorsed
UNITAD’s one-year mandate renewal for the support
of the Government Iraq. The mandate will provide
accountability and, we hope, a measure for healing
for all Iraqis. A crucial step that several Member
States are taking in support of UNITAD’s mandate
involves voluntary contributions. The United States
has contributed $3 million in support of UNITAD’s
field-based activities over the past year, including mass
grave excavations in Sinjar, Mosel and Tikrit.
Thanks in part to that contribution, UNITAD has
assisted the Iraqi national authorities in excavating 17
mass graves near the village of Kojo, which is of special
significance to Iraq’s Yazidi community. We thank our
partners from the United Kingdom, Germany, Qatar,
Cyprus, the Philippines, the United Arab Emirates,
the European Union, Denmark, Sweden, Australia
and Uganda for their voluntary contributions, and we
urge other Member States to do their part to show
the international community’s support for the pursuit
of justice on behalf of all the victims in Iraq — the
Yazidis, the Christians and Shia and Sunni Muslims
and the many others who have suffered at the hands
of ISIS.
UNITAD’s continued cooperation and coordination
with Iraq’s political, judicial, religious and societal
leaders are essential for the successful implementation
of its mandate. For example, this past year, utilizing
existing evidence held by Iraqi authorities greatly
improved the team’s ability to pursue its mandate. In
return, UNITAD is providing technical support to
Iraqi authorities for mass-grave excavations, DNA
analysis and the archiving of evidence documenting
atrocities committed by ISIS. Additionally, UNITAD
has demonstrated the value of its work by directly
supporting third-country criminal proceedings against
members of ISIS, which is an early indicator that
UNITAD will successfully use its current work in
future prosecutions, including those in Iraq.
When we witness actions that can only be described
as evil, it is our responsibility to name it for what it
is — it is hell on Earth — and we need to condemn
it. But that is not enough: we must also be clear and
forceful in stating that no perpetrator will ever be
above the law, that we will be relentless in the pursuit
of justice for the victims of ISIS and that we will never
fail to live up to our duty to fight for the dignity of all
people, most especially the weak and vulnerable.

S/PV. 8675

As Special Adviser Khan powerfully just stated,
the Council carries a heavy responsibility to ensure that
the cries, tears and suffering of the victims, including
those in Duhok and across Iraq, are met with powerful
action. We again thank the Iraqi Government and the
Kurdistan Regional Government for their support of
UNITAD’s mandate, and we commit today to working
with all Council members to ensure that the mandate is
fulfilled swiftly and effectively.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me also start by
expressing our sincere condolences with respect to
the 13 French soldiers who tragically lost their lives in
Mali. Our thoughts and prayers are with their families
and the people of France.
Turning to today’s theme and this morning’s
Security Council briefing, I would like to begin by
sincerely thanking Mr. Kachi for his powerful and stark
reminder of the horrific crimes and atrocities committed
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). I also
thank Special Adviser Khan for his briefing and offer a
more general thanks to him and his team for their hard
work in supporting Iraq’s justice system so as to hold
perpetrators accountable and deliver justice.
The importance of accountability for reconciliation
in a society in a post-conflict situation cannot be
overestimated and is absolutely crucial. The protection
of human rights and the strengthening of the rule of
law, which go along with the work of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD) are equally key to achieving
this objective.
We commend Mr. Khan and his team for the
substantial expansion of their work over the past six
months, which has focused on the three instances of
particularly horrific crimes committed by ISIL: first,
the attacks committed against the Yazidi community in
Sinjar in August 2014; secondly, the crimes committed
in Mosul between 2014 and 2016, including the execution
of members of religious minorities, crimes involving
sexual and gender-based violence and crimes against
children; and thirdly, the mass killings of unarmed Iraqi
Air Force cadets from Tikrit in June 2014. We highly
welcome the fact that the investigative activities have
also been expanded to include crimes against Christian,
Kaka’i, Shabak, Sunni and Turkmen communities.
Germany is encouraged by the fact that the exchange
of information and support for the prosecution of ISIL

19-384917/17

S/PV.8675

Threats to international peace and security

crimes in other national jurisdictions is growing and
bearing fruit. I would like to thank in particular the
Investigative Team for entering into a fruitful exchange
with German authorities with regard to ongoing
investigations. Germany actively supports the work of
UNITAD and has dispatched experienced personnel
to the Investigative Team, in addition to the financial
support that we provide for the Investigative Team. On
a more general note, I would like to recall that building
collective support for investigative mechanisms, such
as UNITAD, is therefore one of the aims of the alliance
against impunity that Foreign Minister Maas initiated
during the high-level week of the General Assembly in
September (see A/74/PV.6).
Before concluding, let me also welcome the
commitment of the Iraqi Government to pursuing
justice and accountability. Justice is indispensable for
national reconciliation and a peaceful and stable future.
We are pleased that cooperation between the Iraqi
Government and UNITAD is going very well and that
it is receiving support from the highest political level.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Special Adviser Khan and Mr. Kachi for their briefings;
I especially appreciate Mr. Kachi’s courage as he spoke
of crimes committed by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). We express our full solidarity with the
Yazidi community in the face of the heinous crimes
committed against them.
Kuwait supports the work of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD) to achieve justice and
hold the responsible accountable. We commend the
progress that the Investigative Team has made with its
international and national members, and we hope that
it will continue its work, in close coordination with the
Iraqi Government, from the preparations stage to the
implementation of its mandate with a clear strategy, by
gathering all criminal evidence from mass graves and
the testimonies of witnesses and survivors, protecting
them, and securing physical and digital documentary
evidence, in order to achieve the goals set out in its
mandate and terms of reference.
That United Nations mechanism is of great
importance in the context of comprehensive
international measures to combat terrorism. It seeks to
render justice in order to provide redress for victims and
survivors and deter terrorists by holding members of
8/17

26/11/2019

that terrorist organization accountable for their crimes,
with a view to setting an example for others in order to
prevent these heinous acts from happening elsewhere.
The mechanism sends a very important message to Iraq
that the international community has not forgotten and
will not forget the atrocities committed by terrorist
organizations against the people of Iraq — atrocities that
violate international law and international humanitarian
law. It also underscores full respect for the sovereignty
of Iraq and its jurisdiction over crimes committed on
its territory, pursuant to national legislation and in
accordance with tangible evidence collected by the
Investigative Team, without interference, in the pursuit
of justice. We also underscore the importance for the
Investigative Team to implement its mandate consistent
with other United Nations and international community
mechanisms related to counter terrorism so as to prevent
duplication of efforts.
Terrorism, regardless of its forms and definitions,
is the common enemy of humankind and international
security. It is one of the gravest threats today with
cross-border effects, and therefore no country can face
it alone. Eradicating all forms of terrorism, with the
support and assistance of the United Nations and friends
and partners in the international community, is an
international responsibility. We need today to address
the root causes of terrorism and violent extremism and
cut off the supply lines of extremist ideologies and their
culture, which often target youth and use them to serve
these criminal acts, preventing them from contributing
to the development of their communities.
On a related matter, Kuwait strives to strengthen
international measures to combat terrorism. For
example, we are part of the Global Coalition against
Da’esh and we co-chair the Foreign Terrorist Fighters
Working Group, together with the Netherlands and
Turkey, under resolution 2178 (2014). We hope that all
States will uphold their responsibility in that context,
including the repatriation of their foreign terrorist
fighters. Much work remains to be done in the same
international and unified spirit to develop and adjust
our efforts, which must be flexible and able to counter
and thwart Da’esh’s schemes.
To conclude, we agree with the Special Adviser that
the brutality of Da’esh’s crimes has not undermined
Iraq’s unity but rather strengthened it. We once again
commend the Government and people of Iraq for
their unity, determination and resolve, which have
contributed to eradicating Da’esh, as we saw during
19-38491

26/11/2019

Threats to international peace and security

the Security Council’s visit to Iraq, We also applaud
Iraq’s commitment to prosecuting the perpetrators of
those terrifying crimes, rebuilding affected areas and
bolstering national unity among all components of Iraqi
society in order to preserve its unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this briefing
on the progress made in the implementation of the
principle of accountability for the serious crimes
and mass atrocities committed in Iraq by Da’esh. It
commends Mr. Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the
Investigative Team established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 2379 (2017), on the presentation of
his third report, which informs the Council about the
progress made and the challenges that remain to be
addressed. We also thank Mr. Kachi, member of Iraqi
civil society, for his very enlightening briefing.
My country reiterates its support for Mr. Khan and
his team and thanks him for the quality of the work
accomplished thus far. It also welcomes the adoption
of resolution 2490 (2019) extending for 12 months the
mandate of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD). My delegation urges UNITAD to continue
its cooperation with the Iraqi authorities; ethnic and
religious communities; civil society, particularly
women; and State and institutional actors, in order to
consolidate the gains made thus far.
Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced that UNITAD,
working in synergy with the Iraqi authorities, will
be able to identify appropriate responses despite
the multiple complex challenges that remain. These
challenges include the transnational nature of Da’esh’s
activities, which requires us to identify areas of judicial
cooperation between the States of the region so that the
members of that terrorist organization who are being
detained beyond Iraqi borders can be made to answer
for their crimes.
My country urges UNITAD and the Iraqi authorities
to further strengthen their cooperation in order to
develop consensus-based judicial mechanisms that will
allow for crimes committed by Da’esh to be covered
by the Iraqi legal arsenal. In that context, my country
welcomes the establishment of the UNITAD witness
protection programme and commends its excellent

S/PV. 8675

cooperation with the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq and INTERPOL.
Côte d’Ivoire is of the view that our collective
commitment to translate into concrete action the
principle of accountability for mass crimes committed
during conflicts, in particular by terrorist groups,
goes well beyond the context of Iraq and the region.
That is above all a challenge to international peace
and security that requires the mobilization of the
entire United Nations system as well as of all actors
involved in combating terrorism and transnational
organized crime.
My country wishes to reaffirm the urgent need
to find lasting responses to the structural causes of
insecurity and instability in our countries and regions.
In that context, combating poverty and unemployment
should be at the heart of our priorities, as should
ensuring better socioeconomic prospects to safeguard
youth from radical rhetoric and the temptation to
join terrorist groups. My country therefore calls on
the international community to continue supporting
national and regional socioeconomic development
strategies through investments that can generate
employment and help provide basic services. That
is also true of the much-needed economic and social
reconstruction of Iraq as well as all of the other regions
ravaged by terrorism, transnational organized crime
and community-based conflict.
To conclude, Côte d’Ivoire once again wishes every
success to Mr. Khan and the United Nations Investigative
Team. It remains convinced that UNITAD’s success
will undoubtedly constitute a positive example and
a decisive step forward in the action of the United
Nations and the international community to fully and
effectively implement the principle of accountability
for all terrorist actors and organizations that commit
mass crimes.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I join
other speakers in conveying our condolences to the
Government of France and the families of the soldiers
who died yesterday in Mali, in the framework of the
combat that we all are waging against the Islamic State.
We also wish to thank the Head of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD) for his briefing, and we
commend the valuable and strong testimony provided
to us by Mr. Kachi.

19-384919/17

S/PV.8675

Threats to international peace and security

Peru acknowledges the crucial work done by
the Investigative Team, which makes it possible to
not only ensure the necessary accountability for the
heinous terrorist acts committed by Da’esh but also to
contribute to national reconciliation. We reaffirm our
support for the vital role that it plays and welcome the
fact that it is now fully operational, which has enabled
it to add capacity in key areas such as investigation,
forensic analysis, the excavation of graves, including
the identification of missing persons, and witness
protection. Particularly important also are the
establishment of special units dealing with genderbased violence and child abuse.
We also acknowledge the positive synergies in
the cooperation and complementarity between the
Investigative Team and the Government of Iraq, which
we commend for its important contributions to these
efforts. Also particularly significant are the efforts
undertaken to provide technical and capacity-building
support in various priority areas, including investigative
activities and the analysis and preservation of evidence.
This has also contributed to the elaboration of the
legislation necessary for the prosecution of such crimes
and the use of evidentiary and informational material,
which can be made available to any States that require it.
We also stress the support that the Investigative
Team has been receiving from other States in the region
and beyond as well as from international, academic and
non-governmental organizations. We stress the special
assistance and cooperation provided by the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the need to
ensure that the Investigative team has the resources it
requires to discharge its mandate.
We would conclude by saying that while progress
has been made in the fight against the Islamic State,
we cannot play down the threat that it continues to
pose in new areas. It is clear that the success of the
work of the Investigative Team, while contributing to
the fight against impunity and ensuring the rule of law
with respect to atrocity crimes, has the potential to
contribute to deterrence with respect to fresh crimes.
Ms. Mogashoa (South Africa): I, too, join other
Council members in paying tribute to the soldiers who
lost their lives in Mali.
I thank the Special Adviser and Head of the
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD) for his informative briefing on
10/17

26/11/2019

the work of UNITAD. We commend him and his team on
their continued progress and significant achievements
in their important task of seeking accountability for the
grave crimes committed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL)(Da’esh). I also thank Mr. Kachi
for sharing his experiences with the Council.
It is clear from the detailed recent report
(S/2019/878) on the activities of UNITAD, under the
capable leadership of the Special Adviser and Head
of the Investigative Team, Mr. Khan, that significant
progress has been made in establishing a fully-fledged,
modern and professional investigative unit employing
the latest technology and international best practices,
and staffed by international experts from a wide range
of relevant fields.
Importantly, as we went through the report, we
deemed it impressive that the investigative capacity
is already yielding results, with UNITAD having
gathered large amounts of evidence in various forms,
including digital evidence, witness testimonies and
forensic evidence. It is clear to us that much thought
and planning has gone into the strategic focus of
UNITAD’s present investigations in Iraq. We are also
pleased about the close cooperation between UNITAD
and the Iraqi authorities in developing mutually
supportive mechanisms to ensure that the shared aim
of prosecuting the perpetrators of ISIL’s crimes in the
country is achieved.
Although ISIL has suffered significant setbacks
as a result of the military defeat of its self-declared
caliphate as well as the recent death of its leader, Abu
Bakr al-Baghdadi, it is clear that the threat posed by
the remaining elements, including affiliate groups that
have taken root in Africa and elsewhere in the world, as
well as the spread of the group’s poisonous ideology by
means of the Internet, are issues that we must continue
to confront.
We also note with concern the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/612) indicating that despite
the setbacks that it has suffered, ISIL remains a pervasive
threat in Iraq. Clearly this poses a destabilizing threat
not only to Iraq but also to the entire region.
In this context, having heard of the bravery that
Mr. Kachi demonstrated, which is clear from his
account of his experiences, we deem that the role of
UNITAD remains vital in implementing other efforts
to end the threat posed by ISIL, particularly in ensuring
that justice is served for the terrible crimes for which
19-38491

26/11/2019

Threats to international peace and security

the group is responsible. In that regard, it is clear that
UNITAD plays a vital role as an impartial, independent
body operating within the United Nations Charter and
employing United Nations best practices, in line with
the relevant provisions of international law, including
international human rights law, in supporting Iraqi
authorities in the challenging and harrowing endeavour
of seeking justice for the crimes committed.
While we are aware of the sensitive and challenging
legal questions that UNITAD has addressed with the
Iraqi authorities concerning the eventual sentencing of
those convicted, we have full confidence that they will
be resolved in a mutually satisfactory and cooperative
manner, and we welcome the prevailing spirit of
cooperation in that regard.
In conclusion, I would like to express South Africa’s
continued strong support for the important work that
UNITAD is engaged in and to encourage Member
States to continue supporting its efforts to close this
painful chapter in history inflicted by ISIL on Iraqis
and on humankind generally.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Special Adviser Karim Khan
and the representative of civil society, Mr. Kachi, for
their briefings.
Iraq is currently actively committed to economic
recovery, peace and stability and national reconstruction
and reconciliation, all of which are at a critical stage.
China hopes that the Iraqi Government will continue to
pursue an inclusive political solution, further promote
economic development, improve its people’s livelihoods
and speed up the reconstruction process, thereby
achieving further progress in its efforts to bring lasting
peace and security to Iraq.
The activities of terrorists in Iraq have caused
large numbers of civilian casualties and seriously
threatened national, regional and international peace
and security. The problem of the large numbers of
foreign terrorist fighters in Iraq, along with their
families, and especially their resettlement, deserves
the international community’s urgent attention. China
commends the tireless efforts of the Government and
the people of Iraq to combat terrorism, and we support
their efforts to bring terrorists to justice in accordance
with the relevant domestic law. We take note of the
third report of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)

S/PV. 8675

(S/2019/878) and appreciate the Investigative Team’s
efforts in spite of all the difficulties it has encountered.
China supports close cooperation between
UNITAD and the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq in order to provide support to the survivors
and victims of terrorist acts. We hope that the
Investigative Team will engage in close consultations
with the Iraqi Government and the parties concerned,
in strict compliance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and its mandate
and terms of reference, as set out in the relevant
Security Council resolutions. UNITAD should take
comprehensive measures to strengthen its capacity
for collecting evidence and conducting effective field
investigations, and play an active role in the process of
holding terrorists accountable and curbing the return
and spread of terrorist forces and activities.
As the Secretary-General’s report points out,
UNITAD’s capacity for tackling new challenges will
depend on its unique position as an impartial and
independent entity, as well as on the continued the
support of the Iraqi people. UNITAD should fully
respect Iraq’s national sovereignty and its jurisdiction
over crimes committed on Iraqi territory and should
play an active role in strengthening the capacitybuilding of the Iraqi Government so that it can hold
terrorist organizations accountable.
Terrorism remains a grave threat to international
peace and security, and combating international
terrorism is still an arduous task. The activities of
terrorist forces, including their attempts to spread
extremist ideology, pose major challenges to the
social stability and development of Member States.
The international community should continue to
strengthen cooperation, adopt unified standards and
take effective measures to resolutely crack down on all
terrorist organizations listed by the Security Council.
All parties, as well as the United Nations, should pay
close attention to the issue of foreign terrorist fighters
in Iraq and elsewhere. The Secretariat should follow
the situation closely and collect information effectively.
China stands ready to work with the international
community to achieve further progress in international
cooperation to combat terrorism.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, let me
join others in expressing Indonesia’s condolences to
the Government and the people of France and to the
families of the soldiers who lost their lives in Mali.

19-3849111/17

S/PV.8675

Threats to international peace and security

We once again thank Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad
Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD), for his briefing today. My
appreciation also goes to Mr. Kachi for his briefing
and, most importantly, for his support to UNITAD’s
work despite his difficult experiences on the ground. I
would like to make three brief points.
First, we are delighted to note that the Investigative
Team is now fully operational, and especially to hear that
progress has been made in the collection, preservation
and storage of evidentiary material in Iraq. Despite
all the challenges on the ground, we are pleased that
the Investigative Team has made significant progress
on its evidence-collecting activities in Sinjar, Mosul
and Tikrit.
Secondly, we underline the importance of
evidence- and witness-based investigations. Protecting
and supporting the survivors and the communities
affected should be at the centre of UNITAD’s work.
We are encouraged to learn from UNITAD’s third
report (S/2019/878) that through its investigative and
witness-protection strategy, the Investigative Team
has been able to ensure a victim-centred approach to
its interviews with survivors and is engaging with the
communities that have been affected.
Thirdly, Indonesia continues to believe that the
primary jurisdiction for holding accountable those
responsible for the atrocities committed within Iraqi
borders should lie with the Iraqi national authorities.
We are therefore absolutely delighted to hear that the
Investigative Team has been cooperating fully with the
relevant authorities and supporting Iraq in strengthening
its judicial system to bring perpetrators to justice. We
hope that this cooperation will be maintained. Indonesia
continues to support the work of the Investigative Team
and wishes Mr. Khan and his team much courage and
success in the challenging task entrusted to them.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to thank Mr. Karim Khan, Special
Adviser and Head of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD), for his valuable briefing this morning. We
also thank Mr. Kachi, the representative of civil society,
for his heart-wrenching and moving testimony.
12/17

26/11/2019

We would also like to express our deepest
condolences to the French delegation for the death of
13 French soldiers last night in Mali during a helicopter
operation as part of their mission to fight terrorism.
In the light of the briefings and the third report of
UNITAD (S/2019/878), we welcome all the significant
progress that has been made on the investigation
strategy, the collection, preservation and storage of
evidence in Iraq, the strengthening of the modalities
for cooperation with the Government of Iraq, the
Supreme Judicial Council, survivors, victims and
affected communities, and Iraqi capacity-building.
There can be no doubt that maintaining the cooperation
and commitment of all stakeholders will help to achieve
the aim of holding the members of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) accountable for war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide in Iraq.
We have also noted the fact that gender balance and
geographical distribution were observed in the selection
of staff for the Investigation Team, that work is being
carried out in teams and that victims of sexual and
gender-based violence perpetrated by ISIL are being
involved in investigations on the ground. ISIL is one of
the main perpetrators of the violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
that have taken place in Iraq, and despite the numerous
efforts to combat it, the threat remains clear. We firmly
believe that the success of the Investigative Team will
facilitate the fight against impunity and thereby foster a
resilient society. In that context, my country encourages
and urges Mr. Khan and his team to continue working
in this direction as an independent, credible and
impartial entity. We reiterate that it is vital to ensure
that the collection, preservation and storage of evidence
is carried out in strict observance of United Nations
policies and good practices, as well as international law,
and without forgetting the importance of full respect
for the sovereignty of the Iraqi people.
In conclusion, we encourage the Iraqi authorities
and the United Nations to continue to intensify their
operational cooperation with the Investigative Team.
At the same time, we assure the Investigative Team of
our Government’s support for its mandate.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): The Dominican Republic also
wishes to express its sincere condolences to France
following the loss of 13 of its soldiers in Mali.
19-38491

26/11/2019

Threats to international peace and security

We thank Mr. Khan for his detailed report
(S/2019/878) and his commendable performance in
leading the work of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD), which we strongly support. We would also
like to express our gratitude to Mr. Kachi for sharing
his moving story with us and for the valuable support
he provides to UNITAD in its investigation processes.
First and foremost, we want to commend the effective
and expeditious way in which the Investigative Team
reached its fully operational phase, as well as the spirit
of collaboration that has characterized its work, thanks
to the direct participation of various stakeholders,
especially the Government of Iraq, the Kurdistan
Regional Government and local communities, including
victims and witnesses of the crimes perpetrated by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The Dominican
Republic supports Iraq’s efforts to fight terrorism and
work closely with the Investigation Team to establish
accountability and bring to justice those responsible
for the crimes committed by the Islamic State on its
territory. We also welcome the fact that Iraq has taken
significant steps towards the introduction of legislation
that will enable the prosecution of acts committed by
the Islamic State such as war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide.
On another aspect, we take note of the progress that
has been made through the excavation of graves and the
collection of evidence and testimonies in Sinjar, Mosul
and Tikrit, as well as of the fact that the framework of
research priorities has been expanded, which is enabling
such activities to be carried out in other communities
directly affected by terrorism. We also encourage the
Investigative Team to continue to attach particular
importance to survivors of sexual crimes and genderbased violence through its special unit, as well as the
witness support and protection unit, which helps to
ensure witnesses’ rights, integrity and confidentiality.
Finally, we reiterate that the Investigative Team
must maintain its independence and impartiality in
working with other United Nations mechanisms and in
consultation with the authorities of Iraq, while always
respecting the country’s sovereignty and jurisdiction.
We believe that Iraq’s collaboration is essential to
ensuring the effective performance of the Investigative
Team and the achievement of its agreed objectives, in
line with the mandate established for it in resolution

S/PV. 8675

2379 (2017). We therefore hope that this existing
cooperation will continue to be encouraged.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I was intending to speak during our informal
consultations, but I will also say a few words here.
I would first like to thank Special Adviser Karim
Khan for his report (S/2019/878), and for the work that
has been done and the progress made in recent months.
I would of course also like to pay tribute to Mr. Kachi’s
very poignant testimony, and I would like to commend
his courage, which demands our respect and admiration.
I think it reminds us of the importance of responding
to survivors’ expectations so that the crimes committed
are recognized, those responsible are brought to justice
and the country’s reconciliation and reconstruction is
made possible.
I would also like to highlight the close cooperation
that has developed between the Iraqi authorities and
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD).
Mr. Khan described that cooperation as exemplary
and remarkable, which is very good to hear. I would
also like to pay particular tribute to the bill introduced
by the Iraqi Parliament to enable the prosecution of
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
We encourage UNITAD to collaborate with the Iraqi
authorities and other United Nations bodies in order to
ensure that the bill becomes law, taking into account the
policies and good practices of the United Nations and
international law. Belgium remains fully committed to
supporting UNITAD in its work.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
the Special Adviser for his report (S/2019/878) and
his work in Iraq, which he continues to carry out so
skilfully. We would also like to express our gratitude
to Mr. Kachi for his briefing and his work and tireless
engagement in documenting the unlawful activities of
Da’esh, which represents a significant contribution to
bringing all those responsible to justice. We welcome
the contributions of the Special Adviser and the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD) to accountability efforts by
collecting, preserving and storing evidence of acts that
may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide committed in Iraq by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant. We are particularly encouraged

19-3849113/17

S/PV.8675

Threats to international peace and security

by the advances being made in operationalizing
the Investigative Team’s mandate, including the
development of its investigative strategy, and the
activities being undertaken by UNITAD in line with its
priorities, which include the collection of testimonial
evidence and the protection of witnesses.
The establishment of trust and the safeguarding
of cooperation between the Government of Iraq and
the authorities of a number of other States, as well as
Iraqi regional and local authorities and representatives
from various sectors of society, including survivors, are
equally commendable. We look forward to seeing the
Investigative Team develop that cooperation, further
increase its operational capabilities and make progress
in its substantive work, in line with its mandate. The
efforts to ensure geographical diversity as well as a
gender, ethnic and religious balance in appointing
the Iraqi members of the Investigative Team deserve
our high appreciation. Its composition should reflect
the diversity of the Iraqi population and also increase
the Team’s capabilities in collecting evidence in the
various communities affected by Da’esh. We commend
the victim-centred approach adopted by UNITAD and
the steps taken to ensure that in particular victims
of sexual and gender-based crimes are provided with
support when engaging with the Team.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that Poland
fully supports UNITAD, its impartiality and its
independence, while welcoming the cooperation of
the different stakeholders with the Special Adviser
and the Investigative Team. Allow me to once again
acknowledge the crucial contribution of the Special
Adviser and his team to promoting accountability and
reconciliation in Iraq and to encourage them to continue
to effectively carry out their mission.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Khan and
Mr. Kachi. Our country has consistently supported
strengthening stability and security in Iraq. The main
role in that process lies of course with the Iraqi people
and Government. We are interested in eradicating the
threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and terrorism in general and are convinced
that countering that threat is possible only through
the broadest possible coordination among counterterrorism efforts.
At the same time, we are convinced that there is a
need for all those involved in combating terrorism in
14/17

26/11/2019

Iraq to respect the sovereignty of the Government and
to coordinate their efforts with Iraq. Their actions must
be in line with the stated objectives, namely, combating
terrorism and assisting the Iraqi Government in
stabilizing the situation. For its part, politically and in
practice Russia will continue to support the efforts of
the Iraqi leadership to combat terrorism and to ensure
the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.
We see the work of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to collect
evidence of crimes committed by ISIL in Iraq to be one
of the most elements of the overall counter-terrorism
strategy in the region.
I would also like to add a few more practical
comments to our statement in our closed consultations.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the members of the Council for
their condolences on the tragic loss of French soldiers
in Mali.
I am still moved by the poignant testimony of
Mr. Kachi, which reminds us of the importance of our
collective commitment. I sincerely thank him for his
briefing and express my deepest appreciation to him.
I also wish to thank the Special Adviser, Mr. Karim
Khan, for his briefing and I commend the work that
he has done. To date, some 100 people, more than
half of whom are women, have been recruited in
order to enable the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to
effectively implement its mandate. Lastly, I welcome
the presence of the Iraqi Ambassador here among us,
which shows that the international community and Iraq
are working hand in hand to fight impunity for crimes
committed by Da’esh in response to Iraq’s request to
the Security Council.
First, I wish to return to the progress made by the
Investigative Team since its establishment. The Team is
now fully able to carry out the mandate entrusted to it
by the Council under resolution 2379 (2017), namely, to
collect, preserve and store evidence in Iraq of acts that
may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. The analytical work that Mr. Khan and
the Team have begun doing concerning mass graves
is essential in order to fully investigate the facts and
to establish under Iraqi or third-country jurisdictions
accountability for those who committed crimes. We
19-38491

26/11/2019

Threats to international peace and security

will continue to support him in enabling victims to
obtain justice. It is vital that the role of victims, their
suffering and their needs be fully acknowledged. In that
context, the setting up of a witness interview facility
in northern Iraq is an important step forward that will
allow survivors to engage with investigators in a safe
environment. It is important that the highest standards
of witness and victim protection be applied.
Next, I wish to commend the close cooperation
between the Investigative Team and judicial authorities,
in particular the Iraqi judicial system. I congratulate
it on its close dialogue with the Iraqi authorities,
which is very positive and which, we hope, will allow
it to enhance its data sets. The end goal is to use the
evidence in proceedings against members of Da’esh
with full respect for the principles and best practices
of the United Nations. In that regard, it is important to
recall the unwavering position of the United Nations
with regard to not transferring any evidence in the
context of judicial cases where the death penalty could
be imposed in any place under any circumstances.
Cooperation is also essential with the relevant United
Nations mechanisms, in particular the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, which has a significantly
expanded mandate to combat impunity and protect
human rights.
Finally. I wish to once again welcome the
determination of the Iraqi authorities to incorporate
combating impunity for all crimes into efforts to
stabilize, rebuild and reconcile all components of Iraqi
society, which is key to preventing any resurgence of
Da’esh. As the Council knows, France is committed to
working with the Iraqis in combating Da’esh in all its
aspects. That message of solidarity was delivered by
Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
during his visit to Iraq last month. France has allocated
more than €70 million to humanitarian assistance and
stabilization efforts in Iraq in direct support for victims
of Da’esh. In 2019, France also set up a programme to
host 100 Yazidi women, who were victims of Da’esh,
and their families in line with the commitments made
by the President of the Republic.
France will continue to support women victims
of Da’esh through its support to the reparations fund
for victims of sexual violence launched by Mr. Denis
Mukwege and Nadia Murad, to which we have allocated
€6.2 million. Lastly, France contributes to training Iraqi
magistrates. We are convinced that combating ISIL on
the ground is just one aspect of that fight. Establishing

S/PV. 8675

the truth about crimes committed by ISIL and punishing
the perpetrators in judicial proceedings that meet the
highest international standards are equally essential to
restoring lasting peace.
In conclusion, the Council must remain mobilized
to prevent the resurgence of Da’esh in all its aspects.
We must continue to support the efforts of the Iraqi
authorities to overcome those challenges and help
UNITAD to further enhance its work and sustain it.
In that way, the objectives of justice and reconciliation
sought through resolution 2379 (2017) can be achieved.
The President: I will now make a brief statement
in my national capacity as the representative of the
United Kingdom.
I begin by extending our condolences to France
on the helicopter crash in Mali. I wanted to put clearly
on the record our support for the Special Adviser and
for the work of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD).
As the French representative just said, it is vital that the
Council continues to follow this very important issue
closely. I think that we all bear witness to Mr. Kachi’s
very sombre and moving briefing today. It is a powerful
reminder of the devastation that Da’esh unleashed.
I thank him for briefing the Council, while offering
him my deepest sympathies and those of the United
Kingdom for his suffering. I do not believe that there
is a more compelling issue question that we have heard
this month of why the Council has important work to do
than the story he told us, for which I thank him.
I would like to add our voice to thanking the
Government of Iraq. Its support continues to be
instrumental to UNITAD’s ability to do its work, and
we welcome the steps the Government has taken to
introduce legislation to allow for the prosecution of war
crimes, crimes against humanity and crimes that may
amount to genocide committed by Da’esh.
Returning to UNITAD, I thank Mr. Khan for
getting the Team up and running. It is very good to hear
that it is now fully operational, as well as the impressive
statistics about gender parity along with the vital work
UNITAD is doing on accountability on the ground.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.

19-3849115/17

S/PV.8675

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our condolences to the
delegation, the people and the Government of France
following the loss of 13 of their soldiers in Mali.
I would also like to congratulate the United
Kingdom on assuming the presidency of the Council
for the month of November. We thank Mr. Karim
Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD), for his valuable briefing and
excellent efforts.
We also thank Mr. Kachi for his briefing on
behalf of the Yazidis and the rest of components of the
Iraqi people.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2490
(2019), approving the request of the Iraqi Government
to extend the UNITAD mandate for an additional year,
until 21 September 2020. We look forward to further
efforts to expedite work to identify perpetrators and
hold them accountable so that we can do justice for the
victims of the crimes perpetrated by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant.
Following the military defeat of Da’esh in my
country, we need intensive and tireless efforts, as well as
international cooperation, to rebuild what the terrorists
destroyed; to ensure the prosecution of perpetrators,
supporter and financers of terrorist acts through
international legal mechanisms so as to guarantee the
complete elimination of these terrorist groups; and to
thwart any terrorist schemes aimed at destabilizing
international peace and security. Such international
cooperation shall include measures and procedures to
coordinate the efforts of countries and international
organizations in an efficient way, monitor airports, cut
off sources of terrorist financing, track and exchange
information on the movement of terrorists and identify
their nationalities, control borders to stop the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters, and monitor and dismantle
means and networks used by terrorist groups.

26/11/2019

to UNITAD through the relevant Iraqi authorities,
and to supporting and assisting it in implementing its
mandate, provided that the work of UNITAD is based
on full respect for Iraqi sovereignty and its jurisdiction
over crimes perpetrated on its territory and against
its people. The Investigative Team should collect
evidence and deal with this matter from a purely legal
perspective with the exclusive purpose of submitting
evidence that Iraqi courts in accordance with Iraqi law
and jurisprudence. Any use of this evidence outside
Iraqi jurisdiction must be pursued in coordination with
and following the approval of the Iraqi Government and
judiciary on a case-by-case basis and at the discretion
of the Iraqi judiciary, pursuant to paragraph five of
Security Council resolution 2379 (2017).
We also refer to the need for continuing coordination
with the Iraqi Government and its competent authorities.
Evidence must be submitted to relevant Iraqi authorities
to complete judicial proceedings.
Justice must be swift to redress the victims of
the crimes committed by ISIL. Ensuring that those
terrorists will be held accountable and providing
criminal evidence to the Iraqi judiciary will reassure
the families of the victims of crimes that are tantamount
to war crimes and crimes against humanity, perpetrated
by that brutal terrorist group.
Prolonging the duration of investigations would
have a negative impact on the condition and clarity of
evidence from crime scenes due to natural factors or
reconstruction efforts in the liberated areas or other
factors. The passage of time could thus lead to the
disappearance or destruction of evidence. This could
undermine UNITAD and the joint efforts of the Iraqi
Government to do justice to the victims.
My country looks forward to positive change and
reconstruction following the dark chapter of Da’esh. We
must turn this page as soon as possible by identifying
the perpetrators of these heinous crimes against the
Iraqi people and bringing them to justice.

We also look forward to concluding the appointment
of Iraqi experts to UNITAD in order to facilitate its
work and allow it to carry out its functions fully, as
well as well as to build the technical capacities of
Iraqi experts.

In conclusion, we reaffirm the need to fully respect
the sovereignty and jurisdiction of Iraq. We also call
on the international community to provide all the
support and assistance to UNITAD so it can carry out
its functions fully.

The Government of Iraq reiterates its commitment
to cooperating with and providing all possible assistance

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.

16/17

19-38491

26/11/2019

Threats to international peace and security

As this is the last scheduled meeting of the Council
for the month of November, I would like to express the
sincere appreciation of my delegation to the members
of the Council and to the Secretariat for all the support
they have given us. It has been a busy month. We have
been able to rally to consensus on several important
issues on the agenda. We could not have done it without
the hard work, support and positive contributions of
all members, their delegations, representatives of the
Secretariat, conferences services officers, interpreters,
verbatim reporters and security staff.

S/PV. 8675

As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the entire Council in wishing the delegation of the
United States good luck in the month of December.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

19-3849117/17
