A/64/PV.74

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

74

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 2 March 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Acharya
(Nepal), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 136 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/64/631/Add.5)
The Acting President: I should like to draw the
attention of the General Assembly to document
A/64/631/Add.5, in which the Secretary-General
informs the President of the General Assembly that,
since the issuance of his communications contained in
documents A/64/631 and Add.1, Add.2, Add.3 and
Add.4, the Federated States of Micronesia has made
the necessary payment to reduce its arrears below the
amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter. May I
take it that the General Assembly duly takes note of the
information contained in this document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 46 (continued)
Global road safety crisis
Note by the Secretary-General (A/64/266)
Draft resolution (A/64/L.44/Rev.1*)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Victor Kiryanov, Colonel-General, Chief, Road
Traffic Safety Department, Ministry of Internal Affairs

of the Russian Federation, to introduce draft resolution
A/64/L.44/Rev.1*.
Mr. Kiryanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s consideration of the issue of road
safety is of the utmost importance in the context the
efforts being made by the international community in
the field of development. Mortality and injury in road
accidents are not only a major global public health
problem; they also have a negative impact on the social
and economic progress of Member States and their
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals.
The data contained in the World Health
Organization (WHO) report (see A/64/266) is alarming.
Nearly 1.3 million people die every year and between
20 million and 50 million suffer injuries as a result of
road traffic crashes. Road traffic injuries are among the
three leading causes of death for people between the
ages of five and 44 years. According to expert
estimates, global losses due to road traffic injuries total
$518 billion and cost Governments between 1 and
3 per cent of their countries’ gross national product.
Recognition by the international community of
the gravity of the road safety issue has given a strong
impetus to robust action by Governments, with the
support by the United Nations, other international
organizations, the World Bank, regional development
banks and others at the national, regional and
international levels. Civil society and charity
organizations have also played an active role in raising
awareness and mobilizing joint international efforts.
We would be remiss not to also mention the key role

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-25517 (E)

*1025517*

A/64/PV.74

played in this process by the Commission for Global
Road Safety chaired by Lord Robertson, and by the
International Automobile Federation.
An important step forward in promoting global
interaction in this field was made by the First Global
Ministerial Conference on Road Safety, held in
Moscow in November and attended by high-level
delegations from more than 150 States. Let me express
our gratitude to all the countries, international
organizations and other key partners that contributed to
the preparatory work and to the successful outcome of
the forum.
The Moscow Conference established a solid basis
for our future joint work to ensure global road safety. It
would be no exaggeration to say that the international
cooperation in this field has reached a fundamentally
new level. We do not attribute the success of the
meeting to the efforts of Russia alone. We are perfectly
aware that its success was ensured through the active
participation of Member States; our colleagues from
the Sultanate of Oman, who for many years have
actively promoted the issue of road safety in the United
Nations; our partners in the United Nations system,
above all, WHO and the United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe; as well as non-governmental
organizations and civil society. The meeting was the
culmination of an intensive public awareness campaign
called “Make roads safe” and the meticulous
preparatory work of the many partners involved.
Addressing the Conference, Russian President
Dmitry Medvedev emphasized that road safety is one
of the major challenges to international development
and that a common strategy and joint efforts are
required to ensure global road safety. It is high time
that the international community agreed to act through
coordinated efforts to overcome the consequences of
the global financial crisis.
The adoption of the Moscow declaration
proposing that the United Nations proclaims the period
2011-2020 as a decade of action for road safety was the
main outcome of the Conference. In this regard, I have
the honour to introduce the draft resolution entitled
“Improving global road safety” and contained in
document A/64/L.44/Rev.1*, which was reissued for
technical reasons on 1 March 2010. In addition to the
initial 78 sponsors of the draft resolution, the following
States have joined as additional sponsors: Albania,
Australia, Bahrain, Croatia, the Czech Republic,

2

Ecuador, Estonia, Iraq, Ireland, Japan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Malta, Mauritius, Montenegro, Qatar,
Spain, Switzerland, the United Arab Emirates and the
United States of America.
The text of the draft resolution was agreed
through open consultations among Member States. We
are grateful to all partners for their substantive
proposals and amendments and their constructive
approach, flexibility and readiness to compromise.
Today, we are pleased to say that the General Assembly
has before it a serious and comprehensive document
that addresses all key aspects of the road safety agenda.
Let me now briefly introduce the text of the draft
resolution.
Among other things, the document notes that the
General Assembly has welcomed the Moscow
declaration adopted at the First Global Ministerial
Conference on Road Safety. It proclaims the period
2011-2020 as the Decade of Action for Road Safety,
with a goal to stabilize and then reduce the forecast
level of road traffic fatalities around the world by
increasing activities conducted at the national, regional
and global levels. It calls upon Member States to
implement road safety activities, particularly in the
areas of road safety management, road infrastructure,
vehicle safety, road user behaviour, including
distractions in traffic, road safety education and postcrash care, including rehabilitation for people with
disabilities. It also invites States to set their own
national road traffic casualty reduction targets to be
achieved by the end of the Decade.
The draft resolution also requests WHO and the
United Nations regional commissions, in cooperation
with other partners in the United Nations Global Road
Safety Collaboration, to prepare a plan of action on
practical steps to be taken, including knowledgesharing and best practices in the areas of health care,
education and transport; improving and harmonizing
national road safety legislation; and the establishment
of a working group of interested countries and
international organizations to mobilize resources for
road safety activities. The draft resolution also calls for
the holding of a midterm review of the progress made
in the implementation of the Moscow declaration.
The road safety agenda is an area of international
cooperation with enduring human value. There is no
place for political disputes or tension in this field. All
of us must share the common goal of preserving human

10-25517

A/64/PV.74

life. Our joint efforts to reduce road injury rates at the
national and international levels can not only help to
prevent the deaths of hundreds of thousands of people;
it can also contribute to the social and economic
development of countries, especially low- and middleincome countries, including in the context of achieving
the Millennium Development Goals by 2015.

Through its working group on road traffic safety,
the Economic Commission for Europe recently
published an updated version of the consolidated
resolutions on road traffic, signs and signals. Those
resolutions constitute reference tools that provide
guidelines to improve road safety, which are to be
implemented by countries on a voluntary basis.

The Moscow Conference gave us a good, robust
start. For our part, I underscore our determination to
maintain that accelerated pace with regard to practical
steps to improve road safety. I call on all delegations to
support the draft resolution and invite all Member
States to join as sponsors.

Three major reports were published in 2008 and
2009. In 2008, WHO and UNICEF launched the World
Report on Child Injury Prevention, whose findings
indicate that road traffic injuries are the leading cause
of death among children aged 10 to 19 years of age. In
2009, the Commission for Global Road Safety
launched the report entitled Make Roads Safe: A
Decade of Action for Road Safety. That report proposed
a global target to reduce by 50 per cent the
2020 forecast of road deaths. It is estimated that
achieving that target would save 5 million lives and
prevent 50 million serious injuries during the coming
decade. In 2009, WHO launched the Global Status
Report on Road Safety, which is the first global
assessment to draw from a standardized survey that
included data received from 178 countries.

Mr. Al-Hinai (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his note
transmitting the report on improving global road safety
(A/64/266), prepared by the World Health Organization
(WHO) in collaboration with the United Nations
regional commissions and other partners of the United
Nations Road Safety Collaboration. I would also like to
thank the members of the Collaboration, under the able
guidance of the WHO, for their great contribution to
the report’s contents.
The report provides an update on the status of the
implementation of the recommendations contained in
resolutions 58/289, 60/5 and 62/244 on improving
global road safety. It describes ongoing activities and
the series of global road safety developments that have
taken place in the course of the past two years. It also
recognizes the significant impact that collaborative
efforts have had on the implementation of road safety
measures, and points to the growing recognition by
Governments that action to improve road safety is an
urgent matter. Sadly, the report also notes that road
traffic injuries continue to jeopardize the advances
made around the world in the areas of health and
development. It also includes several recommendations
for the Assembly’s consideration.
Since the adoption of resolution 62/244, several
meetings, workshops and commemorative events have
taken place, including the publication of major reports.
In that connection, I would like to pay special tribute to
the excellent work of the United Nations Road Safety
Collaboration, a consortium of four partners: the FIA
Foundation, the Global Road Safety Partnership, the
World Bank and WHO. The Collaboration has provided
valuable guidance to countries on how to implement
good practices in the area of road safety.

10-25517

The United Nations regional commissions have
continued to contribute positively to regional efforts to
improve road safety. Meetings and workshops have
been organized by the Economic Commission for
Europe, the Economic and Social Commission for
Western Asia, the Economic Commission for Africa
and the Road Safety Forum for Ibero-America and the
Caribbean. All of these organizations, commissions and
stakeholders could not continue to provide such
valuable service to our countries without the generous
financial support provided by the World Bank, the
Global Road Safety Facility, the FIA Foundation for
the Automobile and Society, the Governments of the
Netherlands, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Australia
and the United States, the Bloomberg Philanthropies,
Michelin, Johnson & Johnson and Scania.
During his annual meet-the-people tour in 2009,
His Majesty Sultan Qaboos Bin Said met with the
people of the district of Sohar and spoke to them about
road accidents and their impact on the social lives of
citizens. His Majesty stated:
“While we believe that life and death are
destined by Allah, we know that the Almighty has
ordained that people should not cast themselves
upon perils. Some may die in these accidents, and

3

A/64/PV.74

others who survive may be disabled and become
a burden on themselves, their families and their
society. Therefore, we should join hands and be
aware of this issue.”
During his speech, His Majesty the Sultan urged
everyone to make this issue a subject of discussion in
their families. Road safety, he said, should be
discussed and public awareness stressed in order to
limit the number of road accidents, which are an
obstacle to progress, growth and civilization.
His Majesty the Sultan affirmed in his speech that
the relevant authorities, in particular the Royal Oman
Police, are carrying out their duties and raising public
awareness. They will do even more in the future, as
they have instructions to step up their efforts to address
this unfortunate phenomenon, which should be limited
as much as possible. His Majesty went on to say:
“[Road accidents] may be caused by a
number of factors, but the human factor is the
main cause. They may be caused by negligence in
maintaining one’s vehicle or a desire to reach
one’s destination as fast as possible. But it is
better to arrive safely than on a stretcher or in the
emergency room.”
Further underscoring the importance of road
safety, he stated:
“I advise everyone to attach great
importance to this issue. There is no doubt that all
sectors of Omani society are listening to what I
am saying from this blessed place. This is an
important issue that continues to have an impact
on Omani society.”
Here, I would like to highlight the steps
implemented by the Government of Oman at the
national level. These include the enactment of
legislation, the establishment of a national road safety
agency, the updating of comprehensive regulations to
meet the needs of the injured and their rehabilitation,
and the creation of a registry of detailed information on
the consequences of injuries in order to minimize the
impact of accidents and with the ultimate goal of
creating for our citizens an environment conducive to
achieving further social and economic development.
The Royal Oman Police has organized and participated
in a number of events in its ongoing efforts to raise
awareness of road safety issues. It has thus participated

4

in both the Gulf Cooperation Council Traffic Week and
the Arab Traffic Week.
The Directorate General of Traffic of the Royal
Oman Police established the Road Safety Institute in
2006. Its mission is to train traffic officers. The
Institute conducts a number of training programmes for
driving instructors, taxi drivers and public
transportation vehicle drivers. It also conducts
programmes
on
first
aid,
administering
cardiopulmonary resuscitation and defensive driving.
To ensure the safety of drivers and pedestrians
alike, the Royal Oman Police is sparing no effort to
ensure that traffic regulations are complied with. As
speeding is the major cause of road accidents, resulting
in 53 per cent of accidents in Oman, the Royal Oman
Police has installed high-quality, fixed-speed radar
detectors on all lit dual carriageways, and mobile speed
radar detectors have been provided to all police
departments in the provinces and regions of Oman.
Since the installation of the radar speed detectors, there
has been a significant decrease in the rate of speed
violations.
The Royal Oman Police is also concerned about
the road-worthiness of vehicles and has established
vehicle inspection stations in all of Oman’s regions.
Those stations are equipped with the most modern
technology and systems used in vehicle inspections.
With the increase in the number of vehicles and
road users, it is important that rules and regulations be
brought into line with the accelerating developments in
all aspects of life. Traffic laws have been amended to
address new and unfamiliar patterns of traffic
behaviour.
Two years ago, this Assembly adopted resolution
62/244, which called for the holding of the first global
high-level conference on road safety in Moscow. On
19 and
20
November
2009,
thousands
of
representatives from all over the world came to
Moscow, where, for the first time, delegations of
ministers and representatives dealing with transport,
health, education, safety and related traffic law
enforcement issues met to discuss progress made in
implementing the recommendations of the World report
on road traffic injury prevention and the General
Assembly’s resolutions on improving global road
safety. The Conference unanimously adopted the
Moscow Declaration, which proclaimed the period
2011-2020 as the Decade of Action for Road Safety,

10-25517

A/64/PV.74

with the goal of stabilizing and then reducing the level
of road traffic fatalities around the world.
The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
contained in document A/64/L.44/Rev.1*, in which the
Assembly would endorse the recommendations of the
Moscow Declaration. My delegation is a proud sponsor
of the draft resolution and commends it to the
Assembly for adoption.
Mr. Oyarzun (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia Herzegovina, Montenegro
and Serbia; and Iceland, State member of the European
Economic Area, the Republic of Moldova, Ukraine and
Armenia all join this declaration.
The European Union welcomes the imminent
adoption by consensus of resolution A/64/L.44/Rev.1*,
entitled “Improving global road safety”. We also note
with satisfaction the large number of countries that
have decided to sponsor the draft resolution, which
demonstrates the relevance and timeliness of this issue
and its importance to the international community. We
express our special gratitude to the delegation of the
Russian Federation for its leadership and efforts in this
accomplishment.
As noted by the World Health Organization, road
traffic injuries are a major public health problem and a
leading cause of death and injury around the world. In
the case of the European Union, involvement in a road
accident is the leading cause of death or hospitalization
for our citizens under 45 years. With 39,000 road
traffic deaths in 2008 and socio-economic costs of
around 2 per cent of gross domestic product,
amounting to €180 billion, road safety continues to be
an area for priority action in the European Union.
In 2003 the European Union set the goal of
halving the number of deaths due to road accidents to
approximately 27,000 deaths by 2010. It is a difficult
goal to achieve. In December 2009, the European
Commission hosted a conference to conclude a public
consultation exercise preceding the drafting of the
European Road Safety Action Programme 2011-2020.
More than 400 stakeholders of varied backgrounds
participated. Regional and multilateral institutions,
development banks and civil society played an
essential role.

10-25517

The European Road Safety Action Programme
2011-2020 is aimed at keeping the European Union
demanding and determined in our fight against road
accidents. It will guide the efforts of the European
Union in the coming decade. The new Action
Programme will focus on key priorities such as
accidents in rural roads, which account for 60 per cent
of the total number of deaths, and vulnerable road
users such as pedestrians, cyclists, motorcyclists and
the elderly.
In addition, we will continue building on our
previous commitments, including by strengthening
controls and penalties, adopting initiatives at the
national level to combat driving under the influence of
alcohol and/or drugs, investing in road infrastructure,
improving road traffic conditions, and improving
legislation on drivers’ licenses and fitness standards for
driving.
The Moscow Declaration, adopted at the First
Global Ministerial Conference on Road Safety, held in
Moscow from 19 to 20 November 2009, and the
subsequent proclamation of 2011-2020 as the Decade
of Action for Road Safety are proof of the international
commitment to keeping road safety high on the
political agenda. We need to continue adopting wideranging,
revised
approaches
and
exchanging
information and best practices at the national, regional
and global levels, with the active participation of civil
society and private sector. The international
community cannot be lax on road safety because every
year hundreds of thousands of human lives are at stake.
Ms. Yeoh (Malaysia): I am incredibly touched
and humbled to be here at the United Nations for this
historic meeting. I am immensely grateful to the
Government of Malaysia for affording me this
opportunity and privilege to speak on behalf of
Malaysia, as well as the “Make roads safe” campaign.
For me, as a little girl growing up in Ipoh,
Malaysia, the United Nations was something far and
distant that represented our best and greatest hopes for
the world. It still does. As members probably know, I
am an actress, but of all the roles that I have played
and all the villains I have defeated, sometimes with
pretty cool martial arts moves, nothing has been as
important or fulfilling as the role I have played on
behalf of the “Make roads safe” campaign.
Just over a year ago, I helped to launch the call
for a decade of action for road safety with a march by

5

A/64/PV.74

2,000 young children through the streets of Ho Chi
Minh City in Viet Nam. Seeing so many children all in
one place, each one with a bright, glowing future,
brought home to me the true scale of this epidemic of
unnecessary road deaths and preventable injuries.
Every day, at least 2,000 children are killed or
seriously injured on the world’s roads. It is an
unconscionable waste of energy, love and human
potential.
Back then, I knew that we could not stand by any
longer and allow this to continue. This feeling, this
determination and this pledge to end this tragic waste
of young lives were reinforced in every hospital ward I
visited and every inconsolable mother I met grieving
for a lost child. I know the General Assembly shares
that determination.
In November in Moscow, the world came
together to decide that the time had come for action. It
was thrilling to see so many leaders from every corner
of the globe committing to make road safety a priority.
All of us who care about and have worked for safer
roads have travelled a long journey together. Today is
the latest and the greatest stage of that journey, when
the United Nations shall proclaim a Decade of Action
for Road Safety. This is a marvellous achievement.
Malaysia would like to express our gratitude to
the Russian Federation and the Sultanate of Oman for
their leadership in promoting critical issues at the
United Nations.
Now the real work begins. The real challenge we
face is to translate words contained in a resolution into
real results — the only results that ultimately count:
lives saved and injuries prevented.
I am so very proud that my country, Malaysia, is
setting such a strong example. In September 2004,
realizing the urgency and need to address road safety
issues in a systematic and planned manner, the
Government of Malaysia set up the Road Safety
Department under the Ministry of Transport as a onestop agency to coordinate, monitor and implement road
safety programmes. The immediate task of the
Department was to outline holistic strategies to reduce
injuries and fatalities due to road crashes. This gave
birth to the Road Safety Plan of Malaysia 2006 to
2010, based on the four “e”s: education, enforcement,
engineering and environment.

6

The Government has also formulated a long-term
policy called the “Zero Fatality Vision”, which is a
safety policy and philosophy that covers all aspects of
safety including the driver, the road infrastructure and
environmental safety. The ultimate aim of this vision is
that nobody should be killed or seriously injured within
the road environment due to crashes.
The Malaysian road safety agenda has come a
long way in the past 13 years. The fatality index
declined from 8.2 fatalities per 10,000 registered
vehicles in 1996 to 3.5 fatalities per 10,000 registered
vehicles in 2009. In addition, for the period 2004-2009,
injury cases due to accidents as reported cases dropped
by 42 per cent.
At the regional level, Malaysia has emerged as
one of the leaders in road safety, as shown by its
election as the Chair of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) Multi-Sector Road Safety
Working Group during the fifteenth ASEAN Land
Transport Working Group Meeting held in May 2009 in
Brunei. ASEAN Governments were encouraged to
form national working groups to provide a reporting
and implementation mechanism on the progress of road
safety initiatives in respective member countries. The
ASEAN Governments also agreed to build the capacity
of non-governmental organizations to be more active in
road safety and identify funding opportunities for road
safety programmes.
The leadership that is being demonstrated by
Malaysia is resulting in real change and improvement.
I know in all certainty that the next decade will be a
decade of action for road safety in Malaysia. Working
together, we can create a new momentum to help to
ensure that this kind of holistic and sustainable
approach to road safety is a reality in many more
countries.
I know that tomorrow the United Nations Road
Safety Collaboration will meet to begin detailed
planning for the Decade of Action. The generous
funding of Bloomberg Philanthropies is now enabling
an unprecedented scale of activity by the World Health
Organization, the Global Road Safety Partnership and
other partners. Spearheaded by the World Bank’s
Global Road Safety Facility, there is now a renewed
attention to road safety in the multilateral development
banks. And I am particularly grateful to Lord
Robertson for his inspired leadership of the
Commission for Global Road Safety, and to both him

10-25517

A/64/PV.74

and the FIA Foundation for the Automobile and
Society for giving me the opportunity to continue to
advocate for road safety as the Global Ambassador of
the “Make roads safe” campaign. So I commit today to
playing my role — the most important role of my
career — in making this Decade of Action a success.
I think back to the children who marched
alongside me in October 2008 at the beginning of the
campaign for a Decade of Action. Now, it is for those
children and the millions like them that we must act to
make roads safe.
Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): For
developing countries, road traffic accidents represent
one of the leading causes of premature death and
constitute a public health problem that has effects on
our development and impinges upon people’s rights.
The data obtained by the World Health
Organization (WHO) are worrying. It is unjustifiable
that 1.2 million people die every year in traffic
accidents — one of the leading causes of death for
people aged between 5 and 44 years. It has been
estimated that, unless action is taken immediately, at
this rate road traffic accidents will become the fifth
leading cause of death in the world by 2030. In the
same context, according to the World Bank, children
between the ages of 5 and 14 will be at greatest risk;
for that group, traffic accidents will become the
principal cause of death or injury by 2015.
As noted by the WHO, 90 per cent of such
accidents occur in low- or medium-income countries.
In my country, it must be said, the figures are chilling.
Every day, 10 people die as a consequence of traffic
accidents. Over the past decade, such accidents have
caused the death of more than 32,000 people and
injured more than 342,000. Every year, such accidents
cause approximately 3,500 deaths; 78 per cent of
victims are passersby, the majority of whom are poor.
This generates further inequity, since accidents
disproportionately affect people who cannot cope with
their consequences, being unable to access health
services or take on the costs of rehabilitation.
Likewise, traffic accidents do not only cause
suffering and cut short lives; they also constitute an
immense economic loss that has a serious impact on
development in the country. According to data
collected by the Ministry of Health of my country, Peru
loses more than $1 billion a year due to traffic
accidents.

10-25517

We know that the main causes of traffic accidents
are associated with speeding, reckless or drunk driving,
mechanical failures, lack of caution on the part of
pedestrians, poorly maintained road surfaces and the
lack of signs and signals, among other things. This
shows the need for urgent and concerted action to
introduce legislative reforms, strengthen our ability to
detect violations and impose penalties, ensure adequate
logistical and technological support, improve road
infrastructure and, above all, make people aware of
road safety.
It is painful to acknowledge that traffic accidents
are avoidable and that they are caused by a series of
factors linked to State management and the activities of
businesses and the community in general.
Faced with the gravity of this situation, Peru has
introduced several measures, including the National
Road Safety Plan, whose objective is to reduce traffic
accidents by 30 per cent by 2011. The Plan has
established six strategic objectives: promote a culture
of respect for transport standards; involve the mass
media in promoting road safety; develop verification
and monitoring mechanisms for road infrastructure;
review the legal framework; designing and
implementing a reliable data-collection system; and
strengthen the actions of the National Road Safety
Council.
In the context of efforts to make improvements in
developing and enforcing standards, starting in July
this year Peru will have a new transportation code that
will increase penalties. Furthermore, in August, Peru
launched the 2009-2012 National Traffic Accident
Health Strategy with the aim of reducing morbidity and
mortality resulting from such accidents. The objectives
of the Strategy include ensuring quality, timely and
comprehensive care for people who are injured or
disabled in road accidents.
The challenges for countries such as Peru in this
area are complex, and to tackle them we need the help
of the private sector and civil society, as well as the
commitment of the international community and
multilateral bodies. To that end, my country has
co-sponsored and decisively supported the draft
resolution that we shall adopt shortly.
As the Moscow declaration says, the global road
safety crisis can be solved only through multisectoral
cooperation and the formation of partnerships among
all parties concerned in the public and private sectors,

7

A/64/PV.74

with the participation of civil society. Furthermore,
given the cross-cutting nature of this issue, addressing
road safety can make a significant contribution to the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
We view these two concepts, which were integral to the
negotiations, as being of crucial importance, and it is
on their basis that we should work throughout the
Decade of Action for Road Safety, from 2011 to 2020.
In the same context, the action plan for the Decade,
which has been endorsed by the WHO and the United
Nations regional commissions as a guiding document
in the implementation of the Decade’s objectives, is
also of particular importance.
The serious situation resulting from road traffic
accidents demands an urgent moral and political
commitment to guaranteeing road safety and ensuring
that roads lead to progress, well-being and the
development of our societies. In this context, my
country is grateful to Russia and Oman for their
initiative. We are firmly convinced of the need and we
have the political will to continue working hand in
hand with the entire international community to make
progress towards this objective.
Mr. Sammis (United States of America): The
United States is proud to co-sponsor draft resolution
A/64/L.44/Rev.1*, “Improving global road safety”. We
thank the Government of Russia for its commitment to
this critical issue. The Moscow Ministerial Conference
on Global Road Safety in November and today’s draft
resolution are important steps towards making our
roads safer. We also appreciate the efforts of the
Government of Oman, the United Nations Road Safety
Collaboration and the World Health Organization.
Each day, thousands of people die on the roads.
Every year, tens of millions are injured. The majority
of those affected are young people and those who live
in developing countries. The human and economic
costs are enormous.
To address that scourge, we must continue to
push for increased helmet and seat-belt use, along with
reductions in speeding and alcohol-impaired driving.
We must build standardized systems for collecting and
analysing crash data, promote the design of safer roads
and vehicles, and implement laws and regulations that
reflect best practices and standards. We must also
address serious emerging challenges.
The United States is deeply concerned about the
risks posed by distracted driving, particularly texting

8

while driving. Last year in the United States,
6,000 people died on the roads and more than half a
million were injured because of distracted or
inattentive driving. If we do not act, the problem will
only grow worse as the number of vehicles on our
roadways rises and communication technologies, such
as cell phones and texting devices, become even more
widely available.
We recognize that new technologies have helped
solve many global road safety challenges, even as they
have distracted some drivers from the road. The United
States believes that we must spur innovation and
harness the promise of science and new technologies,
but also work to minimize their accompanying perils.
We are pleased that this draft resolution
recognizes the great risk posed by distracted driving,
including texting while driving, and encourages
Governments, public and private corporations and nongovernmental and multilateral organizations to help
reduce that danger.
On 1 October 2009, President Obama issued an
executive order directing United States Government
employees not to engage in text messaging while
driving United States Government vehicles or
privately-owned vehicles on official Government
business, or while using electronic equipment supplied
by the Government.
We encourage other Member States, along with
the United Nations system, to join us in issuing similar
directives to prohibit texting while driving. We also
look forward to working with other countries to
document efforts to reduce distracted driving and to
develop guidance for further action.
The United States is committed to saving lives
and reducing the devastation of driver accidents, and
we look forward to working with Member States and
the United Nations to make all of our roadways safer.
Mr. Singh Puri (India): At the outset, let me say
how happy I am to see you, Sir, presiding over this
meeting this afternoon. India welcomes the opportunity
to participate in this debate on the important issue of
road safety. We would like to thank the Government of
the Russian Federation for its initiative in hosting the
First Global Ministerial Conference on Road Safety in
Moscow in November last year. We would also like to
express our appreciation to the Government of Oman for

10-25517

A/64/PV.74

its consistent support for this agenda item. India is
pleased to co-sponsor draft resolution A/64/L.44/Rev.1*.
We have carefully gone through the report on
improving global road safety (A/64/266), transmitted
by the Secretary-General. We thank the World Health
Organization (WHO) for preparing the report in
consultation with regional commissions and other
partners of the United Nations Road Safety
Collaboration.
According to the report, low- and middle-income
countries witness over 90 per cent of the world’s
fatalities on the roads, despite accounting for only
48 per cent of the world’s vehicles. Apart from the
personal suffering that such road traffic injuries cause,
they also threaten health and development gains. The
importance of addressing road safety thus has a key
development dimension. It is therefore encouraging
that the United Nations has recognized road traffic
injuries as an extensive and serious global health
problem,
requiring
coordinated
international
cooperation efforts.
In India, road transport is the dominant mode of
transportation, accounting for 70 per cent of freight
movement and 85 per cent of passenger traffic. We
have one of the largest road networks in the world,
with 3.3 million kilometres of roads. National
highways account for about 2 per cent of the country’s
road network, but carry 40 per cent of total traffic,
leading to severe congestion.
Road traffic accidents claim over 80,000 victims
a year, constituting a major public health problem, with
considerable social and economic costs. Almost half of
those who die in road traffic crashes are vulnerable
road users, including pedestrians, cyclists or users of
two-wheelers. India is therefore acutely conscious of
the imperative to address road safety and reduce the
adverse consequences of traffic accidents.
India’s economic growth lies in part upon the
rapid expansion of our infrastructure, including roads.
We are actively engaged in efforts to enhance road
safety. We believe that road safety requires the
coordination of three aspects: engineering and design,
enforcement, and education involving civil society to
spread awareness. Our response entails a coordinated
and multisectoral approach, incorporating relevant
parts of the Government, civil society and the private
sector. Our interventions seek to cover the following
phases of road traffic injury control: the prevention of

10-25517

crashes and injuries in the first place, the provision of
prompt and high-quality care to those injured in traffic
crashes, and the provision of rehabilitation and longterm care to those who need it in order to minimize
disabilities. We are striving to make road safety a
health, transportation, law-enforcement, education and
development priority.
The national highway system is being widened
and strengthened under various schemes. Plans for the
development of an Indian national expressway network
in a phased manner by the year 2022 are currently
under way. Many of the recommendations made in the
WHO report are being used as a framework for
addressing road safety.
We recognize the significance of strengthening
capacity to collect, use and share road safety
information.
Legislation
is
being
reviewed
comprehensively to meet the emerging requirements of
road safety. Information technology is also being used
in the road transport sector, including through
smartcard-based driving licences and registration
certificates. We are also taking steps to develop a road
safety culture in the country. The twenty-first annual
road safety week was observed from 1 to 7 January this
year throughout the country, involving regional
governments, voluntary organizations and vehicle
manufacturers.
International cooperation is imperative in
assisting developing countries to effectively address
issues of road safety. The availability of adequate
financial resources, technical assistance, capacitybuilding, the sharing of best practices and advocacy are
crucial in that regard. While we are encouraged by the
increase in funding reported in the WHO report,
including through private sector and civil society
involvement, we agree with the report’s assessment
that levels of funding for road safety are still not
commensurate with the scale of the problem and that
increased efforts must be made to secure additional
financial support for road safety projects. However, we
would caution against setting universal standards based
on what may have been developed in one region, and
stress that specific circumstances in various parts of
the world must be taken into account in addressing
road safety.
We strongly support the intent to increase
cooperation at the national, regional and global levels
to achieve the objectives of road safety as part of the

9

A/64/PV.74

Decade of Action for Road Safety. We also look
forward to a concrete plan of action that takes into
account the needs of developing countries for adequate
support to build capacities in this area so as to
implement the objectives by the end of the decade.
Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank the delegation of the
Russian Federation for its leadership and its
constructive and flexible spirit in the negotiations on
draft resolution A/64/L.44/Rev.1*, which it introduced
to the General Assembly today.
For our country, improving road safety
throughout the world is a significant matter, since
Mexico is no stranger to this problem. We need only
point out that we are in third place in the Americas
after the United States and Brazil in terms of the
number of deaths caused by road accidents. Figures
indicate that there are between 17,000 and
24,000 deaths a year in my country due to the lack of
road safety.
Based on the concern generated by these
indicators, two years ago we created the Mexican Road
Safety Initiative, the main objective of which is to
promote strategies and action in all spheres — public,
social and private — in order to reduce the number of
accidents, injuries, deaths and disabilities caused by
motor vehicle accidents. The Mexican Road Safety
Initiative has three main aspects. First, it takes a
comprehensive approach based on epidemiology and
public health. Secondly, it is based on scientific
evidence. Thirdly, it is based on a multisectoral
perspective.
At the First Global Ministerial Conference on
Road Safety, held in Moscow in November 2009, our
country introduced this Initiative as a common good
that could be shared by others and used as a model for
the entire Mesoamerican region, whereby it would be
called the Mesoamerican Road Safety Initiative.
Through the Initiative, the Government of Mexico has
pledged
to
devote
resources
to
research,
communication, education and training, among other
areas.
We note that, in the context of actions in support
of promoting the Decade of Action for Road Safety,
which is taken up in the draft resolution to be adopted
today, our country will be the host of two international
events. The first is the Third Latin America and
Caribbean Forum Road Safety Stakeholders Forum, to

10

be held in October, and the second is the Second IberoAmerican Encounter on Road Safety, which will take
place in March 2011.
Mexico’s commitment to addressing this problem
has also been reflected in our participation in the
Group of Friends of the Decade of Action for Road
Safety. We have therefore co-sponsored the draft
resolution on improving road safety throughout the
world. Mexico believes that the Decade will help to
ensure that our countries can correct underreporting
and improve road safety data information systems. The
main challenge for our country and for others will be to
strengthen a structure of multisectoral work at the
national level that is also operational at the state and
municipal level.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 49/2 of 19 October 1994, I now call on the
observer of the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies.
Mr. Schmale (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): I am grateful for
this opportunity to deliver a brief statement on behalf
of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies.
In 1998, we issued the World Disasters Report,
highlighting road safety as a key issue requiring
attention. Since then, the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies has become
increasingly concerned about the rapid escalation of
the global road safety crisis that now kills 3,000 people
every day and injures 50 times as many. We know that
urgent action is required to reverse the growing crisis,
which disproportionately affects young people,
particularly in low- and middle-income countries.
We also know that the deadly road crash crisis is
different from other crises in that it is neither a natural
disaster nor a war. There are no enemies in road safety.
It is entirely human-made and is all the more shocking
for being so. What makes the road crash crisis
particularly horrific is that these deaths and injuries are
entirely preventable. This crisis is also characterized by
the fact that there is little international funding to help
address it.
However, we are encouraged by the growing
international response and alignment that have taken
place over the past 10 years. We welcomed the
publication of the seminal World Report on Road

10-25517

A/64/PV.74

Traffic Injury Prevention. The members of the United
Nations Road Safety Collaboration have produced a
series of good practice manuals that address the key
road safety risks. Civil society, business and
Government partnership action are increasingly using
these manuals very concretely to make a real change.
These actions show that it is possible to share proven
cost-effective solutions across the globe, with
significant results.
We welcome these actions, and at the same time
we recognize that together we must do much, much
more to transform these small beginnings into a global
wave of positive and effective change.
National Red Cross and Red Crescent societies
are already part of the increasing global response.
Active and committed in the field of road safety, many
are mobilizing decision-makers, creating awareness
among young people and the wider public and
providing first aid services and training, often
integrating road safety in their first aid programmes.
The International Federation has integrated road
safety as a priority into its strategic direction for the
next 10 years. We work closely with the Global Road
Safety Partnership — a partnership among
Governments, governmental agencies, the private
sector and civil society organizations, whose secretariat
we host in Geneva. We and our member Red Cross and
Red Crescent societies are ready to do more and to do
better together with Governments, the private sector,
civil
society,
communities
and
international
organizations.
The International Federation is proud that
national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies are
mentioned in the operative section of this year’s draft
resolution on improving global road safety
(A/64/L.44/Rev.1*), and we are committed to acting
upon it. We welcome the draft resolution and the
coming Decade of Action for Road Safety, and we are
determined to implement activities in support of the
Decade.
In conclusion, the road crash crisis concerns us
all. We must act without delay, first to prevent today’s
deadly trend from worsening, and then to reverse it.
Our vision is a world free of road crash death and
injury. The choice to move towards this vision is ours,
collectively and individually. I can guarantee the
Assembly that the International Federation and its
member Red Cross and Red Crescent societies will

10-25517

play their role fully in the coming Decade of Action for
Road Safety. It is a matter of life and death. It is time
for all of us to act.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/64/L.44/Rev.1*, entitled “Improving
global road safety”, which has been reissued for
technical reasons.
I should like to announce that since the
publication of draft resolution A/64/L.44/Rev.1*, the
following countries have become sponsors: Albania,
Algeria, Australia, Bahrain, Canada, Cape Verde,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Estonia, Grenada, Haiti, Iraq, Ireland, Japan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lithuania, Malta, Mauritius,
Monaco, Montenegro, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Slovakia, Spain, the
Sudan, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates and the United
States of America.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.44/Rev.1*?
Draft resolution A/64/L.44/Rev.1* was adopted
(resolution 64/255).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 46?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 125
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization
Draft resolution (A/64/L.45)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce
draft resolution A/64/L.45.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): It is an honour for me to speak on behalf of
the States members of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO): the Republic of Armenia, the
Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the
Kyrgyz Republic, the Russian Federation, the Republic
of Tajikistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan.

11

A/64/PV.74

The Collective Security Treaty Organization has
enjoyed observer status in the General Assembly since
2004. In that time, the CSTO secretariat has
established contact with the Department of Political
Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Security
Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee and its
Executive Directorate.
The emerging mechanism of CSTO peacekeeping
activities facilitates the utilization of its capacities in
peacekeeping operations, including under United
Nations auspices. The goals of the CSTO, which
became a regional international organization with the
entry into force of its charter on 18 September
2003 and its registration with the United Nations
Secretariat on 16 December of the same year, are the
strengthening of peace and international and regional
stability and the collective protection of the
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of
its member States.
To achieve those goals, CSTO member States
give pride of place to political means, in accordance
with the United Nations Charter. The outcomes of
CSTO activities are proof of its true potential to
cooperate with the United Nations on the basis of
partnership and mutually reinforcing efforts. Given the
increasing importance of combating emerging
challenges and the significance accorded by the United
Nations to developing comprehensive cooperation with
regional organizations, the adoption of a draft
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization is now
on our agenda.
We are grateful to all States that participated in
preparing draft resolution A/64/L.45. Its adoption by
consensus will help to further boost wide-ranging
cooperation between the two organizations.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/64/L.45.
I should like to announce that since draft
resolution A/64/L.45 was submitted, Papua New
Guinea has become a sponsor.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.45?
Draft resolution A/64/L.45
(resolution 64/256).

12

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 125?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 126
Sixty-fifth anniversary of the end of the Second
World War
Draft resolution (A/64/L.46)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce
draft resolution A/64/L.46.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): On its own behalf and that of the 53 sponsors
from all regions of the world, the Russian delegation is
honoured to introduce the draft resolution contained in
document A/64/L.46, entitled “Sixty-fifth anniversary
of the end of the Second World War”. We note that
since, the draft resolution was submitted to the
Secretariat, the following countries have joined the list
of sponsors, in addition to those already listed in the
distributed text: Australia, Benin, Cambodia, the
Congo, Egypt, France, India, Iraq, Israel, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malta,
Montenegro, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Somalia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
Zambia.
This year, we will celebrate an important date:
the sixty-fifth anniversary of the victory in the Second
World War. We are not only entitled, but also obliged
to be proud of that common victory. Tens of millions of
people gave their lives for the ideals of humanism and
fairness to prevail. The aspiration to free humanity
from the scourge of war forever served as the basis for
the establishment of the United Nations, whose Charter
became a code of conduct for States and international
organizations and the commonly recognized basis for
the formation of a new world order and the current
system of international law.
Establishing the anti-Hitler coalition was
certainly an unprecedented example of States with
different ideologies and political systems uniting
before a common threat to all humanity. As Russian
Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov has underscored, “its
participants succeeded in overcoming their differences
in favour of a most critical undertaking”. That is why
the victory in the Second World War is particularly
important today, when the international community

10-25517

A/64/PV.74

must pool its efforts in the face of global challenges
and threats, such as international terrorism, the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
transnational organized crime. Our fathers and
grandfathers have shown us that such unity is possible.
Now, it is our duty to follow in their footsteps.
However, we must not forget that that war was a
great tragedy for the people of Europe and the world.
Today, it is important to remember the lessons of the
Second World War, to enshrine the memory of those
who died and to help preserve national historical
remembrance. This is our common history, and these
events, as we said, led to the creation of the United
Nations. We are convinced that caring about our past
and commemorating historical truths will be a unifying
and consolidating factor in helping the international
community to move forward.
Paragraph 2 of the draft resolution requests the
President of the General Assembly to hold a special
solemn meeting of the General Assembly in the second
week of May 2010 in commemoration of all victims of
the war. The Russian Federation would like to propose
that the meeting be held on 6 May.
Mr. Oyarzun (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
We will soon commemorate the sixty-fifth
anniversary of the end of the Second World War, a
tragic chapter in the history of Europe and the entire
world. The draft resolution before us today (A/64/L.46)
is a most fitting way to mark this occasion, as was the
resolution on the sixtieth anniversary, which the
European Union also supported.
We must never forget the horrors of the past and
the cruelty of war so as not to repeat them. We have the
responsibility of ensuring that crimes against humanity
and war crimes never recur. We must also remember
the sacrifices made and mourn the lives that were lost
in the war, the Holocaust, occupations and acts of
repression. We believe that an awareness of history
helps to prevent the recurrence of similar crimes.
The United Nations was conceived in order to
preserve international peace and security. In its very
preamble, the Charter states that “We the peoples of the
United Nations” are
“determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime
has brought untold sorrow to mankind”.

10-25517

We must overcome the legacies of war and build
on the progress made since the end of the Second
World War in promoting democratic values, human
rights and fundamental freedoms. With regard to its
commemoration, we must pay tribute to all those who
fought for liberty and peace. They should inspire us to
look to the future with hope and to redouble our efforts
for peace and understanding. We Members of the
United Nations must today play this crucial role
together.
We are very conscious of the fact that it is not
just the two World Wars that have brought untold
sorrow to humankind over the past 100 years. Too
often, our efforts for peace have failed. The European
Union, which was itself born from the ashes of
conflict, is firmly committed to working with the other
Members of the United Nations to put an end to this
scourge and create a more peaceful, just and
prosperous world for future generations. We believe
that an honest and thorough debate on history will
enable us to move towards reconciliation on the basis
of truth and remembrance.
We welcome the draft resolution presented by the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
and we thank him warmly for his work. The draft
resolution preserves the memory of the victims of one
of the darkest episodes of our history.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/64/L.46. In addition to
those new sponsors mentioned by the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, I would like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, the following countries have become
sponsors: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Belgium, the
Czech Republic, El Salvador, Monaco, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Slovakia and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.46?
Draft resolution A/64/L.46
(resolution 64/257).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 126.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

13
