United Nations

A/RES/58/145

General Assembly

Distr.: General
19 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 110

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2003
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/58/501)]

58/145. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/178 of 18 December 2002 and its previous
resolutions on the elimination of discrimination against women,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the United Nations, as stated in
Articles 1 and 55 of the Charter, is to promote universal respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction of any kind, including
distinction as to sex,
Reiterating the need to intensify efforts to eliminate all forms of
discrimination against women throughout the world,
Affirming that women and men should participate equally in social, economic
and political development, should contribute equally to such development and
should share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 1 in which the Conference
reaffirmed that the human rights of women and the girl child were an inalienable,
integral and indivisible part of universal human rights,
Acknowledging the need for a comprehensive and integrated approach to the
promotion and protection of the human rights of women, which includes the
integration of the human rights of women into the mainstream of United Nations
activities system-wide,
Reaffirming the commitments made in the political declaration 2 and the
outcome document 3 of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly,
entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century”, in particular paragraphs 68 (c) and (d) concerning the Convention on the

_______________
1

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Resolution S-23/2, annex.
3
Resolution S-23/3, annex.
2

03 50328

A/RES/58/145

Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 4 and the Optional
Protocol thereto, 5
Recalling that, in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 6 heads of State
and Government resolved to implement the Convention,
Recognizing that the equal enjoyment by women of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms will promote the realization of the rights of the child, bearing
in mind the special needs of girls, and acknowledging the mutual reinforcement of
the implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child 7 and
the Optional Protocols thereto, 8
Welcoming the progress made in the implementation of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, but expressing concern
about the remaining challenges,
Welcoming also the growing number of States parties to the Convention, which
now stands at one hundred and seventy-five,
Recalling the entry into force on 22 December 2000 of the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women,
Bearing in mind the recommendation of the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women that national reports should contain information on
the implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action, 9 in accordance with
paragraph 323 of the Platform,
Having considered the report of the Committee on its twenty-eighth and
twenty-ninth sessions, 10
Expressing concern at the great number of reports that are overdue and that
continue to be overdue, in particular initial reports, which constitutes an obstacle to
the full implementation of the Convention,
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General 11 on the status of the
1.
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women;4
2.
Expresses disappointment that universal ratification of the Convention
was not achieved by 2000, and urges all States that have not yet ratified or acceded
to the Convention to do so;
Urges States parties to comply fully with their obligations under the
3.
Convention and the Optional Protocol thereto5 and to take into consideration the
concluding comments as well as the general recommendations of the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women;
_______________
4

Resolution 34/180, annex.
Resolution 54/4, annex.
6
See resolution 55/2.
7
Resolution 44/25, annex.
8
Resolution 54/263, annexes I and II.
9
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
10
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/58/38).
11
A/58/341.
5

2

A/RES/58/145

4.
Encourages all relevant entities of the United Nations system, within
their mandates, as well as Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and, in particular, women’s organizations, as appropriate, to
strengthen assistance to States parties, upon their request, in implementing the
Convention;
Welcomes the rapidly growing number of States parties to the Optional
5.
Protocol, which now stands at fifty-nine, and urges other States parties to the
Convention to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the Optional Protocol;
Notes the closed meeting held by the Committee on 16 July 2003 with
6.
States parties whose reports were more than five years overdue;
7.
Takes note with appreciation of the fact that the Committee has
commenced its work under the Optional Protocol;
8.
Notes that some States parties have modified their reservations, expresses
satisfaction that some reservations have been withdrawn, and urges States parties to
limit the extent of any reservations that they lodge to the Convention, to formulate
any such reservations as precisely and as narrowly as possible, to ensure that no
reservations are incompatible with the object and purpose of the Convention, to
review their reservations regularly with a view to withdrawing them and to
withdraw reservations that are contrary to the object and purpose of the Convention;
Welcomes the adoption by the Committee of revised reporting
9.
guidelines, 12 and urges States parties to adhere to the revised guidelines, in
particular with regard to the content and length of reports;
10. Recalls the great number of overdue reports, in particular initial reports,
and urges States parties to the Convention to make every possible effort to submit
their reports on the implementation of the Convention in a timely manner in
accordance with article 18 thereof;
11. Encourages the Secretariat to extend further technical assistance to States
parties, upon their request, to strengthen their capacity in the preparation of reports,
in particular initial reports, and invites Governments to contribute to those efforts;
12. Invites States parties to make use of the technical assistance provided by
the Secretariat to facilitate the preparation of reports, in particular initial reports;
13. Commends the Committee on its contributions to the effective
implementation of the Convention;
14. Strongly urges States parties to the Convention to take appropriate
measures so that acceptance of the amendment to article 20, paragraph 1, of the
Convention by a two-thirds majority of States parties can be reached as soon as
possible so that the amendment may enter into force;
15. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made so far by the Committee
to improve the efficiency of its working methods, and encourages the Committee to
continue its activities in this regard;
16. Encourages the continued participation of members of the Committee in
inter-committee meetings and meetings of persons chairing the human rights treaty
bodies, including those on methods of work relating to the State reporting system;

_______________
12

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/57/38).

3

A/RES/58/145

17. Encourages the Committee, within its mandate, to continue to contribute
to the efforts to strengthen cooperation and coordination between the treaty bodies;
18. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 54/4 of 6 October 1999, to provide the resources, including staff and
facilities, necessary for the effective functioning of the Committee within its full
mandate, taking into account in particular the entry into force of the Optional
Protocol;
19. Urges Governments, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to disseminate
the Convention and the Optional Protocol thereto;
20. Encourages States parties to disseminate the concluding comments
adopted in relation to the consideration of their reports as well as the general
recommendations of the Committee;
21. Encourages all relevant entities of the United Nations system to continue
to build women’s knowledge and understanding of and capacity to utilize human
rights instruments, in particular the Convention and the Optional Protocol thereto;
22. Urges the specialized agencies, at the invitation of the Committee, to
submit reports on the implementation of the Convention in areas falling within the
scope of their activities;
23. Welcomes the contribution of non-governmental organizations to the
work of the Committee;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session a report on the status of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and the implementation of the present
resolution.
77th plenary meeting
22 December 2003

4
