A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/226
25 April 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 120
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/51/643/Add.2)]
51/226.

Human resources management

The General Assembly,
Recalling Articles 8, 97, 100 and 101 of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming its resolutions 47/226 of 8 April 1993 and 49/222 A and B of
23 December 1994 and 20 July 1995, as well as its other relevant resolutions
and decisions,
Bearing in mind the views expressed by Member States on human resources
management questions in the Fifth Committee during the fifty-first session of
the General Assembly,1
Having considered the relevant reports on human resources management
questions submitted by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its
fifty-first session,2
Having considered also the relevant reports of the Joint Inspection
Unit,3

1

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Fifth
Committee, 7th, 9th-11th, 13th, 14th, 16th, 21st, 23rd, 25th, 26th, 30th,
31st, 34th, 37th, 46th, 49th-51st and 55th meetings (A/C.5/51/SR.7, 9-11, 13,
14, 16, 21, 23, 25, 26, 30, 31, 34, 37, 46, 49-51 and 55), and corrigendum.
2

A/51/304 and Corr.1; A/51/421 and Corr.1 and 2; A/C.5/49/63; A/C.5/49/64;
A/C.5/50/64; A/C.5/51/1; A/C.5/51/6; and A/C.5/51/34.

3

A/51/656, annex and A/51/705, annex.

97-77263

/...

A/RES/51/226
Page 2

Having heard the views expressed by the staff representative in the
Fifth Committee in accordance with General Assembly resolution 35/213 of
17 December 1980,4
Reaffirming that the staff of the Organization is an invaluable asset of
the United Nations, and commending its contribution to furthering the purposes
and principles of the United Nations,
Paying tribute to the memory of all staff members who have lost their
lives in the service of the Organization,
1.
Reiterates its full support for the Secretary-General as the chief
administrative officer of the Organization, and underlines its full respect
for his prerogatives and responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations;
2.
Reaffirms its support for the integrity and independence of the
international civil service, and notes the efforts of the Secretary-General to
preserve these;
I. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL'S STRATEGY FOR THE
MANAGEMENT OF THE HUMAN RESOURCES OF THE ORGANIZATION
Recalling the Secretary-General's strategy for the management of the
human resources of the Organization,5
Welcoming the adoption by the Secretary-General of the concept of an
integrated approach to human resources planning and management, as reflected
in his strategy,
Reaffirming the importance of the staff-management consultative process
to the functioning and activities of the Secretariat,
1.
Notes the steps taken to implement a number of elements of the
strategy for the management of the human resources of the Organization as set
out in the report of the Secretary-General;6
2.
Regrets with deep concern that further progress in the
implementation of the adopted strategy has not been achieved, and urges the
Secretary-General to take the necessary action to ensure its full
implementation and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fiftythird session;
3.
Regrets the unsuccessful efforts to develop a management
environment and culture in the Organization that enables staff members to
contribute their maximum potential, effectiveness and efficiency;
4.
Calls upon the Secretary-General to pursue the full implementation
of his strategy as soon as possible, bearing in mind the provisions of the
present resolution;

4

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Fifth
Committee, 51st meeting (A/C.5/51/SR.51), and corrigendum.
5

See A/C.5/49/5.

6

See A/C.5/51/1.
/...

A/RES/51/226
Page 3

5.
Notes, in this connection, the phasing-in of performance
management, including the introduction in 1996 of a new performance appraisal
system;
II. ROLE OF THE OFFICE OF HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT OF
THE SECRETARIAT
Reaffirming its resolution 48/218 A of 23 December 1993, in particular
the request therein for a mechanism ensuring that programme managers are
accountable for the effective management of the human resources allocated to
them,
Noting with appreciation that the Joint Inspection Unit in its report of
5 November 19967 has dealt with recruitment, placement and promotion policies
in a comprehensive manner,
Reiterating the authority and responsibility of the Office of Human
Resources Management of the Secretariat to enforce recruitment, placement and
promotion policies throughout the Secretariat,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General on staff
representational activities,8
1.
Recognizes the role of the Office of Human Resources Management as
the primary representative of the Secretary-General in establishing human
resources policies and guidelines, and strongly requests the Secretary-General
to maintain its central policy authority;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to enhance managerial
accountability with respect to human resources management decisions, including
imposing sanctions in cases of demonstrated mismanagement of staff and wilful
neglect of or disregard for established rules and procedures, while
safeguarding the due process rights of all staff members, including managers;
3.
Also requests the Secretary-General to issue specific
administrative instructions to establish clearly the responsibility and
accountability of programme managers for proper use of human resources, as
well as sanctions in accordance with staff rule 112.3 for any financial loss
suffered by the United Nations as a result of gross negligence, including
improper motivation, wilful violation of or reckless disregard for the Staff
Regulations and Rules and established policies regulating recruitment,
placement and promotion;
4.
Deplores the high number of exceptions to the established
procedures for the recruitment, placement and promotion of staff, in
particular in the Office of Human Resources Management;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to announce all vacancies so as to
give equal opportunity to all qualified staff and to encourage mobility, it
being understood that the discretionary power of the Secretary-General of
appointment and promotion outside the established procedures should be limited
to his Executive Office and the under-secretary-general and assistant
secretary-general levels, as well as special envoys at all levels;

7

A/51/656, annex.

8

A/C.5/49/63, A/C.5/49/64, A/C.5/50/64 and A/C.5/51/6.
/...

A/RES/51/226
Page 4

6.
Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to streamline
administrative procedures and eliminate duplication, in relation to human
resources management, through delegation of authority to programme managers,
and requests him to ensure, before delegating such authority, that welldesigned mechanisms of accountability, including the necessary internal
monitoring and control procedures, as well as training, are put in place, and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to expedite the simplification and
streamlining of all personnel rules and procedures in order to make them
transparent and easier to apply, and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its fifty-third session;
8.
Reaffirms the need for the Secretary-General to use, to the
fullest extent possible, the staff-management consultative mechanisms set out
in staff rule 108.2 and to strengthen the staff-management dialogue in the
United Nations and all its funds and programmes, and requests him to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure in his proposed programme
budget for the biennium 1998-1999 provision to the Office of Human Resources
Management of the level of resources commensurate with the mandate set out
above;
10.

Recalls that the functions of staff representatives are official;

11.
Also recalls that elected staff representatives are staff members
of the United Nations;
12.
Recognizes the fact that staff representatives are entitled to an
opportunity for career advancement, decides that the period of their
continuous release shall not exceed four years, and also decides to limit such
release to elected staff representatives only, on either a full-time or a
part-time basis;
13.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly a
report on the practice of Member States relative to the financing of national
staff representation and on the proportion of staff representation;
III. HUMAN RESOURCES PLANNING, RECRUITMENT, STATUS OF WOMEN
AND CAREER DEVELOPMENT
Recalling Articles 8 and 101 of the Charter of the United Nations,
A. Human resources planning
Emphasizing the importance of human resources planning to both
recruitment and career development,
1.
Takes note of the preliminary work in human resources planning,
especially in the projection of recruitment needs at the entry level from 1997
to 2001, and requests that these activities be continued and expanded;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with relevant staff
regulations and rules, to use, to the fullest extent possible, existing
mechanisms, such as agreed termination or granting leave without pay, to
create opportunities for upward mobility for existing staff and for recruiting
new staff;

/...

A/RES/51/226
Page 5

B. Recruitment
Stressing the vital importance of the recruitment of new staff to meet
the needs of the Organization,
1.
Reaffirms that no post should be considered the exclusive preserve
of any Member State or group of States, including at the highest level;
2.
Recognizes that the system of desirable ranges is the mechanism
for the recruitment of staff in posts subject to geographical distribution, in
accordance with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United
Nations;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to take every available measure to
ensure, at the senior and policy-making levels of the Secretariat, the
equitable representation of Member States, in particular of developing
countries and Member States with inadequate representation at those levels, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, and to
include relevant information thereon in future reports on the composition of
the Secretariat;
4.
Also requests the Secretary-General, in this regard, to exercise
flexibility in the application of desirable ranges in individual recruitment
cases, bearing in mind all parts of the present resolution;
5.
Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the highest
standards of efficiency, competence and integrity serve as the primary
criteria in the recruitment of staff;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General, while ensuring that the highest
standards of efficiency, competence and integrity serve as the primary
criteria in the recruitment of staff, to ensure also that the search for and
the selection of candidates are conducted in accordance with the guiding
principles of achieving equitable geographical distribution and providing
equal opportunity for men and women to participate in any capacity and under
conditions of equality in the work of the Secretariat;
7.
Reaffirms that secondment from government service is consistent
with Articles 100 and 101 of the Charter and beneficial to both the
Organization and Member States, and urges the Secretary-General to pursue this
practice on a wider scale, as appropriate;
8.
Notes the efforts of the Secretary-General to conduct a targeted
search for candidates from Member States that are unrepresented or underrepresented and below the mid-point of their desirable ranges, and requests
that he continue to expand these efforts;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to restrict the practice of making
temporary appointments against regular budget posts or extrabudgetary posts of
one year or more to temporary needs, for example, replacement of staff on
field mission assignment and authorized leave;
10.
Also requests the Secretary-General to take effective measures to
prevent the placement of staff members against higher-level unencumbered posts
for periods longer than three months, and further requests the SecretaryGeneral to issue vacancy announcements within a three-month period;
11.
Further requests the Secretary-General to instruct all programme
managers to inform the Office of Human Resources Management of all vacancies
immediately and of all foreseen vacancies six months before the posts become
vacant;
/...

A/RES/51/226
Page 6

12.
Notes that the posts subject to the desirable range formula are
limited to the current level of 2,700 posts;
13.
Requests that the Secretary-General not include staff members
recruited against support account posts in the desirable range calculation;
14.
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to apply the
requirements of Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter to recruit staff on
as wide a geographical basis as possible to all posts outside the desirable
ranges;
15.
Reaffirms the policy of the Secretary-General that appointment to
P-1 and P-2 posts and to posts requiring special language competence shall be
made exclusively through competitive examinations and that appointment to
posts at the P-3 level shall normally be made through competitive
examinations;
16.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to hold national
competitive examinations for posts at the P-2 and P-3 levels as a useful tool
for selecting the best qualified candidates from inadequately represented
Member States; special attention should be paid to the prospects of staff for
promotion to the P-3 level and to the need to conduct such examinations with
maximum efficiency and economy;
17.
Invites the Member States concerned to participate in those
examinations;
18.
Requests the Secretary-General not to decrease the proportion of
entrance-level posts at the P-1 to P-3 levels for budgetary purposes;
19.
Also requests the Secretary-General, notwithstanding the
provisions of section V of the present resolution, to offer or to continue to
offer probationary appointments to all staff members who have passed a
competitive recruitment examination and to consider all such staff members for
conversion to permanent appointment after completion of the period of
probationary service;
20.
Further requests the Secretary-General, in the case of staff
recruited through competitive examinations, to ensure that only those who meet
the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity established in
the Charter are granted permanent appointments;
21.
Requests the Secretary-General to complete the realignment with
the national competitive examination of the competitive examination for
promotion to the Professional category of staff members from other categories,
in particular regarding academic qualifications;
22.
Also requests the Secretary-General to make proposals on the
introduction of a probationary period for successful candidates in the
competitive examinations for promotion to the Professional category of staff
members from other categories;
23.
Further requests the Secretary-General to report on the question
of geographical imbalance resulting from promotions, through the competitive
examination for promotion to the Professional category of staff members from
other categories, to posts subject to geographical distribution;
24.
Urges the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures,
including instructions to department heads, as needed, to place all successful
candidates from the national competitive examinations within one year, subject
to the availability of posts;
/...

A/RES/51/226
Page 7

25.
Requests the Secretary-General to accord priority consideration to
successful candidates from the national competitive examinations who have not
been placed within one year for all other vacancies, including those of short
duration;
26.
Also requests the Secretary-General to extend to consultants and
to personnel provided on a non-reimbursable basis the current practice of
barring interns from applying for or being appointed to posts in the
Secretariat for a period of six months after the end of their internships, and
decides that persons on short-term appointments filling regular budget posts
or extrabudgetary posts of one year or more cannot apply for or be appointed
to their current post within six months of the end of their current service;
27.
Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that persons
serving in peacekeeping or other field missions become eligible for
consideration for internal vacancies in the Secretariat after having served
for at least twelve months; should they be considered for appointment,
established recruitment criteria and relevant rules shall apply;
28.
Requests the Secretary-General to resume normal recruitment
activities at all levels as soon as possible;
C. Status of women in the Secretariat
Reaffirming that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee
of the General Assembly entrusted with responsibility for administrative,
budgetary and human resources management matters, including, in this context,
the question of the representation of women in the Secretariat,
Welcoming the achievement of the goal of a 35 per cent overall
participation rate of women in posts subject to geographical distribution,
Noting with concern that the goal set in its resolution 45/239 C of
21 December 1990 of a 25 per cent participation rate of women in posts at the
D-1 level and above by 1995 is still far from being achieved,
Recalling its resolution 51/67 of 12 December 1996, including the
reaffirmation of the goal of a 50/50 gender distribution by the year 2000,
Concerned that this goal may not be met, especially at the policy-making
and decision-making levels of D-1 and above,
Noting that the overall percentage of representation of women in all
Professional posts was 33.66 as at 31 December 1996,
Reaffirming that the Secretary-General, in his efforts to achieve this
goal, should take into account the principle that the paramount consideration
shall be the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency,
competence and integrity, with full respect for the principle of equitable
geographical distribution,
1.
Urges the Secretary-General fully to implement and monitor the
strategic plan of action for the improvement of the status of women in the
Secretariat (1995-2000);9
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue his work to create a
gender-sensitive work environment, through the implementation of all

9

A/49/587 and Corr.1, sect. IV.
/...

A/RES/51/226
Page 8

appropriate human resources management policies and procedures, ensuring that
managers are evaluated on their activities in this regard in the context of
the performance appraisal system;
3.
Also requests the Secretary-General to develop a family leave
programme for United Nations staff without creating supplementary leave
entitlements, and to report thereon to the General Assembly as soon as
possible;
4.
Decides to consider, in the context of its consideration of the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 1998-1999, the structure and source
of funding for the Focal Point for Women, and requests the Secretary-General
to make proposals in this regard with a view to ensuring the provision of an
adequate level of resources commensurate with its mandate;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures, as
soon as possible, to allow the mandate of the Focal Point for Women to be
fulfilled;
6.
Encourages the Secretary-General, consistent with Article 101 of
the Charter of the United Nations, to appoint more women at the D-1 level and
above so as to reduce the gender gap and to reach the mandated General
Assembly target of 25 per cent women in senior decision-making-level positions
as soon as possible;
7.
Urges the Secretary-General, consistent with Article 101 of the
Charter, to increase the number of women employed in the Secretariat from
developing countries, in particular those which are unrepresented or underrepresented and from countries that have a low representation of women,
including countries with economies in transition;
8.
Strongly encourages Member States to support the efforts of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies to increase the percentage of
women in Professional posts, especially at the D-1 level and above, by
identifying and regularly presenting more women candidates and by encouraging
women to apply for posts in the Secretariat of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies;
D. Career development
Recognizing that career development is an indispensable part of
effective human resources management,
Noting with concern the absence of progress in developing a fully
integrated career development system,
1.
Regrets that the Secretary-General has not yet established a
career development policy in the Secretariat, and requests him to establish
such a policy as soon as possible and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fifty-third session;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to meet the goals and objectives
set by the General Assembly in various resolutions by establishing, as a
matter of priority, a comprehensive career development and promotion system;
3.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-third session on how linguistic qualifications are taken
into account in the performance appraisal system and the recruitment and
promotion policy, including for language staff;

/...

A/RES/51/226
Page 9

4.
Further requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly on the feasibility of holding the national competitive examinations
in the six official languages, without prejudice to the mandatory knowledge of
English and French as working languages;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to make proposals aimed at ensuring
that nationals of Member States whose mother tongue is not an official or
working language of the United Nations are not placed at a disadvantage when
taking the national competitive examinations;
6.
Also requests the Secretary-General to pursue the development and
implementation of the managed reassignment programmes for entry-level and
other staff as outlined in his report on the implementation of his strategy,10
and to budget the required posts accordingly;
7.
Notes that only modest progress has been made towards achieving
greater staff mobility for internationally recruited staff as called for in
the strategy, and reiterates the importance of making substantive progress
towards that objective;
8.
Regrets that the report on mobility requested in section V,
paragraph 2, of resolution 49/222 A has not yet been submitted to the General
Assembly, and requests the Secretary-General to submit that report to the
Assembly at its fifty-third session;
9.
Notes with concern the fact that delays in completion of
performance appraisal reports have an adverse effect on staff members being
considered by the appointment and promotion bodies, and requests the
Secretary-General to take steps to ensure that the managers preparing these
reports are held accountable for any such delays;
10.
Requests that, to the extent possible for a fair evaluation of
staff members, the recruitment and promotion procedure not be postponed to the
detriment of staff members for want of performance appraisal reports;
11.
Requests the Secretary-General to utilize the performance
appraisal system to foster staff-management dialogue, including the
identification of staff development and career opportunities, and to report to
the General Assembly at its resumed fifty-first session on the findings of the
review of the first cycle of the performance appraisal system;
12.
Stresses the fact that the new performance appraisal system is
only one of the elements of a comprehensive career development plan in the
Secretariat;
13.
Notes with appreciation the strengthened training programmes,
inter alia, people management training, upgrading of substantive skills,
information technology, communications and training in all six official
languages on an equal basis, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to
invest in the Organization's future capacity by sustaining and expanding these
programmes in order to meet organizational needs and individual career
development aspirations;
14.
Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to strengthen
further the professional training of the staff, so as to foster management
capacity and to ensure that staff continue to receive necessary refresher
training over the course of their careers;

10

A/C.5/51/1, paras. 29-31.
/...

A/RES/51/226
Page 10

IV. REDEPLOYMENT
1.
Notes the impact of the economy measures on the personnel policies
of the Organization;
2.
Recognizes the need to maintain an adequate environment in the
Secretariat and to sustain the morale of staff members;
3.
Reiterates its request contained in paragraph 12 of its resolution
51/221 B of 18 December 1996, and decides to consider the report on the
situation of staff members on the redeployment list as a matter of priority
during the next part of its resumed fifty-first session;
4.
Recognizes that measures related to personnel matters invoked in
order to obtain savings should not entail changes in the Staff Regulations and
Rules without the prior approval of the General Assembly;
V. RATIO BETWEEN CAREER AND FIXED-TERM APPOINTMENTS
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the ratio between
career and fixed-term appointments,11
1.
Underlines the importance of the concept of career service for
staff members performing continuing core functions;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to make efforts to achieve the
level of 70 per cent of permanent appointments in posts subject to
geographical distribution and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
fifty-third session;
3.
Decides that five years of continuing service as stipulated in its
resolution 37/126 of 17 December 1982 do not confer the automatic right to a
permanent appointment, and also decides that other considerations, such as
outstanding performance, the operational realities of the organizations and
the core functions of the post, should be duly taken into account;
4.
Endorses in principle the introduction of a dual-track system of
career and non-career appointments, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session detailed proposals
for the implementation of that system, including a definition of continuing
core functions with a full explanation of the manner in which such a
definition would be applied and the text of any necessary amendments to the
Staff Regulations and Rules that would be required in order to implement the
new system;

11

A/C.5/51/34.
/...

A/RES/51/226
Page 11

VI. CONSULTANTS
Having considered the summary of the principal findings, conclusions and
recommendations of the Board of Auditors12 and the related comments of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,13
Noting with deep concern that, despite repeated recommendations by the
Board, serious irregularities persist in the identification, terms of
reference, hiring, remuneration and management of consultants, including lack
of geographical balance,
1.
Expresses its concern about the practice of using consultants to
carry out functions assigned to established posts, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to refrain from this practice;
2.
Notes with concern the observations of the Board of Auditors that
a number of findings warrant further investigation with a view to taking
appropriate action against personnel responsible for such malpractice,14 and
requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate action in this regard and
to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-second session;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General and the executive heads of the
United Nations organizations and programmes to ensure selection of consultants
on a more competitive basis and to keep the instances of recourse to sole
candidates to a strict minimum, each such case being formally approved at an
appropriate level of authority, on an exceptional basis, prior to engagement;
4.
Also requests the Secretary-General to prepare, no later than the
end of 1997, comprehensive policy guidelines on the terms of reference
(including objectives, targets and output delivery dates), selection, hiring
and renewal of consultants and ensuring transparency and objectivity in the
selection process, and to submit those guidelines to the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions for review before their consideration
by the General Assembly at its fifty-second session under the item entitled
"Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board
of Auditors";
5.
Further requests the Secretary-General to revise the assessment
form on consultants to make it more detailed and more clearly indicative of
the quality of the consultant's work and his or her ability to undertake
future assignments;
6.
Endorses the recommendations made by the Board of Auditors in its
report,15 and requests the Secretary-General to implement them;
7.
Also endorses the recommendation of the Advisory Committee that
the Secretariat resume the past practice of submitting, on a biennial basis
and in conjunction with the report requested by the Committee on the hiring of

12

A/51/283, annex.

13

See A/51/533.

14

Ibid., para. 31.

15

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement
No. 5 (A/51/5), vol. I, sect. II, paras. 155-189.
/...

A/RES/51/226
Page 12

retired staff, a report on the hiring and use of consultants, following the
format of past reports on the subject;16
VII. REPORTING TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, under
the appropriate agenda items, reports on the following questions:
(a)

As soon as possible
A family leave programme for United Nations staff;

(b)

At its resumed fifty-first session

The findings of the review of the first cycle of the performance
appraisal system;
(c)

At its fifty-second session

(i)

The appropriate action taken against personnel responsible for
malpractices identified by the Board of Auditors;

(ii)

Comprehensive policy guidelines on consultants, to be submitted
through the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions;

(d)

At its fifty-third session

(i)

Information on measures taken to ensure equitable representation
of Member States at the senior and policy-making levels of the
Secretariat, to be included in the report on the composition of
the Secretariat;

(ii)

The full implementation of the strategy for the management of the
human resources of the Organization;

(iii)

Delegation of authority;

(iv)

The simplification and streamlining of all personnel rules and
procedures;

(v)

Staff-management consultative mechanisms;

(vi)

The practices of Member States relative to national staff
representation;

(vii)

Proposals on the introduction of a probationary period for
successful candidates in the competitive examination for
promotion to the Professional category of staff members from
other categories;

(viii) The question of geographical imbalance resulting from promotions
of successful candidates in the competitive examination for
promotion to the Professional category of staff members from
other categories;
(ix)

16

Career development policy;

A/51/533, para. 44.
/...

A/RES/51/226
Page 13

(x)

Linguistic qualifications in the context of the performance
appraisal system and the recruitment and promotion policy;

(xi)

The feasibility of holding the national competitive examinations
in the six official languages, including proposals to ensure that
nationals of Member States whose mother tongue is not an official
language of the United Nations are not placed at a disadvantage;

(xii)

Mobility;

(xiii) The efforts made by the Secretary-General to achieve the level of
70 per cent of permanent appointments in posts subject to
geographical distribution;
(xiv)

Detailed proposals for the implementation of a dual-track system
of career and non-career appointments;

(xv)

The hiring of retirees and the hiring and use of consultants.
95th plenary meeting
3 April 1997
