37

Resolutions adopted on the repons of the Fourth Commilltee

have been granted, scholarships or fellowships, particularly with regard to facilitating their travel formalities;
4. Requests that applications for scholarships received from inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories should be transmitted simultaneously to the
offering States for consideration and to the Administering Members concerned for information;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its s_eventeenth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution.

1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

1697 (XVI). Preparation and training of indigenous civil and technical cadres in NonSelf-Governing Territories
The General Assemply,
Recalling its resolution 1534 (XV) of 15 December
1%0,
Taking note of the statements made by the Administering Members to the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories at its twelfth
session on the preparation and training of indigenous
civil and technical cadres, 18
Reiterating that the existence of adequate indigenous
civil servants and technical personnel in the Non-SelfGoverning Territories is necessary for the effective implementation of satisfactory plans and programmes of
development in the educational, social and economic
fields,
Noting the observation of the Committee that because
of the lack of information it has not been able fully to
examine the problem of the preparation and training
of indigenous civil servants and technical personnel
in Non-Self-Governing Territories, 14
Considering that, in the light of the Declaration on
the granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960, immediate steps shall be taken to transfer all powers to the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories without any conditions or reservations,
Believing that the rapid preparation and training of
indigenous, civil and technical cadres in N on-Self-Governing Territories will help towards the achievement
of the purposes of resolution 1514 (XV),
1. Considers that the situation prevailing in various
dependent territories in respect of the strength, composition and state of training of indigenous civil servants and technicaL personnel is unsatisfactory;
2. Regrets that due attention has not been paid to
that problem ;
3. Urges the Administering Members to take immediately all necessary measµres to increase the
strength of indigenous civil service and technical cadres
and to accelerate their training in public administration
and other essential technical skills ;
4. Further urges the Administering Members to
take more extensive and expeditious measures towards
the replacement of expatriate personnel. by indigenous
11
lbid., Sixteenth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/4785),
part one, annex IV.
26
Ibid., part one, para. 36.

officers, especially in positions of high administrative
responsibility;
5. Invites once again the Administering Members
to make fuller use of the United Nations technical
assistance programme for training in public administration and related fields;
6. Requests the Administering Members to transmit
complete and detailed information concerning the training facilities for, and current strength, composition and
state of the preparation of, civil and technical services
in the Territories under their administrations, in time
for its careful examination and study by the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories at its next session;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
special report on that subject, for the consideration of
the General Assembly at its seventeenth session, taking
into account the information submitted by the Administering Members and the observations, recommendations and conclusions thereon of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories.
·

1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

1698 (XVI). Racial discrimination in Non-Self.
Governing Territories
The General Assemvly,
Recalling that, in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960 entitled "Declaration on the granting
of independence to colonial countries and peoples", it
expressed the belief that an end must be put to colonialism and all practices of segregation and discrimination associated therewith,
Recalling further its resolution 1536 (XV) of 15
December, 1960,
Noting with deep concern, from the information
contained in the report of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories,15 that racial
discrimination persists and that the recommendations
of the General Assembly contained in resolution 1536
(XV) have not yet been implemented,
Endorsing the view of the Committee that on no
grounds whatsoever can the existence of racial discrimination in any aspect of life in the Non-Self-Governing Territories be justified,
Considering that racial discrimination and segregation in Non-Self-Governing Territories can be eradicated fully and with the greatest speed by the faithful
implementation of the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples, and
that, accordingly, the efforts of the United Nations
should be concentrated on that task,
1. Condemns resolutely the policy and practice of
racial discrimination and segregation in Non-Self-Governing Territories;
2. Urges the Administering Mern!Jers to include,
among the measures that would contribute to the implementation of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples, steps
to ensure:
(a) The immediate rescinding or revocation of all
laws and regulations which tend to encourage or
115

Ibid., part two, section VIII.

38

General ABsembly-Sixteenth S e s s i o n = - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

sanction, directly or indirectly, discriminatory policies
and practices based on racial considerations, the adoption of legislative measures making racial discrimination and segregation punishable by law, and the discouragement of such practices based on racial considerations by all other means possible, including administrative measures;
( b) The immediate extension to all inhabitants of
the full exercise of basic political rights, in particular
the right to vote, and the establishment of equality
among the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take measures
for the immediate and large-scale dissemination of the
present resolution in the Non-Self-Governing Territories through all the appropriate media of mass communication, in the prii;icipal local languages as well as in
the languages of the Administering Members;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare, not later than September 1962, a report on the
implementation of the present re5olution for the consideration of the General Assembly and any other body
which the Assembly may appoint to assist it in the
implementation of resolution 1514 (XV).

1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.
1699 (XVI). Non-compliance of the Government
of Portugal with Chapter XI of the Charter
of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1542 (XV)

The General Assembly,
Recalling that by resolution 1542 (XV) of 15 December 1960 it declared that an obligation exists on the
part of the Government of Portugal to transmit information under Chapter XI of the Charter of the
United Nations concerning Non-Self-Governing Territories under its administration, and that this obligation should be discharged without further delay,
Noting with deep regret that the Government of
Portugal has refused and still continues to refuse to
submit information on its Non-Self-Governing Territories or to participate in the work of the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories,
as called for by General Assembly resolution 1542
(XV) and Chapter XI of the Charter,
Recalling further the principles set forth in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 entitled
"Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples",
Considering that the provisions of the said Declaration and any decision of the General Assembly concerning its implementation are fully applicable to the
Territories under Portuguese administration equally
with other Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting the continuing deterioration of the situation
in the Territories under Portuguese administration,
1. Cond,emns the continuing non-compliance of the
Government of Portugal with its obligations under
Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations and
with the terms of General Assembly resolution 1542
(XV), and its refusal to co-operate in the work of the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories;

2. Considers it necessary that, pending the fulfilment of these obligations by the Government of Portugal, the General Assembly must, for its part, continue
to discharge its own obligations and responsibilities towards the inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories under Portuguese administration;
3. Decides to establish a Special Committee of
seven members to be elected by the General Assembly
to examine as a matter of urgency, within the context
of Chapter XI of the Charter and relevant resolutions
of the Assembly, such information as is available concerning Territories under Portuguese administration,
and to formulate its observations, conclusions and recommendations for the consideration of the Assembly
and any other body which the Assembly may appoint
to assist it in the implementation of its resolution
1514 (XV);
4. Requests the Secretary-General, pending the
compliance by Portugal with its obligations under
Chapter XI of the Charter to transmit information on
conditions in the Territories under its administration,
to prepare for the us~ of the Special Committee, on the
basis of available information, background papers containing information on conditions prevailing in the Territories under the administration of Portugal;
5. Authorizes the Special Committee, in order that
information available to it may be as up to date and
authentic as possible, to receive petitions and hear
petitioners concerning conditions prevailing in Portuguese Non-Self-Governing Territories;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to furnish the
Special Committee with such necessary secretarial and
other assistance as it may require in the performance
of its tasks;
7. Requests Member States to use their influence to
secure the compliance of Portugal with its obligations
under the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the
General As!,embly;
8. Further requests Member States to deny Portugal any support and assistance which it may use for
the suppression of the peoples of its Non-Self-Governing Territories.
1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

*

* *
At its 1257th meeting, on 20 December 1961, the Fourth
Committee, acting on behalf of the General Assembly, elected
the members of the Special Committee established under
paragraph 3 of the above resolution. At its 1087th plenary
meeting, on 20 December 1961, the General Assembly approved
the election.
The following Member States were elected: BULGARIA, CEYLON, COLOMBIA, CYPRUS, GUATEMALA, GUINEA and NIGERIA.

1700 (XVI). Question of the renewal of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Having recognized the usefulness and value of the
work of the Committee on Information from Non-SelfGoverning Territories in the interests of the advancement of peoples of Nop-Self-Governing Territories and
of the attainment of the objectives set forth in Chapter
XI of the Charter of the United Nations,
