S/PV.8304

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8304th meeting

Friday, 29 June 2018, 3.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Djédjé
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alahmad
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Lewicki
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Clay
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Mine action
Report of the Secretary-General on a comprehensive approach to mine action
(S/2018/623)

S/PV.8304

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

annual report, over 8,500 casualties of mines, explosive
remnants of war and victim-operated improvised
explosive devices. Ongoing conflicts and the difficulty
of access to contaminated areas during active combats
are among the main causes of this unfortunate trend.
The figure represents over twice as many victims as
four years ago. Over 2,000 of those victims were killed,
nearly a quarter of whom were children. Considering
the difficulty of gathering data during active conflicts,
it is likely that the actual number of casualties is
much higher.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Mine action
Report of the Secretary-General on a
comprehensive approach to mine action
(S/2018/623)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Alexander Zouev, Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Institutions in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/623, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on comprehensive approach to
mine action.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zouev.
Mr. Zouev (spoke in Russian): A year ago, on
30 June 2017, the Security Council adopted resolution
2365 (2017), the first resolution on mine action (see
S/PV.7992). At the same time, the Security Council
acknowledged the threat created by explosive objects
to civilians and peacekeepers, as well as the acute need
to carry out mine action in order to mitigate the threat.
With the framework of the Office for the Rule of Law
and Security Institutions, the United Nations Mine
Action Service, in coordination with bodies within the
United Nations system as well as with entities outside
the Organization, is implementing the resolution.
The report that we are discussing today (S/2018/623)
contains a short overview of what we have achieved so
far. It also describes the issues we are encountering as
we carry out our mine action.
(spoke in English)
After years of decrease, casualty numbers from
explosive hazards are on the rise again. Despite the
clearance efforts of the United Nations, Member States
and non-governmental organizations, the International
Campaign to Ban Landmines recorded, in its latest
2/18

29/06/2018

The clearance of landmines, explosive remnants
of war and improvised explosive devices does more
than just save lives. Mine action is a precondition for
stabilization and peacebuilding — and, eventually,
sustainable development — to take hold. Once
explosive remnants of war are removed from critical
infrastructure like hospitals, power plants and watertreatment facilities, rehabilitation and reconstruction of
public services can begin.
The resulting opportunities for progress, in turn,
increase the likelihood that peace can be sustained in
the long term. Moreover, mine action helps prevent
explosive material from being harvested for use by
armed and terrorist groups, which makes mine action a
vital element of the nexus between peace and security
and development, and a cornerstone in preventing any
relapse into future conflict.
The report before the Council today notes that mine
action is critical to the safety, security and mobility of
United Nations personnel. In 2017, 59 peacekeepers
lost their lives through malicious acts involving the
use of explosive devices, and 150 more were injured.
Contexts like Mali and Somalia continue to be highly
threatening environments for the safe conduct of
Security Council mandates.
The Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiative seeks to make our missions stronger and safer.
We owe it to the personnel we deploy on the ground
to provide them with the right training, knowledge
and equipment to safely conduct the United Nations
mandate. Raising awareness, training and building
capacity to mitigate the threat posed by explosive
weapons are critical aspects of this effort. Through their
mine-action activities, peace operations also protect
civilians and enable the delivery of humanitarian aid
to those in need.
18-20346

29/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

In armed conflicts, improvised explosive devices
have become the main driver of increased deaths and
injuries among civilians and peacekeepers. Peace
operations are more effective, and lives are saved, when
the threat posed by explosive hazards is considered
from the earliest stages of planning and programming.
In his Agenda for Disarmament, which was
launched last month, the Secretary-General called for
a whole-of-system approach to this increasingly deadly
threat. Under the leadership of the United Nations Mine
Action Service, United Nations entities are working
towards a more effective and integrated response.
Troop-contributing countries, too, must step up their
efforts to prepare peacekeepers for the threats they face
in their deployments. The United Nations will continue
to provide support to countries seeking to improve
their national mine-action management. I greatly thank
those Member States that have implemented measures
to mitigate the risk to their citizens of explosive
devices, including by acceding to or ratifying relevant
international instruments.
(spoke in French)
Resolution 2365 (2017) has made mine action
one of the main priorities for the Organization. As a
vital element in the prevention of casualties and the
maintenance of peace and security, it is precisely
there — at the forefront of United Nations action — that
mine action must remain. The increasing number of
victims shows that we cannot afford to be complacent.
On behalf of the Secretary-General, I urge Member
States in a position to do so to provide sustainable,
predictable and unearmarked funding to the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in
Mine Action.
The annual review of mine action by the Security
Council, based on a report on the implementation of
the resolution, would continue to give due attention to
the threat posed by landmines, explosive remnants of
war and improvised explosive devices. The Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Mine Action
Service of the Office of the Rule of Law and Security
Institutions will be ready at any time to inform the
Council on specific mine-action issues.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Zouev
for his informative briefing. I suggest that he not stop
at the three languages he just used and next time use at
least four official languages of the United Nations.

S/PV. 8304

I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council who wish to make a statement.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I will speak in only one of
the official languages of the Organization.
Bolivia wishes to express its gratitude for the report
presented by the Assistant Secretary-General for the
Rule of Law and Security Institutions, Mr. Alexander
Zouev (S/2018/623), and we also thank the President and
the delegation of Russia for scheduling today’s meeting.
Today marks one year since the adoption of
resolution 2365 (2017) (see S./PV.7992), which, as the
first Security Council resolution dealing with mine
action issues, was a milestone. The report submitted
by the Secretary-General in the framework of that
resolution allows the members of the Security Council to
take a comprehensive look at the threat that landmines,
explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices pose to civilians during armed conflicts, and
even many years after their conclusion. As an example,
the report notes that, in Cambodia, despite the fact
that the ceasefire was signed more than 25 years ago,
2017 was the first year in which there was a full month
without any record of casualties due to landmines or
unexploded ordnance.
Unfortunately, the number of victims of landmines,
explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices continues to increase. In 2017, there were more
than 8,600 victims, more than double the number in
2014. We must emphasize that the indiscriminate use
of such devices disproportionately affects the civilian
population, with frightening consequences, particularly
for children, who are killed or maimed. This situation is
exacerbated by the ongoing urbanization of conflicts.
Improvised explosive devices also have a negative
impact on the performance of peacekeeping operations
and pose an ongoing threat to the lives of their
members and of humanitarian workers. By way of
example, since the establishment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali in 2013, the Mission has recorded more than
350 victims, 65 per cent of whom lost their lives due to
improvised explosive devices. In addition to posing a
threat to humanitarian workers, improvised explosive
devices hinder the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
They also limit the movement of internally displaced
persons and restrict their return home.

18-203463/18

S/PV.8304

Maintenance of international peace and security

29/06/2018

Mine action is crucial to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, since programmes in those areas
allow public services to be rebuilt, foster sustainable
development and prevent weapons and explosive
material from being used by armed groups and terrorist
groups. For example, land is used for farming, children
can return to school, and water and electricity can be
restored only after an extensive clean-up operation.
There is therefore an intrinsic link between mine action,
security and development. It is for those reasons that we
underscore the work conducted by the United Nations
Mine Action Service in coordinating mine action in 17
countries, territories and peacekeeping missions and
special political missions.

General, which encourages the Security Council to
consider the issue through an annual report on the
implementation of resolution 2365 (2017). To that end,
in the weeks ahead, bearing in mind the input of today’s
meeting and the various statements made by delegations,
my delegation will submit a request for an annual report
on the topic. In addition to the request for an annual
report, we believe it is important to delve deeper into
the issue of mine action, given the Security Council’s
efforts in areas such as the protection of civilians,
humanitarian action and the security of the members of
peacekeeping operations, through the implementation
of national mine action plans and the early inclusion of
the issue of mine action in mission planning.

In the light of all this, mine action is key to
protecting civilians, both during and after conflict. The
implementation of resolution 2365 (2017) is therefore
crucial, as it calls upon all parties to conflict to put
an immediate and permanent end to the indiscriminate
use of improvised explosive devices and protect the
civilian population from the threats they pose. We also
believe that it is necessary to continue including, where
appropriate, the issue of mine action in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
The issue of mine action should also be included in
the earliest stages of mission planning, programming
and operating concepts We also believe that mine
action should be included, as needed, in the agendas of
Security Council missions.

We take this opportunity to reiterate our call to
all States party to the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and Their Destruction, known
as the Ottawa Convention, to honour their obligations
and unite efforts to ensure its full implementation. We
call on all States that have not yet signed or ratified the
Convention to join this important instrument.

We also stress that a mine action component should
be included in peacekeeping operations, special political
missions and issues on the Security Council’s agenda.
For example, it should be recalled that improvised
explosive devices must be removed in Iraq and Syria.
The clean-up of areas contaminated with landmines
is under way in Cyprus, Western Sahara and Abyei.
Risk education programmes are being conducted in
Somalia. The Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, signed in
Colombia in 2016, recognizes the issue of demining
as a precondition for post-conflict rural development.
Following the exit of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti and the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire, ammunition was destroyed, thereby
enabling the civilian population to use areas formerly
employed by those missions in discharging their duties.
Mine action should therefore continue to feature
prominently on the Security Council’s agenda. We
underscore the recommendation of the Secretary4/18

In conclusion, we echo the words of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres who said that peace without
mine action is incomplete peace.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me to start by thanking
the Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law and
Security Institutions in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Alexander Zouev, for his very
informative and thorough briefing. Let me also express
our appreciation to the personnel of the United Nations
Mine Action Service for its daily work to save lives.
Poland welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on a comprehensive approach to mine action
(S/2018/623), which is indeed a useful source of
comprehensive information on the scale of the current
threat posed by mines, explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices. It enables the Security
Council to gain thorough insight into the situation of
civilians exposed to mine risk, including children,
women, humanitarian personnel and peacekeepers.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s observation
that the key role of mine action is sustaining peace.
We therefore believe it critical to incorporate possible
mine action from the earliest stages of planning and
programming cycles when a threat occurs. We share the
Secretary-General’s views on the link between actions
on the peace and stability and sustainable development
18-20346

29/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

agendas. Only by integrating those areas through joint
action can solid and durable solutions be accomplished.
Poland would like to underscore the crucial
importance of promoting risk education activities
among the affected populations, including youth and
children, as well as constant support for the victims.
Education is the key solution to minimize the risk of
suffering of thousands of affected civilians. Last year,
the adoption of the first stand-alone resolution on mine
action was a clear sign of the concerns we all share
about the serious threat to civilians, including children,
humanitarian and medical personnel, posed by
landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices. Today we share that concern even
more. The importance of resolution 2365 (2017) and
its message must be emphasized. For Poland, as the
European Union facilitator of a General Assembly
resolution on mine action, the effective and coordinated
engagement of the United Nations in that area is of
utmost importance.
Regrettably, due to protracted active conflicts
and fighting, there is an ever-increasing number of
contaminated areas and the scale of a worldwide threat
posed to the civilian population is very alarming.
The number of casualties caused by mines, explosive
remnants of war and improvised explosive devices
increased more than twofold in 2017, compared to
2014. That statistic is terrifying. Afghanistan, Libya
and Yemen are among those most severely affected by
contamination, not to mention eastern Ukraine, where,
a few months after August 2017, more than twice as
many civilians were killed by remaining explosives.
On a positive note, the joint and coherent efforts of
national and international actors can lead to results. We
saw that in Colombia, where considerable progress in
mine action has been achieved. Last year, we celebrated
two important events. The first was the twentieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction, which
aims to put an end to the suffering and casualties
caused by anti-personnel mines. We are very glad that
in 2017 the number of States party to the Convention
increased to an impressive 164. The second event was
the twentieth anniversary of the United Nations Mine
Action Service.
We would like to reiterate our full recognition for
the important role of the United Nations Mine Action

S/PV. 8304

Service since 1997 in mitigating threats posed by mines
and associated remnants of war. Since 2015, Poland has
regularly supported the activities of the United Nations
Mine Action Service by making annual budgetary
donations. We intend to continue that support this year.
In conclusion, Poland would welcome further
Security Council discussions on mine action. We
believe that countries should continue the practice of
yearly reporting on the issue, which would contribute
to the enhancement of all activities aimed at mitigating
threats posed by contamination.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this meeting and the
important briefing by Assistant Secretary-General
Mr. Alexander Zouev.
Peru is a country committed to the elimination
of anti-personnel mines, in accordance with the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and
on Their Destruction — also known as the Ottawa
Convention. We believe that taking action against those
weapons, which are particularly cruel, insidious and
indiscriminate, constitutes a moral and legal obligation
of the international community, which is called on to
contribute directly to help the Council shoulder its
responsibilities relating to the protection of civilians
and the maintenance of international peace and security.
Accordingly, we believe that it is important for this
organ continue to focus on developments concerning
mine action, especially in peacekeeping operations
whose work in humanitarian demining is essential
to fostering transitions from conflict situations to
sustaining peace.
Based on our own experience in the area, we
can give a first-hand account of the new peace
dynamics that demining has created. Our armed
forces today enjoy an exemplary relationship of trust
and cooperation with those of our brotherly Republic
of Ecuador in conducting joint demining activities on
the shared border. Demining activities, outreach and
prevention, and reparations and assistance provided to
the victims of mines that the Peruvian State provided
while combatting terrorism during the last decades of
the twentieth century, have created today a positive
relationship between the State and those communities
most exposed to the violence at that time, in addition
to opportunities for development, reconciliation and

18-203465/18

S/PV.8304

Maintenance of international peace and security

the return of displaced persons that was facilitated
by demining.
On the other hand, the continued presence of those
weapons constitutes a remnant of conflict running
contrary to international humanitarian law and tends
to prolong conflict, especially among those who
are most vulnerable. We underscore the importance
of the planning and programming of mine action
in close cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, local authorities, victims, humanitarian
workers, civil society and those members of the
population who risk being affected.
We would also like to highlight the work of the
United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) and
the usefulness of the report of the Secretary-General
on the issue (S/2018/623), in particular with regard
to peacekeeping operations deployed through the
Council’s mandate. The cooperation of UNMAS with
the various relevant United Nations system entities
helps to develop capacities, common standards and
synergies aimed at more effective, safe and efficient
action on the ground. Furthermore, we believe that its
work must go beyond the removal and the destruction
of anti-personnel mines. In particular, we emphasize
the need to support the establishment and strengthening
of national capacities for demining, prevention and
assistance to victims. Establishing a rapid response
system to respond to anti-personnel mines wherever
they might appear is also of particular importance.
In conclusion, we would like to highlight
three points contained in the Secretary-General’s
report that we believe to be of major importance
concerning peacekeeping operations deployed via the
Council’s mandate.
First, there is a need to provide missions with
training, equipment and adequate technology and to
facilitate the transfer of those capacities to the country
affected. We commend the training that is being done.
Secondly, there is a need to prevent and mitigate the
destructive action of improvised explosive devices
used by non-State actors, which today represent the
greatest threat. We welcome the development of
manuals to that end. Thirdly, it is advisable to increase
women’s participation in those activities, with a view
to promoting prevention strategies and linking with
civilian society more inclusively and effectively.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
6/18

29/06/2018

report on a comprehensive approach to mine action
(S/2018/623)
and
Assistant
Secretary-General
Alexander Zouev for his briefing.
We note from the report of the Secretary-General
that mines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) continue to cause widespread
and indiscriminate injuries to civilian populations in
various parts of the world, in both conflict and postoffice situations. Of particular concern to us is the severe
humanitarian consequences, including the loss of life,
widespread suffering and its impact on humanitarian
assistance, as highlighted by the Secretary-General
in his report. We also note that the use of mines and
IEDs and explosive remnants of war continue to hinder
and obstruct the work of humanitarian actors, thereby
affecting humanitarian assistance.
We are alarmed by the impact of landmines,
IEDs and explosive remnants of war on peacekeeping
missions, particularly in the context of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the African Union
Mission in Somalia. For instance, it is seriously
concerning to note that, according to the SecretaryGeneral’s report, MINUSMA has experienced its
highest fatality rate since 2014. Comprehensive action
to address the impact of mines, IEDs and explosive
remnants of war requires a three-fold approach.
First, ensuring the full compliance with
international humanitarian law of all parties to an
armed conflict in their choice of weapons, including
by ensuring strict compliance with the principles
of proportionality, as well as distinctions, remains
central. Parties to an armed conflict should take every
necessary measure to protect civilians from the effect
of hostilities, particularly by refraining from using
weapons that could lead to an indiscriminate attack
against civilians, such as mines and IEDs.
Secondly, we recognize that explosive remnants
of war continue to be a serious humanitarian concern
with devastating short- and long-term consequences
on civilian populations, humanitarian actors and
peacekeepers deployed in post-conflict situations. It is
therefore critical to take concrete measures to address
existing cases of contamination. In that regard, we
welcome the measures taken by the United Nations
Mine Action Service to reduce the impact of landmines,
explosive remnants of war and IEDs on peacekeepers.
18-20346

29/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

That takes me to my third point, on the impact of
landmines, explosive remnants of war and IEDs on
peacekeepers and the role of peacekeeping missions
in addressing those challenges. We recognize that
troop-contributing countries need to take every
necessary measure to better prepare their peacekeepers
deployed in conflict and post-conflict situations to
respond to threats posed by landmines, IEDs and
explosive remnants of war, including in the context of
asymmetrical warfare. Equally important is the need
to provide peacekeepers with the necessary capacity
and force enablers to respond to the challenges faced
by the use of such weapons by providing them with the
necessary training and capability to protect themselves
and civilians, as well as humanitarian actors.
I would therefore like to underscore the need to
provide peacekeeping missions that are deployed and
faced with risks associated with explosive remnants
of war and IEDs with the proper training and the
necessary capabilities that are critical in addressing
the threat posed by explosive devices to peacekeepers,
as identified by the Secretary-General in his report.
Furthermore, as pointed out in the report prepared by
Lieutenant General (Retired) Carlos Alberto dos Santos
Cruz, entitled “Improving Security of United Nations
Peacekeepers”, it is critical to fully equip such missions
by providing them with appropriate mine-protected
vehicles and specialized weapons ammunition and by
including a small cell of military engineers who would
supervise anti-IED planning or operation procedures.
Concrete measures should also be taken to enhance the
intelligence capabilities of such missions to detect IEDs.
As a follow-up of today’s discussion, we encourage
these issues to be taken up within the appropriate
format. I would like to particularly welcome the
proposal by the Secretary-General to mainstream mine
action into relevant country-specific discussions and
the planning and mandate of United Nations responses,
as well as the inclusion of mine action into ceasefire
and peace agreements, where feasible and appropriate.
I would also like to lend my support to the proposal
of the Secretary-General to consider the issue in the
Council on an annual basis.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian): As
this is the last open meeting of the Council this month,
I should like first to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the successful completion of your presidency of the
Security Council. I would like to point out that you
have been very skilful in steering our deliberations.

S/PV. 8304

I wish the Russian national team success in the FIFA
World Cup, which has been so excellently organized in
your country.
(spoke in English)
We thank the Russian presidency for bringing the
issue of mines and explosives to the attention of the
Security Council. We also express our appreciation to
Assistant Secretary-General Zouev for his interesting,
informative and comprehensive update.
(spoke in Russian)
We wish Mr. Zouev every future success in pursuit
of the laudable purposes of the United Nations.
(spoke in English)
The contamination of mines and explosives,
remnants of war and conflicts affects civilian
populations, United Nations operations and global
peace and security. The alarming rate of conflicts
utilizing explosive devices necessitates a more robust
response in order to provide urgent humanitarian mine
action assistance. We are also witness to the growing
use of improvised explosive devices by terrorist groups
against civilians, our peacekeepers and humanitarian
personnel, who must be protected from such tragedies.
Resolution 2365 (2017), ably introduced by Bolivia
in June 2017, is of vital importance and is the first of
its kind as a stand-alone resolution on mine action. It
is a sine qua non for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Secretary-General’s new agenda
for peace. Therefore, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2018/623) and encourage periodic
updates on the status of efforts to address the hazards
of mines and explosives, inter alia, in the form of
annual briefings. Kazakhstan highly values the work
of the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS)
and would like to make the following observations
and recommendations.
It is important for all relevant stakeholders — Member
States, United Nations regional and subregional
organizations, and international partners — to
streamline efforts to protect civilians and include mine
action in their mandates and programmes. It is just as
important to build national capacities through training
and ensuring the availability of equipment by promoting
effective partnerships at all levels. We urge the
international community to support the multifaceted
activities of UNMAS, an invaluable and efficient United

18-203467/18

S/PV.8304

Maintenance of international peace and security

Nations entity for mitigating the devastation caused in
conflict and post-conflict zones through mine action,
mine clearance, rehabilitation and risk education. As
a preventive measure, education about the risk, safety
and identification of mines and improvised explosive
devices is most essential at all levels and segments
of society.
We welcome the work of UNMAS with female riskeducation volunteers to spread lifesaving education
to women, who play a critical role in instilling safe
behaviour among their children and peers. Women
and young people have proven to be great catalysts for
change and action.
The high death toll among our peacekeepers due to
landmines and improvised explosive devices dictates that
ensuring their safety and security must be our priority.
Consequently, it is essential to equip our peacekeepers
and provide them with in-depth, comprehensive and
appropriate training, both predeployment and during
missions. We therefore welcome the fact that UNMAS
has developed and is implementing a comprehensive
framework to mitigate the threat of improvised
explosive devices that has contributed to reducing the
casualty rate. Member States should also support the
mine action response of the United Nations through
predictable, un-earmarked funding for the purposes of
long-term planning and programming.
No discussion of mines would be complete without
considering victims who must be given immediate
medical attention, in addition to prostheses, longterm rehabilitation and reintegration into society.
Reintegration should include vocational training and
job opportunities to lead normal, productive lives.
Kazakhstan has considerable experience in mine
clearance, having neutralized more than 4.5 million
explosive devices in Iraq. My country has also developed
and provided intensive specialized training to Iraqi
security forces, thereby enhancing their capacity to
counter the threat of mines and explosives. That, in
turn, has also become an area of special expertise. In
that connection, Kazakhstan has established and is
constantly upgrading its national demining centre and
its K9 centre.
Kazakhstan is engaged in improving existing
legislation, enacting new laws and providing practical
and technical support for the safe and proper storage
of ammunition and mines, in strict adherence to
established international regulations. We are also
8/18

29/06/2018

strengthening such initiatives regionally among our
Central Asian neighbours in the region.
Lastly, we are committed to joining the multilateral
effort, not only for the safety and security of civilians,
but also to reinforce stability, to promote peace and to
support the process of sustainable development.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Kazakhstan for the kind words
addressed to our presidency and, obviously, for wishing
our team success in the FIFA World Cup. Nonetheless,
let us make sure that every game in the World Cup is
crowned with success. May the strongest team win.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I can only agree
with you, Mr. President, on your last statement. But let
me thank Assistant Secretary-General Alexander Zouev
for his useful briefing today, as always. I also wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his informative and
comprehensive report (S/2018/623), which we welcome.
I would also like to acknowledge Bolivia’s
spearheading efforts in advancing this agenda through
resolution 2365 (2017)last year and their commitment
to keeping the Security Council’s attention on this
important issue. As we said at the adoption of resolution
2365 (2017) one year ago (see S/PV.7992), the terrible
legacy of landmines and explosive remnants of war
on the communities where they are found cannot be
overstated. We commend the United Nations for all of
its work on all aspects of mine action.
Together with countless community and civilsociety groups, results are being achieved. Casualties
from landmines have decreased in recent years and
that is worth highlighting. At the same time, there is
no room for complacency, as the number of casualties
from improvised explosive devices, on the other hand,
has risen sharply. These are generally used in conflict
and post-conflict areas, including by non-State actors.
Sweden fully shares the concerns expressed over the
serious post-conflict humanitarian and peacebuilding
problems caused by explosive remnants of war. We
need to do more to minimize their occurrence, effects
and risks. In that context, it is worth recalling the
significance of mine clearance in further enhancing the
possibilities for peacekeeping operations to fulfil their
work according to their mandates.
There is a growing awareness within the
mine-action sector that including a gender perspective
in activities will result in mine action having a greater
18-20346

29/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

and wider impact. Women are often more inclined to
share information on threats, and women and children
often subject to risk from remnants of war in their
daily activities. We note with satisfaction that the
programme staff of the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS) is almost 50 per cent women.
All in all, Sweden has contributed over $100 million
to mine action worldwide over the past decade. The
Swedish Civil Contingencies Agency is a stand-by
partner to UNMAS and the International Committee of
the Red Cross, and conducts humanitarian operations,
including humanitarian mine action worldwide.
Sweden believes in an approach to disarmament
and international security that puts human beings at the
centre of its policy. Sweden is a State party to all relevant
conventions banning or regulating the use of mines,
anti-personnel landmines and cluster munitions as well
as the handling of explosive remnants of war. Sweden
remains firmly committed to these Conventions and
their full universalization, which is the most effective
way to counter the risks associated with the use of
such weapons.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting. I want to thank
the Bolivian delegation as well for calling the Security
Council’s attention to this important issue. Of course
I want to thank Assistant Secretary-General Zouev
for his briefing to us here today. We hope that today’s
discussion will highlight the importance of mitigating
the threats posed by mines and other explosive hazards
as well as underline the potential life-saving impact of
addressing this issue effectively.
The United States urges other Member States to
join us in a robust international partnership to reduce
the impact of unexploded ordnance, improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) and mines on the vulnerable
communities around the world. As many have mentioned
here, the clearance of mines, IEDs and unexploded
ordnance plays an essential role in reconstruction
and stabilization in many regions of the world. We
remove explosive hazards in order to protect civilians
to ensure a secure environment for the providers of a
range of follow-on assistance and to clear the lines of
transportation and communication for commerce.
In the international realm, the United States is the
Chair of the Mine Action Support Group for the next
two years. We will strive to increase donor participation
and commitment to this very important work.

S/PV. 8304

Protecting civilians from these weapons is a
prerequisite for achieving lasting peace and stability.
Whether it is children on their way to school, business
men and women conducting trade and commerce,
farmers cultivating their fields or shepherds tending
their flocks, civilians must be protected from the risk
of abandoned landmines and unexploded ordnance.
As long as these types of dangers persist, affected
communities will not fully recover from the remnants
of conflict.
The United States has been the world’s largest
single donor and financial supporter of humanitarian
mine action, providing more than $2.9 billion in aid
for conventional-weapons destruction in more than
100 countries since 1993. This includes clearance of
landmines and unexploded ordnance. In fact, the United
States is more committed to conventional-weaponsdestruction assistance now than we ever have been.
Our State Department provided $179.5 million in
conventional weapons destruction assistance in 2016,
and we project the final contribution for 2017 to be
$266.5 million, which is an unprecedented single-year
investment. This assistance is not focused solely on
clearance of explosive hazards, such as landmines,
IEDs and unexploded ordnance; rather, the conventional
weapons destruction programme provides the United
States with a broader framework, with the flexibility to
assist States with munitions management.
Around the world, stockpiles of excess poorly
secured or otherwise at-risk conventional weapons
remain a serious challenge to peace and prosperity.
Poorly secured munitions are illicitly diverted to
terrorists, armed groups and other destabilizing actors,
threatening the lives of our citizens and those of our
partners. Deteriorating or mishandled stockpiles
could threaten to devastate nearby population centres.
They can also prevent the safe use of land, which can
suppress economic development and prevent displaced
persons from returning home.
These programmes do not merely seek to protect
civilians from the threat of unexploded ordnance; they
also provide a vehicle to prevent the spread of disease,
stave off starvation and provide a sense of hope and
confidence for populations afflicted by these threats, so
that they might more actively engage their communities
and participate in their economies. Rapid stabilization
assistance, critical to promoting security and securing
peace dividends in a post-conflict environment, cannot

18-203469/18

S/PV.8304

Maintenance of international peace and security

29/06/2018

take place until IEDs, unexploded ordnance and other
conventional munitions are removed safely and securely.

managed stockpiles of ammunition, and the circulation
of small arms and light weapons.

In conclusion, in the light of the unfortunately high
number of armed conflicts today, conventional-weaponsdestruction assistance will continue to play a critical
role in our efforts to build a more peaceful, secure and
prosperous world.

In the wake of the crisis in my country, Côte
d’Ivoire, despite not having experienced the use of
anti-personnel mines, decided to destroy its stockpile
of anti-personnel mines — a total of 1,803 mines — in
accordance with its commitments under the Ottawa
Convention on anti-personnel mines. The Ivorian
Government has also decided to make the management
and security of arms and ammunition stocks one of
its priorities.

Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): We
thank the Russian presidency for convening today’s
important meeting, which gives the Security Council
the opportunity to assess, one year after its adoption,
the level of implementation of resolution 2365 (2017) on
landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices. We also thank Mr. Alexander Zouev
for his excellent briefing on the implementation of
the resolution.
The remarkable progress made in recent years
in mine action is to be welcomed and encouraged, as
is the growing commitment of States to complying
with mine-action standards. Indeed, 164 States are
now parties to the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction. My
country notes with satisfaction that some States have
destroyed the remaining anti-personnel mines on their
territories, thereby fulfilling their obligations under the
Convention. My delegation also welcomes the inclusion
of mine action at the heart of humanitarian action,
peacebuilding and the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
It must be recognized that, despite the significant
progress that has been made in this area, the common
goal of achieving a mine-free world is far from
being achieved and remains a major challenge for
the international community. As highlighted in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/623), the
phenomenon remains a persistent threat to international
peace and security, particularly for civilian populations
and humanitarian workers, but also for peacekeeping
forces deployed in conflict zones. Long after the end
of hostilities, these explosive devices continue to kill
and maim, making it impossible for refugees and
internally displaced persons to return to their homes
or to give them any hope of a return to normal life or
post-conflict reconstruction. Furthermore, despite the
decrease in threats caused by mines and explosive
remnants of war, new threats have emerged, such as
improvised explosive devices, obsolete and poorly
10/18

With the support of the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire and its Mine Action Service, Côte
d’Ivoire has established weapons and ammunition
storage sites that meet international standards, through
the development of standards for the construction
of weapons depots, the renovation of armouries and
the construction of secure bunkers, in accordance
with international standards. Similarly, a weaponsstockpile-management procedure manual and an
ammunition-management guide have been developed
to improve existing tools and systems. The authorities
have also worked, in terms of capacity-building, on
the technical training of persons in charge of depot
management, and have set up a computerized database
of weapons and ammunition. To date, Côte d’Ivoire
can boast a marked and registered weapons rate of
95 per cent.
In the face of the worrying issue of mines and
explosive remnants of war, Côte d’Ivoire calls for
strengthened international cooperation among States
with a view to eliminating the danger they pose to
international peace and security. It encourages the
implementation of international legal instruments
related to mine action and urges ongoing collective
efforts towards the universalization of such instruments.
My delegation also believes that the elimination of the
risks inherent in anti-personnel mines requires a holistic
approach that involves both raising public awareness
of the dangers posed by those devices and conducting
the operations necessary to identify and remove them.
That approach must also include victim assistance,
weapons management, the destruction of arsenals,
national capacity-building and the full implementation
of Conventions prohibiting and regulating the use of
anti-personnel mines.
My country also encourages States to implement
programmes and policies on mine awareness, mine
18-20346

29/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

clearance, mine risk education and victim assistance,
based on the Strategy of the United Nations on Mine
Action 2013-2018. Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the inclusion
of the issue of mine action when developing mandates
for peacekeeping operations, special political missions
and humanitarian and development programmes. In
that context, we appreciate the key role played by the
United Nations, including its Mine Action Service,
and reaffirm the need for partnerships and cooperation
among regional organizations, such as the African
Union and the United Nations.
Lastly, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the completion
of the United Nations explosive ordnance disposal
standards as an important step in adapting the response
of the United Nations to the evolving mine threat.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
struggle to eliminate the danger posed by mines
and explosive remnants of war remains relevant
to our shared efforts to promote peace and ensure
development in the world. It is therefore important that
the Security Council remain seized of the issue because
of its implications for international peace and security
and that the Secretary-General ensure that Council
members are regularly informed of its progress.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Let me begin by congratulating Mr. Alexander
Zouev on his excellent briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/623), which is of critical
importance, and by wishing him every success in his
work as Head of the United Nations Office of Rule of
Law and Security Institutions. We would also like to
congratulate the members of the Council, united in
our strong commitment to contributing actively and
positively to the results and contributions that today’s
meeting hopes to achieve.
My brief statement on mine action focuses on the
following reflections and observations.
First, landmines were created before the twentieth
century, but their use did not become widespread among
the many groups and armed forces until the Second
World War. They were widely used in international and
internal conflicts alike. Mines remain an ongoing threat
to civilian populations even long after the cessation of
hostilities. Similarly, unexploded ordnance — bombs,
howitzers or grenades — and other ammunition that did
not explode when it was employed continue to wreak
havoc in post-conflict communities around the world
and are likely to be even more numerous.

S/PV. 8304

Secondly, the threat of the mines goes far beyond
killing, maiming and injuring thousands of people
every year, whether or not there is a conflict.
Thirdly, such weapons continue to have social,
prolonged and, in many cases, serious economic and
environmental consequences.
Fourthly, from 2002 to June 2003, thousands of
landmine casualties were recorded in 65 countries, the
majority of which — 41 — were at peace, not at war.
Fifthly, during a civil war in 1864, General William
T. Sherman used words that subsequently became
famous to describe the use of mines. Due to the brutality
of their effects, he stated that their use was “not an act
of war, but a homicide”.
The international community must take into
account the fact that in 1995 the United Nations
declared that mines were “one of the most widespread,
lethal and long-lasting forms of pollution we have
yet encountered”. In a conflict, it is impossible to
accurately estimate the number of unexploded mines
and ammunition. The threat posed by unexploded
ordnance is therefore now a serious concern for the
international community because of the humanitarian
consequences, in particular of anti-personnel mines,
and such consequences must be properly assessed.
Given that bleak backdrop, we would like to
express our deepest gratitude and appreciation to our
Bolivian colleagues for their valuable contribution
in this field. Just a year ago, on its own initiative,
the Council adopted resolution 2365 (2017), which,
to our surprise, was the first international legal text
dedicated to condemning and demanding collective
and coordinated action against the indiscriminate use
of such cowardly weapons.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea urges States,
by mandate of the Security Council, to adopt the
necessary regulatory mechanisms governing the use,
possession and illegal trafficking of mines and other
improvised explosive devices. It is essential to adopt
joint strategies to ensure greater control and security
at airports, ports, border posts and crossing points,
roads and in communications among States. The goal
is to better detect and confiscate improvised explosive
devices and related materials in an effort to build a
world that is safer, fairer, more peaceful, prosperous
and, above all, respectful of societies so as to continue
to ensure peaceful coexistence among peoples.

18-2034611/18

S/PV.8304

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, I would like to welcome and support
the recommendations contained in a recent report of
the Secretary-General, in which he requests a formal
follow-up to the issue, with periodic reports on the
status of the implementation of relevant resolutions. In
that regard, Equatorial Guinea will seek to ensure that
the issue is included on the Security Council’s agenda.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let me
begin by thanking Assistant Secretary-General Zouev
for his excellent briefing and leadership on the issue
at hand. We commend you, Mr. President, on Russia’s
able presidency of the Security Council in June. Let me
also thank Ambassador Llorentty Solíz of Bolivia for
requesting today’s meeting.
I will address three points: first, the threat of
landmines; secondly, the United Nations and mine
action; and thirdly, the role of the Security Council.
First, landmines, explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices pose a significant threat
to the safety of civilians, parents and children alike,
peacekeepers and humanitarian aid workers during
conflict and long after it ends. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/623) highlights that it is
truly a global concern. Afghanistan, Libya, Ukraine,
Iraq and Yemen are among the most affected countries.
It demonstrates the relevance of mine action for the
Council’s agenda. In places like Mosul, Iraq, urgent
humanitarian action is hindered, which means that
civilians cannot return to their homes. Indeed, the
increased use of those types of explosives in urban
and residential areas is alarming. Let us not forget that
children are the leading victims of explosive remnants
of war. That confers upon us a huge responsibilty.
That brings me to my second point — the United
Nations and mine action. We commend the role of
the United Nations Mine Action Service under the
able leadership of Agnès Marcaillou. We see a clear
connection between mine action and peacekeeping.
We actively support the United Nations in modernizing
peace operations through the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping process, which, as we all
know, the Secretary-General launched here in the
Council in March (see S/PV.8218). In that context, we
highly favour the further integration of mine action
into United Nations peacekeeping, and we look forward
to working closely with Côte d’Ivoire in the coming
months in that process.
12/18

29/06/2018

At the same time, humanitarian space must
be protected, and my country tries to help in that
regard. We are sixth on the list of worldwide donors
in humanitarian mine action. We are contributing
€3 million of unearmarked funding to the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund and an additional
€45 million to humanitarian demining projects for the
current four-year period. We cooperate in particular
with non-governmental organizations. We commend
them for their work in sometimes very dangerous
circumstances. Let me mention them: the Mines
Advisory Group, the HALO Trust and DanChurchAid.
That is part of our multi-annual funding and
multi-stakeholder collaboration approach, and we hope
that other countries will approach mine action in a
similar way.
We welcome recent accessions to the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction — also
known as the Ottawa Convention — the Convention on
Cluster Munitions and other instruments, but frankly
speaking we continue to have a long way to go before
all of them are universal. We therefore hope to see
additional accessions to all the relevant instruments by
this time next year.
That brings me to my third point — the role of the
Security Council. We believe that it is important that
the Council continue to consider mine action, which
can be done both in country-specific debates and
through mainstreaming mine action in peacekeeping
mandates. Therefore, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations contained in his report.
That includes urging troop-contributing countries to
better prepare peacekeepers for the threats that they
will face and including mine action in peace agreements
and ceasefires. We are in favour of holding an annual
debate on that subject in the Council. One year after the
adoption of resolution 2365 (2017), the Council cannot
become complacent.
In conclusion, mine action really is at the nexus of
security, conflict resolution and development. Its ripple
effects can carry a long way if we go about it in the
right way. There is a clear humanitarian imperative.
Mine action enables farmers to grow crops, parents
to buy food for their children and their children to go
to school.
Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zouev for his briefing, and through
18-20346

29/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

him I would like to extend the United Kingdom’s
appreciation for all the work carried out by United
Nations staff working on mine action, especially in the
United Nations Mine Action Service.
I thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2018/623) on the implementation of resolution
2365 (2017). The United Kingdom reiterates its support
for the resolution, in which, for the first time, the Council
calls for action against the lasting threat posed by
landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) to civilians and peacekeeping
and humanitarian personnel. Twenty years after the
adoption of the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention,
landmines remain a major threat. As discussed in the
Secretary-General’s report, landmines continue to kill
and maim indiscriminately. It is civilians, and all too
often children, who are the victims of those brutal
weapons. Although a great deal has been done and
achieved to rid the world of those horrific weapons, it
is clear that more remains to be done.
The United Kingdom fully agrees that instruments
of international law provide protection against the
proliferation of explosive weapons. We remain fully
committed to the Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons, which we chaired in 2017, the Anti-Personnel
Mine Ban Convention and the Convention on Cluster
Munitions. We call on all States not already party to
those conventions to accede to those key international
disarmament initiatives without delay. It is only when
we stop producing those atrocious weapons, that people
will stop being killed by them.
The United Kingdom will continue to uphold its own
commitments under the Convention. We are working to
clear landmines in the Falkland Islands, the only part
of our territory that is contaminated with landmines.
We are also proud to offer substantial international
assistance. Last year, we tripled our funding for mine
action and will spend $130 million over three years to
tackle the humanitarian and development impact of
landmines and other explosive remnants of war. That
support is making 150 square kilometres of land safe,
which will help 800,000 people and ensure that, every
year, over 100,000 people — especially children — fully
understand the dangers posed by landmines and how to
avoid them.
We welcome the significant role played by the
United Nations, in particular its focus on strengthening
national capacity and the importance of partnerships.

S/PV. 8304

In support of that, we provide funding to the Voluntary
Trust Fund of the United Nations Mine Action Service,
and, through the United Kingdom military’s Defence
Explosive Ordnance Disposal, Munitions and Search
Training Regiment, have supported the United Nations
development of improvised explosive device disposal
standards. We welcome the completion of those
standards and recognize the role that they will play
in ensuring the safety of United Nations personnel
who take part in demining activity. As identified in
the Secretary-General’s report, there is an appalling
trend of increased use of improvised explosive devices
by non-State actors. The United Kingdom supports
Resolution 2370, (2017), which restricts terrorist actors’
access to weapons. We call for additional stringent
national measures to deny terrorists ready access to
weapons and explosive precursors. We also support
General Assembly resolution 71/72, on countering
the threat posed by improvised explosive devices, the
second of its kind.
International cooperation is vital to tackling
the criminal and terrorist networks facilitating and
using IEDs. The United Kingdom is actively engaged
in facilitating discussions among the international
community on the topic of IEDs and mine action.
The conference that we hosted in May considered
the challenges of realizing a mine-free world and
looked at how we could overcome them. Much of
the remaining clearance challenge stems from recent
indiscriminate contamination by mines and IEDs.
It is vital that we continue to assess the challenges
ahead and collaboratively consider the means to meet
such challenges. We must augment our efforts where
we can so that we can collectively tackle the scourge
of landmines.
Mr. Alahmad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express my appreciation
for the valuable briefing by Mr. Alexander Zouev,
Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law
and Security Institutions in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
We are discussing an extremely important topic
today on the Security Council’s agenda, as the issue
of mines, explosive ordnance and improvised explosive
devices is directly linked to the United Nations goal
to maintain peace and security in armed conflict and
dispute zones. Regrettably, since the United Nations
began monitoring civilian casualties caused by such
explosives and mines in 1999, statistics have shown an

18-2034613/18

S/PV.8304

Maintenance of international peace and security

29/06/2018

increase in the number of civilian casualties resulting
from the remnants of war and mines. It is truly
saddening that children comprise the largest category
of civilian victims of the remnants of war.

mines in the liberated areas of Iraq. We also welcome
the work being done between the United Nations and
the Governments of Lebanon, Libya, Somalia and other
Governments of Member States.

Our discussion today on mine action and warnings
concerning their negative impact on civilians, especially
in the aftermath of war, is of particular importance to
the State of Kuwait because of its bitter experience
following the liberation of the country from the Iraqi
occupation, which in its wake left behind landmines
throughout its territory, including on beaches and in
vast expanses of desert, that have killed many civilians.

We condemn the use of landmines by the Houthis
in Yemen. These landmines are being placed randomly,
thereby endangering the lives of civilians, in clear
violation of international humanitarian law.

We commend all United Nations efforts to maintain
peace and security among all conflicting parties,
which is achieved through peacekeeping operations
and the Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral, as well as efforts to arrive at settlements
and confidence-building measures and limiting the
deadly effects of landmines on the lives of civilians
following conflicts.
Allow me in this regard to commend the heroic
actions taken by more than 100,000 men and women
in peacekeeping operations in different conflict zones,
risking their lives in order to maintain and protect
the lives of others, especially civilians, in extremely
dangerous and complicated environments. We call
for improving the preparation and performance of
peacekeepers, who are operating in areas at high risk of
explosives, so that they are better able to perform their
duties and save their lives.
I would like to define three important measures that
would alleviate the impact of landmines on civilians:
first, to stop violence and conflict between armed
groups; secondly, to facilitate restoring public services
in post-conflict areas and promote the 2030 Sustainable
Development Goals for establishing peaceful and
conflict-free societies; and thirdly, to issue national
laws which prohibit the possession of weapons and
explosive materials.
We welcome measures to enhance partnership
and cooperation between the United Nations and other
States at the national and international levels in the field
of mine action. Moreover, we commend the partnership
established between the United Nations and the African
Union Commission to manage mine action. I would
also note the efforts made by the United Nations, in
cooperation with the Government of Iraq, through joint
programmes aimed at screening and clearing areas of
14/18

In conclusion, I note that resolution 2365 (2017),
which the Security Council adopted last year,
represents a positive development in the efforts of the
United Nations to combat the danger of landmines,
explosives and improvised explosive devices remnants
of war. I reaffirm that such efforts to stop the use of
landmines will save the lives of many civilians and
make an important contribution to achieving the desired
security and peace. We support the recommendation of
the Secretary-General to consider mine action on an
annual basis in the Council.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting. We also thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Zouev for his briefing.
In recent years, thanks to the joint efforts of the
international community, progress has been made in
international mine action. The harrowing problems of
landmines have been mitigated in some countries and
regions. Last year, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2365 (2017), fully demonstrating the
priority that the international community attaches to
mine action.
China welcomes the Secretary-General’s report
to the Security Council on a comprehensive approach
to mine action (S/2018/623). We also commend the
efforts of the United Nations to address the threat of
landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices (IEDs), and encourage the United
Nations to continue to play a major role in that regard.
We believe that the Organization’s efforts in this area
are of great importance to realizing the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030 and are also in line
with the concept of a community of shared future for
mankind that China has been advocating.
At present, dozens of countries throughout the
world are facing the threat of landmines and other
explosives. In certain countries and regions, local
wars and armed conflicts have led to more suffering
18-20346

29/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

caused by landmines, while IEDs have already become
a tool for terrorists and extremists to spread terror and
violence in recent years. Strengthening international
assistance and cooperation in mine action will help to
greatly reduce the threat posed by landmines and other
explosives to civilian lives and property, safeguard
peacekeeping missions and realize the SDGs.
China maintains that to strengthen international
assistance and cooperation in mine action and to
effectively mitigate humanitarian concerns related
to landmines and other explosives, the international
community should focus on the following four points.
First, it is important to respect the differences among
countries with regard to security environments and
military strength by addressing the humanitarian
concerns and legitimate national military and security
needs in a balanced fashion. Secondly, it is imperative
to fully take into consideration the national conditions
and needs of landmine-affected countries and to
provide them with assistance and cooperation based on
the realities on the ground. Thirdly, we must build the
capacities of mine-affected countries in order to enable
them to transition from reliance on external assistance
to self-reliance, for the most part. Fourthly, it is crucial
to focus on improving the practical results of demining
assistance and cooperation and to continue to find new
avenues for international cooperation.
China has always paid great attention to the
humanitarian concerns associated with landmines. As a
past victim, we feel very strongly about the hardships of
mine-affected countries. China has actively supported
international legal instruments, including the Geneva
Conventions and the Convention on Prohibitions
or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively
Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects (CCW),
as well as resolution 2365 (2017). China is a high
contracting party to the CCW and its five Additional
Protocols. We faithfully fulfil our obligations under
those instruments.
China has also actively participated as an observer
in the Convention on Cluster Munitions and the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines
and on Their Destruction. China is firmly committed
to the cause of international humanitarian demining
assistance. China has offered demining assistance
to more than 40 countries in Asia, Africa and Latin

S/PV. 8304

America by providing demining equipment and
personnel training.
In September 2015, at the seventieth session of
the General Assembly, Chinese President Xi Jinping
announced at the Leaders’ Summit on Peacekeeping
that China would launch 10 demining assistance
programmes within the next five years. All of those
programmes have been implemented ahead of schedule.
As we speak, China is hosting a humanitarian demining
training workshop for Laos in Nanjing, China. In the
second half of the year, we plan to train 80 Cambodian
deminers in China. We will also donate humanitarian
demining supplies to those two countries.
China attaches great importance to humanitarian
concerns arising from the abuse of IEDs by non-State
actors. We support efforts to find a reasonable and
viable solution within the CCW framework. China
strictly administers the production, sales, procurement,
import and export, storage and transport of explosives
through a series of laws and regulations. As an active
participant in the development of the United Nations
IED-disposal standards, China, with the assistance of
the United Nations Mine Action Service, has co-chaired
the Working Group with Belgium and has drafted some
of its important chapters. We hope that the standards
will help United Nations peacekeeping operations to
improve their skills and ability to dispose of IEDs and
that it will be used voluntarily by the international
community as a reference.
As always, China stands ready to fulfil its
international obligations and provide assistance to the
best of its ability as people in mine-affected countries
and regions strive to rebuild their homes. We join the
international community in making our contribution
to addressing the humanitarian concerns arising from
landmines and other explosive devices.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Alexander Zouev for his briefing. I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting one year after the adoption of resolution 2365
(2017) on an important topic that deserves our attention
and mobilization.
Unfortunately, my first comment is to recall that
the state of affairs is indisputable. Anti-personnel
mines, explosive remnants of war and cluster munitions
remain a major threat to our security. To that, we must
add the challenge of improvised explosive device

18-2034615/18

S/PV.8304

Maintenance of international peace and security

(IEDs), which are most frequently used by terrorists,
and the very nature of the IEDs. The fact that they are
homemade, using components that are freely available,
makes this issue all the more difficult to address in
international bodies. Since we renewed the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) only
yesterday (see S/PV.8298), I am thinking specifically
of the case of Mali, where the Blue Helmets have
already paid a heavy price. I am also thinking of the
Rohingya woman amputee who was the victim of an
anti-personnel mine whom we met during the Council’s
visit to Bangladesh and Burma, and of the photos of
shredded limbs and bodies that we were shown there.
What these weapons have in common is that they
blindly mow down adults and children, civilians and
military, without distinction. They are actually one of
the leading causes of civilian casualties in conflict and
post-conflict areas, from Afghanistan to Colombia.
That speaks to the breadth of this threat and the risks
it brings nowadays, and France considers it a serious
cause for concern that should continue to force us to act
with more determination than ever.
Considering how serious these challenges are, in
my second point I would like to echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call for strengthening our action to save
lives. Needless to say, our action should be adapted
each specific situation, because we are dealing with a
complex range of weapons, with major consequences
both for stabilization in general and post-conflict
reconstruction, and they require targeted measures,
which the international community should take action
on on two levels.
First, we have to supply the means needed to work
with the stakeholders on the ground, whether they are
troops or specialized non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), to fight this threat. They need operational
means adapted to particularly tricky security conditions.
In that regard, France would like to commend the
outstanding work being done by the United Nations
Mine Action Service (UNMAS), in cooperation with
other United Nations agencies. UNMAS, which is
headed by my compatriot Agnès Marcaillou, is putting
its unparalleled know-how at the service of the world’s
most vulnerable populations with a great deal of
courage. I want to express our special gratitude to the
responders on the front lines of this effort, the civilian
and military deminers, for their tireless devotion at the
risk of their own lives. It is their action that creates the
16/18

29/06/2018

security conditions that enable Blue Helmets to deploy,
humanitarian personnel to reach the people in need and
the people themselves to resume normal life.
It is also essential to assist States and their
specialized agencies through various training and
awareness-raising activities. The countries exposed
to these threats must be able to develop their own
expertise so that they are no longer dependent on
assistance locally from foreign and international teams.
Among other things, we should focus on educating
local populations about the risks.
My third point has to do with France’s efforts to
combat the problem of mines. We focus particularly
on backing efforts to reform the security apparatus of
a number of partner States, train national bodies and
support partners deployed in the countries concerned.
Following the example of Handicap International,
these NGOs are doing an admirable job. With a
view to achieving stabilization, France is supporting
specialized training in a mainly humanitarian context
in a number of countries emerging from crisis. In
close partnership with the relevant stakeholders, we
are supporting demining programmes, particularly in
the Middle East and Africa, for example through such
regional initiatives as the Humanitarian Demining
Training Centre in Benin.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize that it is only
through united action and better cooperation that we
will succeed in effectively combating the threat posed
by mines. It is our responsibility to intensify our efforts
and strengthen their coherence in order to minimize the
bleeding that these deadly devices cause. The complexity
of the threat demands that multiple actors come up with
a coordinated response based on the diverse kinds of
expertise and resources of each. The example of the
Mine Action Support Group should inspire us in that
regard. Increasing our cooperation also means working
to universalize and fully implement the legal tools at
our disposal, especially the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons, the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban
Convention, which is our basic instrument in the fight
against anti-personnel mines, and the Convention on
Cluster Munitions. Many countries share the objectives
of these Conventions even if they are not yet signatories
to them, and France encourages all who have not yet
done so to accede to them. Together with the European
Union, we stand ready to give them concrete support in
that process.
18-20346

29/06/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

I would like to end by congratulating Russia for its
effective presidency of the Security Council this month.
The President (spoke in Russian): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Alexander Zouev for his substantive briefing. We
believe it is very important to be kept regularly informed
by the Secretary-General about the United Nations
bodies specializing in mine action, in accordance
with resolution 2365 (2017), and we see his report on
a comprehensive approach to such action (S/2018/623)
as one of the steps being taken to implement the
disarmament agenda. We note his efforts to maintain a
neutral, impartial and balanced approach in the report
that uses the facts to reflect the major measures taken
under United Nations auspices in 2017 in the area of
demining and clearing land of anti-personnel mines,
explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices (IEDs).
However, among the report’s significant trends,
there is a notable overemphasis on the humanitarian
risks associated with the threat of mines in Syria and
eastern Ukraine. We were also sorry to see that there
was no reflection in the report of Russia’s mine action
efforts. As one of the most active participants in the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, Russia
makes a significant contribution to international efforts
to reduce the threat of anti-personnel mines, explosive
remnants of war and IEDs based on implementing
resolution 2365 (2017), on which we present annual
national reports. In 2016 and 2017 a mine-clearance
unit from the Russian Armed Forces’ International
Mine Action Centre conducted four humanitarian
demining operations in Syria, two in Palmyra’s historic
architectural complex and in the residential part of
the city, and two in Aleppo and Deir ez-Zor, clearing
a total of 6,500 hectares of land, 1,500 kilometres of
roads and more than 17,000 buildings. They detected
and rendered harmless 105,000 explosive remnants of
war, including more than 30,000 homemade explosive
devices. The Russian Armed Forces’ systematic efforts
to eliminate the threat of IEDs in Syria represents
our practical contribution to implementing the related
General Assembly resolution 72/36.
Russia actively promotes technical, consultative
and operational capacity-building for mine clearance.
At our International Mine Action Centre, we train

S/PV. 8304

specialists in the areas of mine clearance, the detection
and neutralization of IEDs, the operation of mobile
robotic complexes, and mine detection services.
The Centre is also open to exchanging professional
experience with all interested parties. In 2017, for
instance, it trained 207 Russian officers and 36 foreign
military personnel. The opening at the end of 2016 of
a branch of the Centre in Aleppo was an important
step that has already put more than 1,000 demining
specialists for the Syrian Armed Forces through sapper
school. I would like to point out that the Syrian sappers
trained at the Russian Centre have been supplied with
modern technical detection and protective equipment
for explosive objects and are already taking part in
demining parts of eastern Ghouta, the southern suburbs
of Damascus, eastern Qalamoun and Homs.
The Russian Federation’s efforts are crucial to
restoring the infrastructure necessary for returning
refugees and temporarily displaced persons to their
homes. Notably, that approach is recognized in the
Secretary-General’s report. However, while where the
situations in Darfur and Iraq are concerned it describes
on the specific work being done, the report on Syria
is limited to mentioning the task to be done and then
moves immediately to the difficulty of access. Russia’s
mine action efforts show clearly that the problems have
nothing to do with access. In our view, the involvement
of the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS)
in the efforts in Syria has been unjustifiably long
drawn out. And the problem is not just to do with an
unresolved issue with the Damascus Office and the
Head of UNMAS, but also with something we are all
too familiar with, the politicization of humanitarian
issues by potential donors who do not want to contribute
to normalizing life in Syria.
In conclusion, I would like to note that the Russian
Federation gives significant attention to the development
of international cooperation on mine clearance. In
October 2017 and May 2018, engineers from the Russian
Armed Forces held two international conferences on
humanitarian demining in which delegations from
24 countries took part. We are continuing our close
interaction with the Geneva International Centre
for Humanitarian Demining. Russian experts took
part in efforts organized by the United Nations Mine
Action Service to prepare international standards for
countering IEDs.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

18-2034617/18

S/PV.8304

Maintenance of international peace and security

I give the floor to Mr. Zouev.
Mr. Zouev (spoke in Spanish): We have taken
detailed notes on the important comments and
recommendations that Council members have made
today, and we will be implementing them in our mine
action efforts in future. We will also definitely take
note of the President’s recommendation to use more of
the official languages of the United Nations, and more
than the three that I have used in my briefing today.
In that regard I would like to point out that last June,
during Bolivia’s presidency, when I had the honour of
representing the Secretary-General at the meeting (see
S/PV.7992) at which the Council adopted its historic
resolution 2365 (2017), I used four of the official
languages, including Spanish, which, unfortunately, is
not my best.
The President: I would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zouev for his vast polyglot skills.
We are looking forward to having him in the Council
more often. There are still two more languages that
he should be able to master, and next time we will
hear his briefing in all the official languages of the
United Nations.
(spoke in Russian)
Since this is the last meeting of the Security Council
for the month of June — at least I hope it is — before
adjourning it, on behalf of the delegation of the

18/18

29/06/2018

Russian Federation, I would like to express my sincere
gratitude to the members of the Council, especially
my colleagues the Permanent Representatives, their
mission staffs and the secretariat of the Council for all
the support that they have given us, and also for the
kind words I have heard today for our presidency. It
really was a busy month, in which we managed to reach
a consensus on a number of important issues within our
remit. We could not have achieved those results alone
or without the hard work, support and constructive
contribution of every delegation and the representatives
of the Secretariat, as well as all the conference staff,
the interpreters and translators, the verbatim reporting
service and the security staff, for which I want to thank
them sincerely.
Our presidency is coming to an end and I am sure
that the members of the Council will support me in
wishing the Swedish delegation luck in July. I hope this
official football, which has been our guiding light for
half of our presidency, will bring luck to the Swedish
delegation and will also remain on the table, according
to the agreement reached with the Swedish delegation,
until the end of the FIFA World Cup. We wish the
delegation of Sweden success with the presidency of the
Security Council and the Swedish national team success
on the World Cup football field, and many thanks to all.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

18-20346
