United Nations

A/RES/58/220

General Assembly

Distr.: General
19 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 97 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2003
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/58/487)]

58/220. Economic and technical cooperation among
developing countries
The General Assembly,
Stressing that South-South cooperation, as an important element of
international cooperation for development, offers viable opportunities for
developing countries and countries with economies in transition in their individual
and collective pursuit of sustained economic growth and sustainable development,
Recognizing that developing countries have the primary responsibility for
promoting and implementing South-South cooperation, not as a substitute for but
rather as a complement to North-South cooperation, and in this context reiterating
the need for the international community to support the efforts of the developing
countries to expand South-South cooperation,
Taking note of the Ministerial Declaration adopted by the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the States members of the Group of 77 at their twenty-seventh
annual meeting, held in New York on 25 September 2003, 1 in which the increased
importance and relevance of South-South cooperation were re-emphasized,
1.
Takes note of the report of the High-level Committee on the Review of
Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries on its thirteenth session, 2
endorses the decisions adopted by the High-level Committee at that session, 3 and
decides to change the name of the Committee to High-level Committee on SouthSouth Cooperation, with no change in its mandate or in the scope of its activities;
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the state of South2.
South cooperation 4 and on raising public awareness of and support for South-South
cooperation; 5

_______________
1

A/58/413, annex.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 39 (A/58/39).
3
Ibid., annex I.
4
A/58/319.
5
A/58/345.
2

03 50772

A/RES/58/220

3.
Reaffirms the need to strengthen further, within its available resources,
the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation of the United Nations Development
Programme as a separate entity and a focal point for South-South cooperation within
the United Nations system, recognizes that its activities should be perceived as an
integral part of the overall development policy of the United Nations system and the
United Nations Development Programme, and in this context calls upon United
Nations funds and programmes and other entities of the United Nations
development system to intensify efforts to mainstream technical and economic
cooperation among developing countries by using relevant national, regional and
international mechanisms in consultation with Member States;
Notes with interest that South-South cooperation can have a positive
4.
impact on global, regional and national policies and actions in the economic, social
and development fields in the developing countries, and urges developing countries
and their partners to intensify South-South and triangular cooperation in these areas,
as they contribute to the achievement of the internationally agreed development
goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration; 6
5.
Recognizes that regional integration initiatives between developing
countries constitute an important and valuable form of South-South cooperation and
that regional integration is a step towards beneficial integration into the world
economy;
Also recognizes the urgent need to help to strengthen the capacities of the
6.
developing countries, especially the least developed countries, to participate in and
benefit from globalization and liberalization processes, and to this end welcomes the
initiatives being undertaken at the subregional, regional, interregional and global
levels towards establishing public-private partnership mechanisms aiming to
enhance and expand South-South cooperation in trade and investment, and in this
context notes the initiatives of the World Trade Forum;
Reiterates the urgent need to help to strengthen institutions and centres
7.
of excellence in the South, especially at the regional and interregional levels, with a
view to making more effective use of such entities towards improved South-South
knowledge-sharing, networking, capacity-building, information and best practices
exchanges, policy analysis and coordinated action among developing countries on
major issues of common concern, and in this context encourages such institutions
and centres of excellence, as well as regional and subregional economic groupings,
to establish closer links and bridges among themselves, including through the Web
of Information for Development of the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation;
Notes with interest the holding of the High-level Conference on South8.
South Cooperation in Marrakesh, Morocco, from 16 to 19 December 2003, and calls
upon developing countries, and encourages their development partners and relevant
international organizations, to participate actively in the Conference in order to
ensure its success and increase the momentum and intensity of South-South
cooperation;
Urges all relevant United Nations organizations and multilateral
9.
institutions to intensify their efforts to effectively mainstream the use of SouthSouth cooperation in the design, formulation and implementation of their regular
programmes and to consider increasing allocations of human, technical and financial

_______________
6

2

See resolution 55/2.

A/RES/58/220

resources for supporting South-South cooperation initiatives, and in this regard
takes note of the initiatives contained in the Havana Programme of Action adopted
by the first South Summit 7 and the follow-up to the High-level Conference on
South-South Cooperation in Marrakesh, as well as the preparations for the second
South Summit in 2005;
10. Recognizes the need to mobilize additional resources for enhancing
South-South cooperation, reiterates in this context its decision in its resolution
57/263 of 20 December 2002 to include the Voluntary Trust Fund for the Promotion
of South-South Cooperation in the United Nations Pledging Conference for
Development Activities, as long as it exists, and in the same manner decides to
include the Pérez-Guerrero Trust Fund for Economic and Technical Cooperation
among Developing Countries in the same Pledging Conference, and invites all
countries, in particular developed countries, to support South-South and triangular
cooperation through, inter alia, these funds, bearing in mind the need for these funds
to continue to use such resources in an effective manner;
11. Decides to declare 19 December, the date on which the General
Assembly endorsed the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for Promoting and
Implementing Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries, 8 as the United
Nations Day for South-South Cooperation;
12. Also decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session a
sub-item entitled “South-South cooperation for development”, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit at that session a comprehensive report on the state of
South-South cooperation and on the implementation of the present resolution.
78th plenary meeting
23 December 2003

_______________
7

A/55/74, annex II.
Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries,
Buenos Aires, 30 August-12 September 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.II.A.11 and
corrigendum), chap. I.

8

3
