S/PV.8706

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8706th meeting

Tuesday, 21 January 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Baati
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-01495 (E)
*2001495*

S/PV.8706

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

21/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question

Ms. DiCarlo: I brief the Security Council today
amid heightened regional tensions that threaten to
destabilize further an already volatile political and
security environment. The Secretary-General has been
clear in calling on all leaders to exercise maximum
restraint and has emphasized that the world cannot
afford another conflict.

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Maldives,
Morocco, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Portugal,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates to
participate in this meeting.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is not immune
to the tensions in the region. At the same time, the
effects of its persistence are felt far beyond Israel
and the occupied Palestinian territory. The United
Nations has consistently stated that we cannot hope
to bring sustainable peace to the Middle East without
taking firm action to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and achieve a two-State solution based on
international law, relevant United Nations resolutions
and prior agreements.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations, to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

It is, sadly, not a surprise that a recent survey
of millennials by the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) found that almost two
thirds — 65 per cent — of Israeli millennials thought
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would never end,
making them the least optimistic of people surveyed
in countries affected by war. Palestinians were also
pessimistic, although slightly less so, with 52 per
cent believing that the conflict would never end. The
international community bears a responsibility to help
build a different future for those young Israelis and
Palestinians, one that promises hope, reconciliation and
peaceful coexistence rather than perpetual occupation
and conflict.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ms. Ursula Mueller,
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Mrs. Adela Raz, Vice-Chair of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, and His Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah
Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
2/30

During the past few weeks, the United Nations has
continued its engagement with all Palestinian factions
to stress the need for, and the prospect of, holding longoverdue legislative and presidential elections. Political
parties have confirmed they would include more women
candidates than the law requires. Discussions also
continue regarding potentially amending the electoral
law and raising the quota of women candidates on a list
from 20 to 30 per cent.
Despite broad internal political agreement and a
series of compromises by all factions, to date President
Abbas has not issued the decree needed to schedule
elections. In the past month, he has stated that he would
not set dates until Israel agrees that elections can take
place in East Jerusalem. Plans to organize the vote are
now grinding to a halt. The Secretary-General and the
20-01495

21/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Special Coordinator remain hopeful that elections will
be scheduled soon in line with previous practice.
With the political process deadlocked, negative
developments continue to undermine the prospects for
a two-State solution. The beginning of 2020 witnessed
the continued expansion of settlement activity and the
threat of annexation of parts of the West Bank. On
4 and 5 January, Israeli authorities advanced plans for
some 1,900 residential units in settlements in Area C.
The plans include the retroactive regularization under
Israeli law of an outpost and the advancement of plans
in two other locations that were regularized in 2019. In
addition, tenders were announced for some 2,200 units
in Area C and East Jerusalem.
On 5 January, an inter-ministerial committee
tasked with discussing annexation plans for the Jordan
Valley held its first meeting. On 9 January, the Office
of the Minister of Defence announced the appointment
of the director of a new task force to tackle so-called
“illegal Palestinian construction” in Area C of the West
Bank. Also in January, the Jerusalem District Planning
Committee advanced a new 150-unit compound to
be built in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of
Beit Hanina, on land owned jointly by Israelis and
Palestinians. The construction rights are expected to be
split between the Israeli and Palestinian owners of the
land, although the Palestinian owners had previously
submitted objections to that plan.
On 15 January, following a ruling by Israel’s
High Court of Justice, Israeli authorities demolished
two houses in the outpost of Kumi Ori, in Area B of
the West Bank. Also on 15 January, Israel’s Defence
Ministry announced it was advancing the declaration of
seven new nature reserves in Area C and the expansion
of 12 existing ones. If implemented, those declarations
would be the first of their kind since the start of the
Oslo process.
I reiterate that all settlements are illegal under
international law and remain an obstacle to peace. The
annexation of some or all of Area C, if implemented,
would deal a devastating blow to the potential for
reviving negotiations, advancing regional peace and the
essence of the two-State solution.
Meanwhile, sporadic violence in the occupied
West Bank, including Jerusalem, and Gaza continued
throughout the reporting period. Two hundred and
twenty Palestinians, including 80 children, were
injured in various incidents, including during clashes,

S/PV. 8706

protests, search-and-arrest operations and settlerrelated violence. Of those, 50 were injured by tear-gas
inhalation. In addition, six Israelis, including one child,
were injured during the reporting period.
Developments in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood
of Al-Issawiya are a significant and growing
concern. The area continues to be the focal point of
ongoing clashes and numerous arrests, including of
minors. The United Nations continues to monitor the
situation closely.
While the situation remains extremely fragile, there
has been a notable and welcome reduction in violence
in and around Gaza, as the understandings brokered by
the United Nations and Egypt continue to be broadly
upheld. On 26 December, the organizers of the ongoing
protests along the Gaza perimeter fence announced that
the weekly demonstrations would be on hold until the
end of March. Following the announcement, a relative
calm has prevailed along the fence.
The limited demonstrations that took place prior
to the announcement remained relatively peaceful,
although some protesters engaged in violent activities,
including approaching the fence and throwing Molotov
cocktails and explosive devices towards Israeli forces.
The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) responded with
riot dispersal means and live fire, injuring some 140
Palestinians, including some 75 women and children.
According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, (OCHA), the number of injuries
recorded during the Gaza protests during the reporting
period was the lowest since the protests began, in March
2018. One Palestinian died of injuries sustained during
a protest in May 2018.
It is concerning and regrettable, however, that there
has been a resurgence in the past few days of incidents
of incendiary balloons and kites being launched from
Gaza towards Israel. Those actions are a risk to the
civilian population. During the reporting period,
Palestinian militants fired some 20 projectiles from the
Gaza Strip towards Israeli communities, a significant
decrease as compared to previous months. The rockets
fell short, fell in open areas or were intercepted and did
not cause any damage or injuries. In response to the
rocket attacks, the IDF conducted several strikes against
what it said were Hamas targets in Gaza. No injuries
were reported. Assistant Secretary-General Mueller
will elaborate in further detail on the humanitarian
situation in the occupied territory.

20-014953/30

S/PV.8706

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Despite ongoing efforts, the socioeconomic
situation in Gaza remains very difficult. Progress was
made during the reporting period on the implementation
of the package of urgent humanitarian and economic
interventions for Gaza endorsed in September 2018 by
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC). I
take this opportunity to thank those in the international
community that have contributed to the implementation
of the AHLC plan, and call on all to increase their
support to United Nations programmes on the ground.
By the end of 2019, 37,000 temporary jobs had been
created by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the United
Nations Development Programme and the World Bank.
The cash-for-work programmes specifically target
women and young people, as they are underrepresented
in the labour force and require specialized assistance
to gain access to employment opportunities. Several
thousand more jobs are expected to be created this year.
The increased funding would allow United Nations
agencies the capacity to significantly scale up and
improve those job opportunities, as well as implement
other programmes to support the economy and address
unemployment in the longer term. Qatari-funded fuel
supplies for the Gaza power plant also continued,
allowing for increased and more stable electricity
supplies in Gaza.
Meanwhile, many AHLC projects remain unfunded
or in deficit. Critical health interventions identified in
the package are still in deficit of $4 million. Donors
are encouraged to continue their support for those
interventions to alleviate the suffering of the population
and help avoid another deadly escalation.
Despite the welcome progress in advancing those
projects, it is a fact that humanitarian and economic
steps alone will not resolve Gaza’s immense challenges.
At their core, Gaza’s problems are political, and they
require political solutions. Palestinian leaders must take
concrete steps to ensure that Gaza and the West Bank
are reunited. At the same time, Israel must significantly
improve movement and access for goods and people to
and from Gaza, as a step towards the full lifting of the
closures, in line with resolution 1860 (2009).
In other developments during the reporting period,
on 20 December, the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) released a statement announcing
that the ICC’s preliminary examination into the situation
4/30

21/01/2020

in Palestine had concluded with the determination that
all the statutory criteria under the Rome Statute for the
opening of an investigation had been met. In doing so,
she expressed her view that, among other things, war
crimes had been or were being committed in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip.
She also stated her position that the Court’s jurisdiction
applies to the occupied Palestinian territory.
In line with legislation passed in the Knesset in
July 2018, on 29 December the Government decided
to withhold $43 million in clearance revenues that
Israel collects on behalf of the Palestinian Authority,
in monthly instalments spread over the course of 2020.
The amount was determined by Israeli authorities to be
equal to what Palestinian authorities paid Palestinians
injured in attacks against Israelis and families of those
killed in such attacks. That deduction comes in addition
to $139 million already withheld by Israel against
stipends paid in 2018 to prisoners convicted or accused
of security offences against Israel. I am concerned
that this development may strain the tenuous progress
made in October 2019, when Israel and the Palestinian
Authority reached a partial agreement on transferring
clearance revenues. I reiterate my call on both sides to
engage in a constructive manner to ensure compliance
with the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations. The
United Nations stands ready to assist in that process.
Turning to the region, efforts to form a Government
in Lebanon have continued since Hassan Diab was
nominated Prime Minister-designate on 19 December.
The popular protests also continue, against the
background of a deteriorating economic situation. The
violent incidents that took place in Beirut between
protesters and security forces in recent days and
incidents of disproportionate use of force raise very
serious concerns, particularly as the protests had been
largely peaceful until now. Following recent tensions
in the region, the Special Coordinator for Lebanon and
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
Head of Mission and Force Commander encouraged
parties to shield Lebanon from any potential spillover
and to urge calm. The situation in the UNIFIL
area of operations, including along the Blue Line,
remained stable.
While the situation on the Golan had generally
remained calm in the past weeks, on 14 January the
Syrian armed forces issued a statement informing that
the Israel Defense Forces had conducted an airstrike
on targets located in Syria. The United Nations
20-01495

21/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Disengagement Observer Force engaged both parties
in order to prevent an escalation of tensions and
reminded them of their obligation to respect the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
continued urgency of resolving the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict on the basis of relevant United Nations
resolutions, international law and bilateral agreements.
In the absence of progress towards an agreement
that will resolve all final-status issues, the United
Nations continues to focus its efforts on establishing
an environment conducive to a return to negotiations.
Recent events in the region have once again brought
to fore the crucial necessity of dialogue and diplomacy
in the region. What is more, we need look no further
to find living examples of dialogue and coexistence
at the community level: despite the political deadlock
and tensions, Palestinians and Israelis on the ground
continue to work every day to build a more peaceful
and secure future. From youth creating new platforms
to increase cultural understanding across religious and
national lines, to women demanding a greater role in
their Governments’ decision-making, these remarkable
individuals continue to serve as an inspiration to all of
us to redouble our efforts towards a negotiated solution.
I assure the Council that the United Nations remains
committed to supporting Palestinians and Israelis as
they pursue a peaceful and just future.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to update the Security Council on the humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory.
I have just returned from a six-day mission to
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory, where I
heard from Palestinian and Israeli people, as well as
representatives of the international community and
humanitarian partners. Those meetings conveyed
hardships and challenges, and opportunities for
positive change.
Today Palestinian families throughout the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, and in Gaza struggle
to live in dignity across a fragmented territory.
One in every two Palestinians — some 2.4 million
people — need humanitarian aid in 2020, due to a
protection crisis resulting from occupation, the blockade
on Gaza, recurrent cycles of violence and over a decade

S/PV. 8706

of Hamas control, which has fuelled the internal
Palestinian political divide. Widespread humanitarian
access and civilian movement restrictions, increasing
demolitions and destruction of property, the excessive
use of force, restrictive planning regimes, forced
displacement, and impediments to livelihood and
economic opportunity, combine as drivers of chronic
vulnerability and humanitarian need. Humanitarian
partners work to meet those growing needs in the face
of increasing constraints on operations and recordlow funding.
In Gaza, I met Salwa, a 53-year-old cancer survivor,
who told me how she was overwhelmed with a sense of
fear and devastation while battling her illness and trying
to care for her family. She was allowed to leave Gaza
to receive medical treatment in the West Bank, but her
permit was subsequently denied without explanation,
interrupting critical treatment, deepening her anxiety
and creating a sense of hopelessness.
I also met Anas, a 24-year-old medical graduate,
who spoke about the limited options for youth and
how movement restrictions have severely curtailed
opportunities for a productive life. He expressed concern
that the energy and passion of Palestinians in Gaza is
being lost, making young people more susceptible to
extremism and driving too many to attempt suicide.
Those stories underscore the fragility in Gaza. But
I also saw tremendous potential: for example, young
women such as Bissan, who, at the age of 21, had
already started a charity to help. Razan, another young
woman, told me: “We have people here with high-level
skills and abilities, with innovative ways of thinking,
but we need opportunities.”
In 2019, violence during the Great March of
Return demonstrations at the Gaza fence caused injury
and claimed lives. Since March 2018, more than 210
Palestinians, including 46 children, had been killed and
more than 8,000 had been shot with live ammunition.
While there were fewer casualties in the latter part
of 2019, we continue to have concerns about Israel’s
excessive use of force during the demonstrations and the
instrumentalization of Palestinian children by Hamas.
The large number of injuries from the
demonstrations has overstretched Gaza’s already limited
health services, which suffer from acute shortages in
drugs, personnel, equipment and electricity. More than
1,200 people required limb reconstruction and some
150 underwent amputations, all of whom need long-

20-014955/30

S/PV.8706

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

term rehabilitation. The World Health Organization
also reported more than 200 incidents involving health
workers in Gaza in 2019, resulting in 270 injured.
Since the start of 2019, there have been multiple
escalations in hostilities between armed groups in Gaza
and Israel, most of which were fortunately contained
thanks to an intense joint United Nations and Egyptian
mediation effort. Nevertheless, 29 Palestinian civilians,
as well as 33 members of armed groups, were killed in
Israeli air strikes and five Israeli civilians were killed
by Palestinian indiscriminate rocket fire. I urge all
parties to take all feasible precautions to avoid civilian
harm in the course of hostilities.
Unemployment in Gaza is at 45 per cent, with
youth unemployment at over 60 per cent. Some 46 per
cent of the population live below the $5.5 poverty line
and an estimated 60 per cent of households are food
insecure. The young people whom I met in Gaza, like
anywhere else in the world, simply ask for peace and
the opportunity for a productive life.
While the efforts of the Government of Israel to
ease movement by increasing the number of permits for
people to leave Gaza are acknowledged, the approval
rate of permit applications for patients to leave Gaza
through the Erez crossing for medical treatment was
65 per cent on average in 2019. According to UNICEF,
more than a third of the children who left Gaza for
medical treatment between October 2018 and July
2019 were unaccompanied by a parent due to not being
allowed to exit.
It is also acknowledged that efforts have been
made by the Israeli authorities to ease the import and
export of goods and to reduce the number of restricted
items on the dual-use list. However, significant limits
that undermine the economy and impede the ability to
improve essential services and infrastructure remain.
That is exacerbated by the long-standing political and
administrative Palestinian divide, which has reduced
the capacity of service providers in Gaza to provide
basic services. Nearly half of essential medicines and
approximately 30 per cent of essential supplies stand at
less than one month’s supply. According to the World
Health Organization, Israel’s restrictions on imports
have impacted access to medical supplies and the
maintenance of medical equipment.
Amid a decline in external aid, high unemployment
and economic recession, vulnerable people in Gaza are
trapped in a cycle of deepening poverty and insecurity,
6/30

21/01/2020

with few opportunities to become self-reliant. They
resort to harmful coping mechanisms that impact
children the most. UNICEF reports rising rates of
school dropout, child labour and child marriage and an
estimated 270,000 children suffer from some form of
mental disorder. Similarly, I have seen how the lives and
well-being of residents in Israeli communities around
Gaza are disrupted by rocket fire from Palestinian
armed groups, with mental health impacts, particularly
among children.
Within that larger picture, however, there is room
for cautious optimism. The number of people permitted
by the Israeli authorities to leave Gaza increased by
46 per cent in 2019, as compared to 2018, and reached
the highest level since 2007. The volume of goods
exiting Gaza increased by 20 per cent, as compared to
2018. December 2019 witnessed the largest number of
goods exiting in any month, also since 2007.
The number of people leaving Gaza through
the Egyptian-controlled Rafah crossing increased
by nearly 40 per cent in 2019, as compared to 2018.
Israel expanded the permissible fishing area along the
southern and central parts of Gaza’s coast to 15 nautical
miles offshore, allowing access to deeper waters.
Funding provided by the Government of Qatar enabled
the electricity supply to increase in 2019 to an average
of 12 hours a day. And, as Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo said, by the end of 2019, 37,000 jobs had been
created by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the United
Nations Development Programme and the World Bank.
Such improvements give me hope for Gaza if we
build on that momentum. It will be key for Israel to
further relax restrictions on movement, alongside
adopting measures that stimulate the economy, in line
with resolution 1860 (2009). The Palestinian Authority
must refrain from impeding the allocation of resources
to people in Gaza as a way of exerting pressure on
Hamas, which must prioritize people’s needs in
Gaza. All parties must uphold their international
legal obligations.
In the West Bank, I visited a Palestinian Bedouin
community in the Jordan Valley. I met Jamil and Manar,
a young couple, who described the pressures that their
community faces, including home demolitions, the
constant threat of further demolition of their property
and restrictions on movement. Manar, a 24-year-old
mother, described her personal fears and challenges,
20-01495

21/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

shared by her family and neighbours. She spoke of the
anxiety over simple activities, such as transport to school
without the threat of harassment from Israeli settlers,
entry by the Israeli military into the community and her
fear that she cannot protect her children. Families there
are not connected to the water or electricity networks.
Although they have lived in the area since the 1970s,
the Israeli authorities consider their presence illegal.
Jamil and Manar’s experience mirrors that of many
Palestinians in the West Bank, where families face
difficulty in securing adequate shelter, accessing basic
services and protecting their children and the elderly.
Economic development is undermined by Israeli
administrative and physical constraints that fragment
the territory, limiting Palestinian access to land and
natural resources. That is most extreme in Area C,
comprising 60 per cent of the West Bank, where
the planning regime makes it virtually impossible
for Palestinians to develop adequate housing and
infrastructure. Most public land is allocated to Israeli
settlements or to military use and most private land is
zoned as agricultural or “green” areas.
Homes, clinics, schools, water cisterns and animal
shelters without permits face the risk of demolition
or confiscation. In 2019, 620 structures were demolished
across the West Bank — mainly in Area C and East
Jerusalem — displacing over 900 Palestinians and
affecting access to services and livelihoods for tens
of thousands of people. That represents an increase
of 35 per cent in demolitions and nearly double the
number of displaced persons as compared to 2018. The
number of structures demolished in East Jerusalem is
the highest in two decades. Over 12,500 demolition
orders are pending today against Palestinian properties
in Area C, and nearly one third of the homes in East
Jerusalem face a risk of demolition because they lack
building permits.
Such measures increase the vulnerability of
communities, generating the need for humanitarian
support; but the aid provided to those Palestinians is
also impacted. A total of 126 structures demolished or
confiscated in 2019 had been provided as humanitarian
assistance. An estimated 162,000 Palestinians across
Area C have limited access to primary health-care
services, relying only on mobile clinics. Earlier this
month, on 2 January, the Israeli authorities, citing a
lack of prior coordination, seized a vehicle that was
used to transport medical staff and equipment to a
mobile health clinic in Masafer Yatta, south of Hebron,

S/PV. 8706

impeding residents’ access to health care. Through a
range of legal and administrative measures, Israel has
enabled the establishment and expansion of Israeli
settlements in the heart of Palestinian neighbourhoods
in East Jerusalem and Hebron city, at times resulting in
the forced eviction of Palestinian families.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs recorded 340 attacks in 2019 carried out by
Israelis, including settlers, resulting in two fatalities,
135 injuries and property damage, including to
more than 6,200 fruit-bearing trees, representing a
100 per cent increase as compared to 2017. Such attacks
undermine the physical security and livelihoods of
Palestinians. Despite the Israeli authorities’ efforts to
prevent and address such violence, concerns remain
about serious gaps in accountability that may contribute
to the prevalence of settler attacks.
There were 112 Palestinian attacks against Israeli
civilians in 2019, including settlers, in the West Bank
and Israel, resulting in three deaths and 26 injuries,
along with damage to Israeli property. In addition,
26 Palestinians were killed and 3,455 were injured by
Israeli forces in the West Bank in search-and-arrest
operations, demonstrations and clashes. There are
concerns about excessive use of force by Israel in the
context of law enforcement operations during protests
and other clashes. The combined impact of many of those
challenges places pressure on families to leave their
communities, contributing to a coercive environment
that places them at risk of forcible transfer.
Operating space for humanitarian actors is
constrained by both the Israeli and the Palestinian
authorities. Efforts to delegitimize humanitarian
action in the occupied Palestinian territory continue
to undermine our ability to provide protection and
assistance to people in need. We are also facing recordlow funding levels. The humanitarian response plan for
2020 is highly prioritized and requests $348 million to
provide basic food, protection, health care, shelter and
water and sanitation to 1.5 million of the most vulnerable
Palestinians. Over 75 per cent of the requested funds
are for Gaza.
I urge Member States to increase their support to
humanitarian operations in the occupied Palestinian
territory to both the humanitarian response plan and
the United Nations Occupied Palestinian Territory
Humanitarian Fund. The Humanitarian Fund allocated
$27.4 million in 2019, benefiting 1.1 million people.

20-014957/30

S/PV.8706

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Providing funding to UNRWA, the largest humanitarian
actor in the occupied Palestinian territory, is also
critical in order to prevent deterioration, especially in
Gaza. Member States are also encouraged to support
interventions that strengthen humanitarian development
collaboration and reduce Palestinians’ reliance on
humanitarian aid. Such strategic assistance is critical
where deterioration risks further destabilization in an
already volatile region. Aside from funding, strong
support by Member States is required to ensure that
humanitarian partners are able to operate according
to humanitarian principles and counter the impact of
unsubstantiated allegations against operational partners.
In order to decrease vulnerabilities in the longer
term, it is vital that all parties work towards the
policy shifts required to reduce humanitarian need
and uphold obligations under international law. We
saw improvements in Gaza in 2019 that, if developed
and expanded to the West Bank, have the potential to
generate positive change in 2020. We must galvanize
our efforts as the international community to ensure
that Palestinian families are increasingly able to live
in dignity.
I continue to urge all parties — Israeli and
Palestinian — to uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. The basic needs of Palestinians in
Gaza and in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
must be met, including by allowing the entry of essential
supplies and humanitarian relief. Lethal force in law
enforcement operations must be used only when strictly
unavoidable in order to protect life.
Ultimately, the solution for the occupied Palestinian
territory is neither humanitarian nor development
action, but lies in political discourse and agreement. In
conclusion, I reiterate Special Coordinator Mladenov’s
call to this organ, urging leaders on all sides to summon
the necessary political will to take concrete steps in
support of ending the occupation and realizing a lasting
peace, resulting in two democratic States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace.
The President: I thank Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We congratulate Viet
Nam and express our appreciation for its able leadership
of the Security Council. We also congratulate the other
8/30

21/01/2020

newly elected members — Estonia, the Niger, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines and Tunisia — and express
our hope for their success, together with the rest of the
Council, in upholding their responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Such responsibilities
are ever-more critical during these troubled times for
our world.
I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, Ms. Ursula Mueller, for their important
briefings on the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Any impartial
assessment of the situation reflects the dire political,
socioeconomic, humanitarian and security conditions
as Israel, the occupying Power, continues exploiting the
Security Council’s paralysis and the blind support of
its main ally, further entrenching its illegal occupation
of Palestinian land and destroying prospects for a
peaceful solution.
The past year ended with disturbing figures,
underscoring the severity of violations and the
protection crisis being suffered by Palestinian children,
women and men under Israeli occupation.
In 2019, Israeli occupying forces killed 134
Palestinians and injured over 15,000 people, the
majority by air strikes and live fire. The casualty toll
from the Great March of Return in the Gaza Strip
has reached over 300 Palestinians killed, including
children, and over 35,000 injured by the occupying
forces since the protests began in 2018. That includes
50 persons blinded by bullets to the eyes, 150 limb
amputations and another 200 expected, according to
the World Health Organization. The scope and scale
of injuries has pushed Gaza’s already strained health
system to the breaking point.
The year brought Gaza closer to the United Nations
country team’s Gaza in 2020 report projection that
the impact of Israel’s illegal blockade, now nearing
its fourteenth year, and military aggressions would
leave Gaza uninhabitable by 2020 if not reversed.
The humanitarian situation remains dire; we have an
extensive report to that effect. World Bank estimates
indicate 53 per cent unemployment and a shocking
67 per cent for youth in Gaza, where poverty, food
insecurity and despair are also rampant and nearly
97 per cent of the water is unfit for human consumption.
20-01495

21/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Were it not for the assistance provided by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and other
international aid, the situation would have collapsed
long ago. We are grateful for the General Assembly’s
resounding renewal of the UNRWA mandate and for
the generous donor support. We urge the redoubling of
support in the light of the financial crisis and immense
pressures being endured by the Agency, including
ongoing attempts by Israel to obstruct the presence and
services of UNRWA in occupied East Jerusalem. Israel
must be reminded that it is not the sovereign in the
city. I repeat — Israel must be reminded that it is not
the sovereign in the occupied city of East Jerusalem.
It remains the occupying Power and is obligated to
respect the United Nations immunity, international law
and all relevant resolutions.
The year 2019 also witnessed daily arrests by
the occupying forces. Over 5,500 Palestinians were
detained, including 889 children and 128 women; some
were released after interrogation and others imprisoned.
Currently, more than 5,000 Palestinians, including
50 women and 200 children, are being held captive
in Israeli jails, including 450 under administrative
detention. Approximately 700 of these are suffering
illnesses, including 10 cancer patients, all subjected to
inhumane treatment and conditions.
Israel’s illegal settlement activities also reached
unprecedented rates in 2019, as confirmed in the
Secretary-General’s reports on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016) and countless other
reports. Settlement construction and expansion, land
confiscation, property demolitions, excavations and
natural resource exploitation all escalated. Over 10,000
new settlement units were advanced, which will result
in the illegal transfer of thousands upon thousands
more Israeli settlers if not stopped. The start of 2020
began similarly, with Israel brazenly announcing plans
for 2,000 more settlement units.
Israeli settler violence and terror against Palestinian
civilians, including children, also continued unabated.
Some 256 attacks were recorded in 2019, 50 carried out
by terrorist price-tag militias and gangs, causing death,
injury, damage to homes, churches, mosques, orchards
and vehicles.
Annexation threats also grew louder in 2019.
While Israeli officials continue to brag about Israel’s
illegal annexation of East Jerusalem and openly pursue

S/PV. 8706

measures to alter the city’s demographic composition,
character and legal status unchallenged, their
expansionist appetite has grown.
It is clear that Israeli officials believe that they
have secured United States support for such an illegal
scheme, notably after the December 2017 decision on
Jerusalem and the November 2019 announcement on
settlements, and have zero regard for the law — in this
case, international law. Recent statements by the United
States Ambassador to Israel, promising to deliver
everything to Israel, have only furthered that belief, as
heard in Prime Minister Netanyahu’s constant vows of
annexation, including his recent statement that:
“We are going to bring United States recognition
for our sovereignty in the Jordan Valley, in all the
settlements, those in the blocs and those that are
beyond it.”
In 2019, demolitions escalated as well. Israel
destroyed or seized 617 Palestinian homes and properties
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, forcibly
displacing 898 Palestinians. In addition to homes,
donor-funded humanitarian projects, water wells,
agricultural structures and solar panels were destroyed,
the majority in the so-called Area C of the West Bank,
which is openly targeted for Israeli annexation.
In the past decade, over 10,000 Palestinians have
been displaced by Israeli demolitions and the threat
of displacement looms over thousands more, many
refugees and the majority living in occupied East
Jerusalem and surrounding areas. Ongoing threats
to demolish Khan Al-Ahmar and forcibly transfer its
inhabitants reflect that stark reality.
“Destroy Khan Al-Ahmar tomorrow morning,
every day a different illegal outpost of Arabs and
Europeans. In war as in war — took a heavy toll
on all sides. In the coming year you will have
American backing and that is definitely enough.”
Those are the words of Israel’s Transport Minister.
Similarly, a Knesset member has declared:
“The future of Judea and Samaria will be decided
in actions, not words. Khan Al-Ahmar must be
removed immediately.”
Both statements were made following the decision
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor
to open an investigation into war crimes committed
in Palestine as Israeli politicians join Prime Minister

20-014959/30

S/PV.8706

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and other officials in mocking the Court, flaunting
their intentions to commit more crimes and competing
in criminality. Such open provocation and incitement
intensified throughout the year, including provocations
against the holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem. Israeli
officials continue to recklessly violate the historic
status quo at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, disrespect Jordan’s
custodianship and call for Israeli takeover of that holy
site, fuelling the radicalism of Jewish extremists and
fanning the flames of religious war.
All of that has compounded the hardships and
suffering of the Palestinian civilian population,
devastating millions of lives. At the same time, they are
severely undermining the prospects of peace, making
the two-State solution, based on the pre-1967 borders,
more remote than ever and a one-State apartheid reality
more probable, to the detriment of all living on that
land for the foreseeable future.
Barring immediate, tangible action, based on
accountability under international law, first and
foremost, the prognosis for the new year will be equally
bleak, if not worse. Just weeks ago in this Chamber (see
S/PV.8699), we heard lofty statements about the Charter
of the United Nations. The consensus was clear in every
pledge. Respect for the Charter and international law
is key to ensuring global peace and security and the
viability of the international rules-based order. Yet
there are those who continue to recklessly trample the
law without regard for the consequences.
For decades, Israel, the occupying Power, has
trampled the Charter, United Nations resolutions and
all relevant provisions of international law. As with
common war criminals, even the spectre of an ICC
investigation has not deterred Israeli Government
officials and military commanders, who continue
to blatantly challenge the Security Council and the
international community as a whole. We must therefore
once again call for actions to uphold the rule of law.
This is an urgent, shared responsibility and obligation
for the Security Council, the General Assembly, the
ICC and all States.
It is past time to end to the double standard that has
allowed such sheer impunity by Israel. It is past time to
say “Enough”. It does not make sense to speak eloquently
about international law, principles and commitments,
while allowing them to be shredded and ridiculed so
systematically and without consequence. Upholding the
Charter requires defending it in all circumstances and
10/30

21/01/2020

insisting on compliance with zero exceptions. In cases
of its breach, accountability is paramount.
All Israeli colonization in occupied Palestine,
including East Jerusalem, must be condemned and
neither threats nor attempts at annexation should
go unchallenged. They must be immediately halted.
The Charter must be upheld. The prohibition on the
acquisition of territory by force must stand. Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
must be respected. This must mean the complete
cessation of all Israeli settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
as well as all measures of annexation and all other
unlawful policies and practices, including collective
punishment, an end to its illegal blockade of Gaza and
all acts of provocation, incitement and violence.
Should Israel continue to defy the international
community, there should be no hesitation to pursue
the prosecution of the perpetrators and sanctions — I
repeat, sanctions. For, absent accountability, it is clear
that Israel will persist with its crimes, causing more
human suffering, irreversibly dismantling the twoState solution and compounding the conflict with
grave consequences. This worst-case scenario must be
averted, and all must uphold their duties and pledges to
seek peace, security and justice.
This is not Israel-bashing; it is a call for respect
for the law and our shared values — the foundations
of a safe, peaceful and prosperous world — and for
safeguarding human rights and salvaging the just
solution that can finally end this tragic conflict. The
urgent need to stop Israeli annexation schemes cannot
be underestimated. Immediate action is needed before
it is too late — prevention, prevention, prevention. We
need to stop annexation before it takes place. It is our
collective responsibility to do so. Any talk of peace
plans, which might be coming soon, should be about
actualizing Palestinian independence and sovereignty,
not advancing Israeli annexation. I repeat, not advancing
Israeli annexation.
Initiatives endorsing such illegal schemes and
departing from the global consensus enshrined in the
Council’s resolutions are rejected and doomed to fail,
as all here, with the exception of one delegation, have
repeated in the Council so many times. Any initiative
not rooted in global consensus, international law and
United Nations resolutions will fail. All here have said
that. The representative of the United Kingdom, the
20-01495

21/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

representative of France, the representative of Germany
and the rest of the Council repeat this message all the
time. Any initiative not rooted in global consensus to
end the occupation to preserve the two-State solution,
based on the 1967 borders, without any changes unless
agreed upon by the two parties through negotiations,
will fail — I repeat, will fail.
In this year of the United Nations seventy-fifth
anniversary, we appeal for a renewed commitment to
the Charter. Should the Security Council continue to be
obstructed from fulfilling its Charter duties, we call on
all States, individually and collectively, to act in respect
of their political, legal and moral obligations and the
long-standing international consensus to justly resolve
the Palestine question. Only such action can bring us
back from the brink and make a just solution not only
possible but inevitable. Such a solution must end the
Israeli occupation and achieve the independence of the
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital,
based on international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative, as well as a just solution for the plight of the
Palestine refugees on the basis of General Assembly
resolution 194 (II).
While the start of this year gives little cause for
hope, we are by no means hopeless. Despite adversity
and setbacks, we are steadfast in the pursuit of our
rights, including to self-determination, and firm in our
conviction with regard to the inevitability of justice. The
Palestinian people are not going anywhere. Millions of
them are rooted in our national homeland, and no one
can remove them from our national homeland.
To those who believe that the destruction of the
two-State solution will end the Palestinian struggle
for freedom, we say that they are wrong — they are
absolutely wrong. Despite all the challenges, we will
never give up on our legitimate national aspirations for
the Palestinian people to live freely and equally in their
homeland, side by side with all of their neighbours,
including the Israeli people, in peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and welcome the new members to
the Council.

S/PV. 8706

Today I would like to address a people with an
incredibly rich history and heritage, whom Israel
considers a partner in building a better future in the
Middle East — the Iranian people. Unfortunately, the
Iranian people are ruled by a regime that remains the
biggest threat to peace and security in the region.
The regime has proudly announced that it is
enriching more uranium than before the disastrous Iran
deal. It supports and funds terror, instead of investing
in its own people. Its forces shoot live ammunition at
protesters. The regime outright lied to the international
community to cover up its fatal actions that took the lives
of 176 passengers and crew aboard a Ukrainian aircraft.
It is encouraging to see that more and more countries
are taking steps to hold the regime accountable, but
there is still much more than can and must be done. It is
inspiring to witness the brave Iranian people, who have
been oppressed by their own Government for decades,
fight back. The Iranian people are risking their lives by
taking to the streets and demanding their rights.
I would like to take this opportunity to speak to the
Iranian people directly. Our Persian neighbours have
a tremendously rich heritage of which they should be
proud. Since the time of the Achaemenid Empire in 550
BCE, the Persian people have made vital contributions.
They gave the world its first declaration of human
rights and racial equality, which freed slaves and gave
people the right to choose their own religion. They
created the world’s first taxation system and postal
service. They invented the world’s first water supply
system, refrigerator, algebra, animation, chess and the
list goes on.
It is incredible to think of the great contrast
between their rich history and the current regime. It is
absurd that the people who invented human rights and
protected the freedom of religion are ruled by a regime
that tramples both. That absurdity has brought them
to stand up for their heritage and their country’s rich
history and, while the Islamic Republic is doing all that
it can to silence their voice, they stand strong and proud.
They are not deterred by violence or by the threat of
imprisonment. They do not allow the violation of their
freedom of speech to prevent them from spreading their
message. I say today to the Iranian people, Israel is on
their side.
They are protesting because they are tired of being
lied to by their Government. Allow me to share with the
Council the story of one brave Iranian. Nikta Esfandani

20-0149511/30

S/PV.8706

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

21/01/2020

had the courage to join the protests in November and
fight for her future. Tragically, during one of the
protests, she was shot and killed by the regime. She was
14 years old. As if that was not enough of a tragedy,
the regime then tried to cover up her death. At first, it
announced that her death had been caused by something
else and then it forced her parents to say that she died
from poisoning.

The Iranian people are protesting because they
are tired of the violence and of being shot at by their
own Government. Owing to the Iranian regime’s
attempts to cover up its crimes, the number of civilians
who have lost their lives in protests since November
2018 is unclear, but some reports indicate as many as
1,500 — 1,500 Iranians killed by their Government for
exercising their right to freedom of expression.

It appears that all options are on the table for the
regime, except taking responsibility. The recent coverup of the downing of the Ukrainian passenger airplane
is just the tip of the iceberg, but it was enough to chip
away at the regime’s propaganda machine.

The Islamic Republic’s violence is not contained to
Iran and neither is the criticism against it. The regime
has used its proxies to spread violence and terror
throughout the region. At the recent Security Council
debate on the implementation of the Charter of the
United Nations, we all heard from our colleague, the
representative of Yemen, that his county is experiencing
the world’s worst humanitarian crisis. He blamed the
war there on “Houthi militias, supported by the Iranian
regime” (S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1), p. 5). He spoke
out against the regime. The Islamic Republic spreads
violence within and outside its borders, and its people
have had enough.

Gelare Jabbari was an anchor for Islamic Republic
of Iran broadcasting television and radio company,
whose head is appointed directly by the Supreme
Leader. Jabbari resigned following the Ukrainian airline
incident. After announcing her resignation, she wrote
to the Iranian people, asking them to forgive her for the
13 years she had told them lies. The Iranian regime lies
to its people and to the international community. It lies
about its nuclear programme and about its terror-driven
regional ambitions. The Iranian people know that it is
time for the international community to recognize that
the Iranian regime is deceitful and cannot be trusted.
The Iranian people are protesting because they are
tired of the regime neglecting the economy and, instead,
spending billions on its proxies. Iran suffers from
serious infrastructure problems, a weak banking sector
and widespread corruption. It is expected that by March
of this year, 57 million Iranians will be living below the
absolute poverty line. As a result, Iran is experiencing
the world’s greatest brain drain. Some 150,000 of
Iran’s best engineers, pilots, doctors and other highly
sought-after professionals leave the country every year
in search of a place where they can walk and live in
freedom from the fear of the Islamic Republic.
Yet the regime continues to neglect its people and
waste money on violence and terror. Since the outbreak
of the conflict in Syria, Iran has spent at least $30 billion
to support Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad. Every
year, it transfers $700 million to Hizbullah and
$100 million to Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad. Those amounts pale in comparison to the
estimated $100 billion that the regime has spent on its
nuclear programme. There is no doubt that that money
could be better spent domestically, but we all know that
the regime does not care about the Iranian people.
12/30

The Islamic revolution stripped the Iranian people
of their rights and turned them into pawns in the
regime’s plan for regional domination. They are victims
of the regime. Let us be clear. The campaign against
Iran’s nuclear aspirations, ballistic missile programme
and regional agenda is a campaign against the Iranian
regime not the Iranian people. We must empower the
Iranian people. Israel sees the Iranian people as a
partner in achieving a better, safer and more prosperous
future in the Middle East. What the Iranian people are
telling us now is that they see us as partners as well.
The Iranian people deserve a Government that
respects them and protects them, not one that kills and
abuses them. The international community must support
the Iranian people. We must not allow their voices to be
silenced by internet shutdowns, imprisonment or death.
More pressure must be applied on the regime. Now is
the time to make sure that all sanctions and embargoes
continue and to put new ones in place. It is the only way
to keep the Iranian people and the entire world safe.
The President: I now give the floor to the Council
members who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
Addressing these issues in a fair manner is not easy
and we appreciate her efforts and those of her team to
20-01495

21/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

do so. I also thank Assistant Secretary-General Mueller
for her briefing.
As I have stated on many prior occasions, if we
are to see genuine progress in our work to help bring
peace to the Middle East, the Council must treat this
issue more even-handedly. Given the likelihood that we
will hear continued criticisms of Israel that are unfairly
one-sided, I wanted to take a few moments to shed light
on Israel’s contributions to the international community
and to appreciate publicly all that has been overcome in
order to make those contributions.
This week and next week, in New York and around
the world, we will be commemorating the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz. No one in
this Chamber should need reminding of the horrors that
occurred just beyond Krakow and across Europe during
the Second World War. Those are the horrors that lead
us to say never again.
While we can never forget the unparalleled horrors
of the Holocaust, Israelis consistently look to the future
and the ways in which they can improve the lives of all
people. Israelis have won 13 Nobel Prizes, including in
chemistry and economics. They have improved dripirrigation technologies that allow countless individuals
in the desert environment around the world to be fed.
They have enhanced surgical technologies that improve
the success of medical operations.
Indeed, while the world criticizes Israel, Israel is
making the world a better place. The Council should not
lose sight of that fact. I will not allow us to and instead I
call upon my colleagues to embrace a more appropriate
focus for a Council dedicated to international peace
and security — a focus on the regional actor fuelling
division, violence and hatred; the regime that funds and
trains militants focused on the destruction of Israel; the
regime that provides weapons and other support to the
Houthis and Hizbullah, props up the Al-Assad regime
and seeks to interfere with Iraq’s fragile democracy;
the regime that guns down its own citizens when they
protest the corruption, lies and mismanagement of
the leadership.
Yet, despite a long history of advocating for the
obliteration of Israel and aggressively undermining
regional peace and security, Iran too often escapes
serious scrutiny by this organ. When Iran attacked
tankers in the Persian Gulf and energy facilities in
Saudi Arabia last year, the Council was silent. When
Iran provided weapons to the Houthis and Hizbullah,

S/PV. 8706

the Council was silent. When Iran sought to prop up the
Al-Assad regime’s brutal repression of its own people,
the Council was silent.
It is not as though Iran’s malign behaviour occurs
without the Council’s knowledge. It has been well
documented by the United Nations or is simply out in
the open. Our failure to address Iran’s central role in
destabilizing the region sends a powerfully damaging
message to those who seek lasting peace and prosperity
in the region. It only encourages further instability,
which puts the peace we all seek at greater risk.
I have said before that Israel has no better
friend than the United States and I will say it again
today — whether it is reminding the world what Israel
has done to make substantive contributions to global
peace and prosperity or what Iran is doing to frustrate
efforts towards peace. President Donald Trump and the
American people together will do what is required to
stand by our partner, our ally and, indeed, our friend
again and again.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and
Ms. Ursula Mueller for their comprehensive briefings.
Ms. Mueller’s briefing, in particular, remind us that the
humanitarian situation in occupied Palestinian territory
requires our full attention.
Belgium is especially concerned about the lack
of funding of the humanitarian response plan and the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and invites
the international community to make a more active
commitment in that area. I would like to underline
the critical role of UNRWA in the absence of a lasting
solution to the conflict. Belgium will continue to fully
support its mandate.
The two-State solution, to which we once again
renew our commitment, will require a calm international
and, above all, regional environment, quite unlike the
developments of recent weeks. We firmly condemn
all policies that jeopardize the two-State solution. As
we heard, the settlement policy in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem continues, along with measures such as
forced displacements, evictions and demolitions.
We call on the Israeli authorities to put an end
to that settlement policy, which is illegal under
international law, including resolution 2334 (2016).
In 2019, 97 structures financed by the European

20-0149513/30

S/PV.8706

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Union were demolished — a 90 per cent increase
compared to 2018. We urge the Israeli authorities to
put an end to such demolitions and either restore the
structures or compensate the Palestinian people for the
damages incurred, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
The continuation of the settlement policy is part of
a rampant annexation, which is also marked by Israel’s
implementation of a dual legal system beyond the green
line. The establishment of an Israeli interministerial
committee tasked with making annexation proposals is
also a troubling development in that regard. As we have
already said on a number of occasions, all unilateral
annexations undermine international order and are not
recognized by Belgium.
We are extremely concerned about increased settlerrelated violence and encourage the Israeli authorities
to prevent such violence and to effectively combat
impunity. In addition, the developments in the situation
in Al-Issawiya and the marked increase in violence are
also a source of great concern. The parties concerned
on the ground must exercise calm and restraint so as to
avert any escalation. Incursions by Israeli forces are on
the rise and many of them take place close to schools.
We remind Israel of its obligation to protect, respect
and implement the rights of the child by ensuring that
schools are inviolable safe spaces for children.
The recurrent escalations of violence in Gaza also
imperil the prospect of stable and lasting peace. All
violence, regardless of its perpetrators, is unacceptable
and impunity cannot be allowed to prevail. The rules
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law must be observed.
The decision taken by Israel to withhold part of the
tax revenue due to the Palestinian Authority, under the
Paris Protocol, risks increasing tensions. We encourage
both parties to pursue negotiations in order to find a
lasting solution. We stress the importance of setting
a date for the holding of legislative and presidential
elections throughout the Palestinian territory, the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. In
that regard, it is essential that all the parties concerned
cooperate to ensure that elections are held in an inclusive
environment conducive to the full, meaningful and
active participation of all citizens, including women
and young people.
14/30

21/01/2020

In conclusion, Belgium aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered later on behalf of the
European Union.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to start
where my colleague of Belgium ended, by referring
to the common position of the European Union, which
will be expressed later in our discussion.
As the Ambassador of Germany, I would like
to echo the remarks made by the Ambassador of the
United States about the Holocaust and the fact that we
are commemorating the liberation of Auschwitz. In that
context, it is very important for us never to ease up on
the fight against anti-Semitism.
With regard to the remarks made by my colleague
of Israel, I would like to echo what he said about respect
for the Iranian people and about the conduct of Iranian
policy, in relation to respect for human rights and
foreign policy, in support of terrorist movements in the
region. One point I would like to highlight, which is
also very important in the context of our debate on the
Middle East, is our appeal to Iran to finally recognize
Israel and its right to exist.
I would like to pick up where the Observer of
Palestine ended and remind the Security Council about
the debate held a week ago (S/PV.8699). The Council
issued a presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/1) in
which we expressed our respect for international law
and stated that international order must be based on
international law. We must respect that statement
and implement it. As I have said before in this organ,
international law is not à la carte. We are all therefore
called upon to implement the resolutions adopted by
the Security Council. That is binding international
law. Among those there are several resolutions on the
Middle East. They are all summarized in the most
recent resolution adopted on the matter — resolution
2334 (2016). According to that resolution and previous
ones, settlements are illegal under international law.
Annexations, which have been announced and are now
part of the Israeli election campaign, are a violation
of international law. That is also true of changes to
the status of Jerusalem. That, too, is a violation of
international law.
One sometimes forgets that resolution 2334 (2016)
is a very balanced resolution, which condemns all
acts of terror, violence against civilians, incitement,
provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric.
Germany condemns all attacks on Israel. The firing
20-01495

21/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of rockets from Gaza is not acceptable. Germany is
steadfast in its commitment to Israel’s right to selfdefence and its proportionate response to attacks.
I would like to make a few final points. We very much
are in favour of elections in the Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem. It is very important that the
Palestinian Government be democratically based. I
echo what Ms. Mueller said with regard to the terrible
humanitarian situation. In that respect, I would again
like to confirm our commitment to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). We believe UNRWA is crucial
for regional stability and the provision of humanitarian
assistance to schools, health systems and hospitals. To
date, no one has explained to me what other agency
Palestinians could turn to in order to go to school or to
the hospital, if not to UNRWA.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation welcomes today’s meeting on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
I would like to thank Ms. DiCarlo and Ms. Mueller for
their briefings on the situation, which must inspire us
to act.

S/PV. 8706

way for sincere negotiations towards a resolution to the
conflict, which has lasted for far too long.
With regard to the security situation, my country
deplores the resurgence of provocative acts in the
occupied territories and the disproportionate use of
force by the Israeli security services in suppressing
peaceful demonstrations, in particular on the Gaza
Strip. The vicious cycle of rocket fire and the
indiscriminate reprisals that follow must stop in order
to protect civilians, who pay the price.
The parties to the conflict must work towards
de-escalation, including through various existing
structures. The situation in the region remains very
volatile, as a result of serious incidents that occurred
in recent weeks, such as the assassination of General
Soleimani, Iranian missile launches at United States
bases, the ongoing riots in Lebanon and Iraq, the crisis
in Syria and the twists and turns of the Iranian nuclear
deal, to name but a few.

By adopting resolution 2334 (2016), the Security
Council turned down a number of expectations and
recommendations that, had they been implemented,
could have advanced the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process. Regrettably, three years later, my delegation
notes with serious concern that the situation on the
ground continues to deteriorate further, in particular in
the occupied territories and on the Gaza Strip, which
is under blockade. That situation makes the living
conditions of Palestinians especially difficult. Ongoing
settlement activities, including in East Jerusalem, the
seizure or demolition of Palestinian infrastructure and
other evictions are acts that are at odds with international
law and violate relevant Security Council resolutions.

For my country, the continued blockade of the Gaza
Strip and other restrictions on the movement of people
and goods and on access to basic social services, in
particular for women and children, are unacceptable. The
endemic shortages of all kinds, caused by the blockade,
make the lives of the people of Gaza unsustainable and,
in the long run, could lead to an increase in the number
of acts of violence and desperation, in particular on
the part of unemployed young people in the enclave.
In that regard, I would like to reaffirm my delegation’s
support for the efforts of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and welcome the renewal of its mandate by the Security
Council in December 2019. We call on all donors to
provide their valuable support to the Agency so that it
can continue to provide vital services to those in need.
To that end, the aim is to protect the fundamental rights
and dignity of the Palestinian people.

My delegation condemns, in no uncertain terms, the
hateful and inflammatory statements of all kinds that
have been made recently, often for electoral purposes.
The ramifications of such actions will serve only to
deepen mistrust and divisions and, consequently,
reduce the likelihood of the resumption of dialogue
between the two parties, which, unfortunately, is now
at a standstill. However, the Niger is hopeful that
the upcoming general elections, in both Israel and
Palestine, will create a new dynamic for the resumption
of dialogue between the two parties and truly pave the

In conclusion, I would like to urge the international
community to continue its efforts in the quest for a
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that takes into
account Israel’s security aspirations and the legitimate
and inalienable rights of Palestinians, including their
right to self-determination. My delegation reaffirm its
position in favour of a solution comprising two States
living side-by-side in peace and security on the basis
of the pre-1967 borders. Any solution based on force,
and thereby unilateral in nature, would only further
aggravate the situation. In that regard, the Security

20-0149515/30

S/PV.8706

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Council must show itself capable of discharging
its responsibilities under the Charter by ensuring
compliance with its own resolutions to ensure that,
like all other peoples, the Palestinian people may enjoy
peace, security, respect and dignity.
Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for
her valuable briefing. We would also like to thank
Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for her important information.
The Palestinian question, which is the essence of
the Arab-Israeli conflict, is now several decades old. In
that time, the world has witnessed major transformations
and events, while this question remains idle with no
solution. On the contrary, the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories continues to deteriorate because of
the insistence of Israel, the occupying Power, in forging
ahead with its practices against the Palestinian people
and implementing its expansionist settlement schemes,
in flagrant violation of international law and Security
Council resolutions, especially resolution 2334 (2016).
That conduct is a major obstacle to the achievement of
the two-State solution and undermines any possibility
of reaching a just and comprehensive peace.
Despite all United Nations resolutions on the
Palestinian question and the overall situation in the
Middle East, including the occupied Arab Syrian
Golan and the occupied Lebanese territories,
Israel’s intransigence has not simply been limited to
non-compliance with any of those resolutions; rather,
it has adopted a dangerous escalatory approach by
adopting many unilateral measures that entrench
occupation and target the foundations and terms of
reference of a settlement.
In that context, we once again express our deep
concern about calls to annex parts of the West Bank
and the continued implementation of settlement
projects in the occupied territories, including East
Jerusalem, as well as the ongoing siege of the Gaza
Strip and the measures taken to impose restrictions on
the Palestinian economy.
The atrocious facts and figures cited by Ms. Mueller
this morning with regard to the deteriorating living,
security and economic conditions resulting from the
occupying Power’s continued illegal practices are
grave indicators of how the situation risks further
deterioration, not just in the Palestinian territories but
16/30

21/01/2020

throughout the entire region. We therefore call for an
end to those practices and the making of serious efforts
to achieve a just and comprehensive solution.
Moreover, Tunisia rejects practices intended to
change the legal, historic and demographic status
of Jerusalem, as well as the violation of Islamic and
Christian holy sites. Tunisia reiterates its support for
the historic Hashemite guardianship over the holy sites
and the role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan in
the management, maintenance and preservation of
Al-Haram Al-Sharif. That is based on our firm position
on defending the causes of righteousness, international
legitimacy and peace.
Tunisia will continue to support all efforts to resume
negotiations based on the agreed terms of reference,
especially the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the two-State solution,
which is the only realistic and viable solution for just
and comprehensive peace. Accomplishing that goal is
an urgent priority in restoring security and stability in
the region. And it requires the international community
to shoulder its legal and political responsibilities
to implement international law and United Nations
resolutions. Israel should be committed to ending its
occupation and enabling the Palestinian people to
exercise their legitimate rights, primary among them
their right to self-determination and the establishment
of their independent State along the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
Given the Security Council’s responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, we call
on it to step up its efforts to end such Israeli practices
and resolve the conflict. We reiterate the importance of
the Security Council conducting a visit to the occupied
Palestinian territories so that the Council can see for
itself the tragic consequences of the occupation on the
lives of the Palestinian people, and therefore take the
necessary measures to end the occupation.
Tunisia emphasizes the need to stop the targeting of
civilians. We call for full use of existing international
mechanisms, for respecting international humanitarian
law and the Fourth Geneva Convention and for ensuring
the necessary protection for the Palestinian people
until a resolution of the conflict can be reached and all
final-status issues resolved. In that context, given the
significant importance of the Palestinian refugee issue,
Tunisia reaffirms the imperative need to preserve the
role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
20-01495

21/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8706

Palestine Refugees in the Near East and to provide it
with adequate financial resources.

have a responsibility to arrest that deterioration and to
create an atmosphere more conducive to peace.

We also stress the importance of achieving
Palestinian national reconciliation, overcoming
differences among Palestinian brothers and unifying
their ranks with a view to supporting their negotiating
position and thereby fulfilling the aspirations of the
Palestinian people for freedom and independence.

For Israel, that means, first, an immediate halt
to settlement expansion. We condemn the Israeli
Government’s advancement this month of yet more
plans for more than 1,900 housing units across the West
Bank. It is the United Kingdom’s long-standing position
that settlements are illegal under international law
and undermine the viability of the two-State solution.
Secondly, Israel must avoid any suggestion that parts of
the occupied Palestinian territories should be annexed.
Such a move would be contrary to international law
and damaging to peace efforts and could not pass
unchallenged. Thirdly, there must be an immediate
end to the demolition of Palestinian-owned homes and
structures, as well as the eviction of Palestinians from
their homes. The targeting of donor-funded structures
in Area C is of particular concern. We call on the Israeli
authorities to provide a clear and transparent route to
construction for Palestinians in Area C.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our concern at the
continuation of the Palestinian question with no
solution on the horizon. The ongoing unilateral Israeli
measures to impose a fait accompli policy while
attempting to bypass the solution and undermining
its terms of reference can lead only to an escalation
of tensions and the exacerbation of violence, thereby
threatening regional and international security and
stability. Tunisia therefore stresses the importance of
safeguarding the terms of reference and implementing
resolutions of international legitimacy as the steadfast
foundation of all international efforts to achieve just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Before I start,
I want to pick up on what both the American and
the German Ambassadors said about the Holocaust
commemoration, which of course takes place this year.
It is a very important commemoration. Some of us will
be joining the Secretary-General at the weekend in
New York to commemorate this important anniversary.
Turning to the open debate, the year 2020 opened
with a new crisis in the Middle East following the
killing of Qasem Soleimani in response to strikes by
Iraqi militias against coalition bases, and the downing if
Ukrainian Airlines Flight PS-752. The United Kingdom
continues to urge all parties to de-escalate following the
events and Iran to take the opportunity to come in from
the cold and pursue its legitimate interests in the region
peacefully and with full respect for international rules.
I would like to echo what the German representative
said about recognition of Israel in this context.
As demonstrated by the briefings we heard today,
it is right the Security Council also remain engaged
to resolve one of the longest-standing conflicts on its
agenda, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We have made
clear our concern over the situation on the ground, which,
as the Secretary-General noted in his assessment last
month (see S/2019/938), has deteriorated over the past
three years, and the figures that the Under-SecretaryGeneral cited are troubling and compelling. All sides

Turning to the responsibilities of the Palestinians,
first, we unreservedly condemn the indiscriminate
attacks against Israeli civilians by groups such as
Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad. Such attacks are
completely unacceptable and a violation of international
law and need to cease immediately. Secondly, there
should be renewed efforts towards Palestinian
reconciliation. We encourage those involved in the
reconciliation process to allow the Palestinian Authority
to fully resume its Government functions in Gaza and
ensure compliance with the Quartet principles. Thirdly,
we call on the Palestinian Authority to set a date for
free and fair elections in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and in Gaza as soon as possible. Genuine
democratic national elections for all Palestinians are
crucial to the establishment of a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State.
The Security Council has a role to play in identifying
and containing future flashpoints in conflicts. The
resumption of the Great March of Return protests
in March is once such possible flashpoint. Hamas
operatives have cynically exploited those protests in
the past. The United Kingdom’s commitment to Israel’s
security is unwavering. Any protests must adhere to
the principle of non-violence. We reiterate our longstanding concerns about the manner in which the Israel
Defense Forces police non-violent protests, including
the use of live ammunition and excessive force, and we

20-0149517/30

S/PV.8706

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

call on Israel to adhere to the principles of necessity
and proportionality.
Turning to the economic and humanitarian situation
in Gaza, as we have heard, it remains dire. The United
Kingdom will provide approximately $21 million in
humanitarian assistance to Gaza in this financial year
and, to help address the underlying causes, we are more
than tripling our spending on economic development
programming, providing some $75 million between
2018 and 2023. Ultimately, only peace, stability and
the easing of movement and access restrictions will
allow the necessary investments to be made in a
sustainable way.
We understand and share the deep frustration on
all sides at the lack of progress on the Middle East
peace process. A just and lasting resolution that ends
the occupation and delivers peace for both Israelis and
Palestinians is long overdue. We remain committed to
achieving a two-State solution and our long-standing
position is clear. We support a negotiated settlement
recognized by all sides, leading to a safe and secure
Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian
State, based on the 1967 borders, with agreed land
swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital of both States and
a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement for refugees.
We look forward to working with colleagues to advance
our shared objectives of peace and prosperity in the
year ahead.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mueller for their briefings. I align myself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
The only way to achieve lasting peace and to
fulfil the legitimate aspirations of the Israelis and the
Palestinians is through a negotiated two-State solution
that respects the internationally agreed parameters and
international law. Unfortunately, the developments on
the ground are deteriorating and are preventing the
resumption of meaningful negotiations in order to
resolve this long-standing conflict. I would reiterate
the importance of implementing resolution 2334 (2016),
including its call for affirmative steps to reverse the
negative trends on the ground that are imperilling the
two-State solution.
We are concerned about the continuation of Israel’s
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
in violation of international law. We also call on Israel
18/30

21/01/2020

to end the demolitions of Palestinian-owned buildings
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, which have also
included projects funded by the European Union and
its member States. Concerning recent calls for the
annexation of areas in the West Bank, I would like
to stress that annexation would constitute a serious
violation of international law and would harm prospects
for moving forward with the peace process.
Reaching a sustainable political solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict also requires progress
on intra-Palestinian reconciliation. We encourage
all Palestinian factions to commit to inclusive,
comprehensive and fair elections. Holding elections
throughout the Palestinian territory, including in
the West Bank, East Jerusalem and Gaza, would be
important for renewing the democratic legitimacy
of the Palestinian Authority and ensuring its
strong institutions.
Unfortunately, the situation in the Gaza Strip
remains fragile. We condemn the firing of rockets
from Gaza into Israel. Such indiscriminate violence
and targeting of the civilian population are completely
unacceptable. We call on all parties to exercise restraint
and to refrain from targeting civilians, in line with
obligations under international humanitarian law. The
cycle of violence in Gaza will only bring about more
civilian casualties. It undermines the humanitarian
situation in Gaza, resulting in further suffering and
growing extremism.
I would also stress the importance of continued
support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
which remains crucial to providing essential services
for Palestinian refugees, especially health care and
children’s education. Estonia has contributed with
additional funding in recent years so as to support
UNRWA’s activities in the Middle East.
With regard to Syria, we want to reiterate our
support for resolution 2254 (2015). As pointed out in that
resolution, the success of the political process is closely
interlinked with a nationwide ceasefire. Unfortunately,
that is not the case for Idlib province, where the
situation remains highly volatile despite the repeated
ceasefire agreements by various parties to the conflict.
The continued military operations in the area may have
severe humanitarian consequences and lead to another
influx of refugees as increased violence threatens
millions of civilians. The humanitarian situation in the
20-01495

21/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

area remains dreadful despite the renewal of the crossborder aid mechanism on 10 January. Millions of people
remain in need of life-saving assistance and protection.
The instability in Idlib and further military gains by
the regime and its allies may harm the prospects for a
meaningful political transition.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, I wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for their
important briefings.
As the seventy-fifth anniversary of our Organization
approaches, we are reminded once again that no
durable peace can be achieved without upholding the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as multilateralism. The absence of
those elements, in practice, has shaped the protracted
Arab-Israeli conflict and made the two-State vision
harder to achieve. Recent regional tensions have also
reminded us all of the critical necessity of upholding the
principles of the Charter and multilateralism. We once
again urge all parties to exercise maximum restraint,
restart dialogue and renew international cooperation.
Allow me to stress the following points.
First, there is an urgent need to reverse negative
trends. The prevailing negative trends in the IsraeliPalestinian conflict escalate the threats to achieving
durable peace and security in the region. On the
settlement issue, for example, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reported that
621 Palestinian structures were demolished or seized
in the West Bank in 2019, displacing 914 Palestinians.
Those figures represent a 35 and 95 per cent increase,
respectively, as compared with 2018. If the de facto
annexation is not brought to an end, it will cause
profound human suffering to the Palestinians and make
peace and stability impossible to attain. We must not let
such unlawful acts go unnoticed. The Security Council
must instead seriously address the issue and find a
durable solution based on the United Nations Charter
and in conformity with its resolutions. In that regard,
I wish to reiterate Indonesia’s profound commitment
to, and support for, all efforts to bring the peace
process back on track, based on the internationally
agreed parameters.
Secondly, the Council must stand firm in upholding
international law and multilateralism. The Council
must not be silent in the face of continuous Israeli
threats of formal annexation of the occupied territory,

S/PV. 8706

including East Jerusalem. In resolution 2334 (2016), the
Council affirmed that changes to the 4 June 1967 lines,
including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those
agreed by the parties through negotiations, constitute a
flagrant violation under international law. There is no
other way forward on this matter, apart from ensuring
Israel’s compliance with international law and the
relevant resolutions.
My third and final point pertains to the dire
humanitarian situation of the Palestinian people. It is
imperative to stop the blockade and related restrictions
against civilians in the Gaza Strip, as they constitute
collective punishment on the Palestinian people,
imposed in clear violation of international humanitarian
law. Meanwhile, the expansion of illegal settlements in
the West Bank poses a serious threat to the life of every
Palestinian, including women and children.
It is the responsibility of the international community
to help those enduring the serious humanitarian
situation in Gaza, the West Bank and places of refuge.
Let me join other colleagues in stressing the vital role
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), not only
as a lifeline but also as a safeguard for the Palestinian
right of return. I am glad to hear from Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller about the capabilities and ability of UNRWA to
increase employment among Palestinian youths. That is
why we continue to support UNRWA.
I wish to reaffirm the solidarity of the Government
and the people of Indonesia with the Palestinian
people, as well as our unwavering support for their
inalienable rights.
We heard from Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller about the plights of Salwa, Jamil and Manar
and Anas. How many more names will we learn, as the
reality and the suffering of the people of Palestine are
given a human face? That paints a clear picture of what
is happening on the ground, as well as of what has to
be done by all of us here in order to ensure that such
suffering does not continue.
It is disturbing to hear that, on the first day of the
year 2020, Israeli authorities uprooted 147 olive trees
in the village of Al-Jaba’a, in Bethlehem, belonging
to eight Palestinian families. For Palestinians and
many communities, the olive tree represents peace
and resilience. In the current context, the olive tree
may also represent the two-State vision — a vision of

20-0149519/30

S/PV.8706

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

peace in the Middle East. It remains the obligation of
the Council to safeguard that vision, first and foremost
for the sake of the Palestinian people but also for the
stability of the region and beyond.
Lastly, I find it find it hard to understand how we
are expected to hold a dialogue in the Council when the
delegation of Israel has not responded to a single query
posed by our Palestinian colleagues today. We should
have a conversation in this Chamber. We should have
a discussion on how to move things forward. But the
fact that the Israeli representative did not make a single
reference to Palestine in his statement today shows
that there is something wrong in the process and in our
discussions thus far. I find it bewildering and shameful.
It does not serve the purpose of peace. It is time for us
in the Council to move forward and to find a solution.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Allow me to begin
by thanking Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, for their informative
and factual yet chilling briefings on the situation
between Israel and Palestine. Ms. Mueller’s report on
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory was sobering, especially with regard to
unaccompanied Palestinian children seeking medical
aid in foreign lands. We also note the compelling
testimony of the Ambassador of the State of Palestine.
We would like to address four issues this morning,
namely, the political process, the security concerns, the
continuous land grabbing of Palestinian lands, and trust
between Israel and Palestine.
Turning first to the political situation, the dark
clouds hanging over the Middle East, tensions between
the United States and Israel and Iran, tensions in
Lebanon and ongoing difficulties in Syria, Iraq and
Yemen are diverting attention away from the core
problem in the region: the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
South Africa calls on the Security Council and all other
players to refocus on that core problem.
The lack of progress in the Middle East peace
process is of great concern to South Africa. As we have
heard before, and as many Council members have said
here today, the only viable and sustainable solution to
the crisis in the Middle East is a two-State solution that
allows for a sovereign, independent Palestinian State
based on the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital, alongside a safe and secure State of
20/30

21/01/2020

Israel. Any attempts to divert from those fundamental
concepts and the premature closure of final-status
issues are but a distraction from the internationally
accepted framework for resolving the crisis. In that
regard, we reaffirm that the only way to achieve peace
and stability in the Middle East is through reaching a
lasting peace between Palestine and Israel — there is
no other alternative — and restoring all the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people, in accordance with
the two-State solution and the relevant resolutions and
international terms of reference.
With regard to the announcement of Palestinian
elections, we thank Ms. DiCarlo for the update on
the United Nations efforts to ensure the holding of
inclusive Palestinian elections. We call on all parties
to make a concerted effort to ensure that safe and
inclusive elections are held throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. The
Council has always emphasized, including SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, that a surge in diplomacy is
a critical tool for the mediation of seemingly intractable
conflicts. Where is that surge in diplomacy on this more
than 60-year-old conflict?
On the security situation, South Africa is deeply
concerned by the tension around the Gaza Strip, which
has led to further killing and a perpetuation of the
conflict. In that regard, we call for a cessation of violent
attacks by both sides and for a return to negotiations.
South Africa believes that the current crises in Gaza
will lead only to parties moving further and further
apart from each other and undermine any hope for the
resumption of negotiations. South Africa thanks Egypt
and the Secretary-General for brokering the latest
ceasefire between Israel and Gaza.
The current security situation and the continued
blockade imposed on Gaza negatively affect the
humanitarian situation, as we heard from Ms. Mueller
today. In that regard, we commend the staff and officials
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East for continuing to
provide essential aid, including health and education
services, to the people of Gaza.
With respect to the continued land-grabbing
in Palestine, in these uncertain times, additional
instability will only heighten tension. Threats and
pronouncements of annexation, including large parts of
the occupied West Bank, further undermine prospects
for peace and hinder any chance of finding a sustainable
20-01495

21/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

settlement to the crisis. Ms. DiCarlo gave details on
the ongoing Israeli land-grab of Palestinian territories,
carried out in defiance of the Council’s resolutions and
overwhelming global condemnation.
South Africa reiterates that the continued expansion
of settlements violates international law, undermines
the prospects for peace and contravenes the decisions
of the Council, effectively damaging its credibility as
the organ mandated to maintain international peace
and security. We therefore continue to insist on the
full implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). We must
highlight that overt violations of Security Council
resolutions would usually elicit harsher measures
imposed on the party responsible for such infractions.
We also call for the continuation of written reports
by the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolutions 2334 (2016).
With regard to trust between the parties, the Council
must work towards restoring trust in the legitimate
peace process that has been pursued for decades in
order to prevent the further development of antagonism
between the parties. We therefore call on the Council to
be united and unified in encouraging gestures of hope
and the building of trust between the parties in an effort
to defuse tension and towards creating an environment
conducive to the resumption of dialogue. The Council
should decisively address the hopelessness of both
Israeli and Palestinian children, who see no end to the
conflict that their grandparents and parents started.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call for the Council
to reconsider a visit to the region, which would be a
clear indication — and not an infringement on the
internal affairs of any parties — that the international
community continues to support the resolution of the
core and oldest conflict in the Middle East. As with
other Council field visits, it would also provide an
opportunity to meet all relevant actors in both Israel
and Palestine and encourage them to move towards
lasting peace for the sake of their own people. Israel
and Palestine need help. The Council can provide that
help. South Africa is ready to do its part to contribute
to peacemaking efforts to assist both parties to move
towards peace.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo and Ms. Muller for their briefings.
France calls for the urgent resumption of a credible
peace process, at a time when the deterioration of
the situation on the ground is a major source of

S/PV. 8706

instability. That is especially the case in Gaza, where
the humanitarian situation is disastrous, as recalled
by Ms. Muller, and in Jerusalem, where demolitions,
expropriations and attacks on the status quo of holy
sites are on the rise.
The parameters for a settlement to the conflict are
well known: borders based on the 4 June 1967 lines,
with agreed land swaps negotiated by the parties; a
fair, equitable and agreed-upon solution to the refugee
problem; Jerusalem as the capital of the two States; and
security arrangements that allow the two States to live
side by side in peace and security.
On that basis, agreed upon by the international
community, negotiations between the two parties must
resume without further delay in order to ensure the
implementation of such a solution. It would be unrealistic
and dangerous — above all for Israel — to believe that
a solution that breaches those agreed parameters would
be capable of delivering lasting stability to the region.
That is why France continues, and will continue,
to defend the two-State solution, and therefore the
establishment of a sovereign, viable and democratic
Palestinian State, not only because it is a just position
that complies with international law and the decisions
of the Security Council, but also because it is realistic.
In that regard, it is futile to think that it is possible to
meet the aspirations of one people at the expense of
another, and that political expectations can be met by
exclusively economic incentives.
Any policy that has the effect of jeopardizing the
two-State solution must be denounced. That is why I wish
to reaffirm France’s grave concern over the accelerated
settlement activities on the ground and the slide
towards an annexation mindset. On several occasions,
I have had an opportunity to reiterate France’s position
on settlements, which contravene international law.
That position remains unchanged, pursuant to Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016), which
cannot be subjected to à la carte interpretation. The
European Union also shares that position.
We have also condemned the calls by Israeli officials
for the annexation of all or part of the West Bank. Any
annexation of territory constitutes a serious violation of
international law, as the Secretary-General recalled in
September, and cannot go unanswered. In that context,
we call on the Israeli authorities to renounce any plan
that is liable to create faits accomplis on the ground that
would undermine the two-State solution.

20-0149521/30

S/PV.8706

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Lastly, I would like to relay France’s call for the
holding of Palestinian elections in the West Bank, Gaza
and East Jerusalem in the near future. Such elections
are an indispensable step towards inter-Palestinian
reconciliation, which is necessary for the democratic
strengthening of Palestinian institutions. They also
represent a legitimate expectation of the Palestinian
people, 14 years after the last elections were held, as well
as a necessary step along the path towards negotiations
and peace. In this context, we encourage the Palestinian
leadership to pursue its efforts with a view towards the
holding of plural and inclusive elections. It is important
that the Palestinian authorities promptly issue a
presidential decree setting the date for the elections
and that, for their part, the Israeli authorities allow the
proper conduct of elections in East Jerusalem. Together
with its European Union partners, France stands ready
to fully play its part in supporting the Palestinian
authorities in the holding of the elections. That is the
purpose of the work that we have begun.
France calls on the entire international community
to take action so that the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East can pursue its vital work. In this regard, we are
concerned about the increasing number of obstacles
the Agency is facing as it carries out its mission in
East Jerusalem.

21/01/2020

in the Middle East. We therefore call for all settlement
activities to stop, without preconditions.
It is our duty to protect our universally accepted
body of international law on this issue. To do otherwise
would allow a jaundiced view of international law to
weaken the existential pillars on which all States rely,
especially the small and militarily weak ones. The
international community has not given up on the twoState solution, and we should collectively and robustly
resist any attempt to change the situation on the ground
so as to make this internationally agreed goal more and
more elusive. Each of us has the option to remain silent
or to stand on principle.
We remain invested in the peace, security and
development of Palestine, Israel and all their neighbours.
The continuing conflict hinders Palestine in its quest to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In
its 2018 voluntary national review, the Government of
Palestine cited the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as a key
deterrent to fostering an internal enabling environment
to achieve the SDGs.
With regard to Gaza, the humanitarian situation
there remains one of great concern. Israel’s blockade
of Gaza breeds poverty and deprives Gazan residents
of their rights. Accordingly, we call once again for the
lifting of the blockade on the Gaza Strip.

I first would like to join my colleagues in
acknowledging the important commemoration of the
Holocaust this year. Never again must such atrocities
be endured by humankind.

We reiterate our strong support for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and its mandate.
UNRWA continues to play a vital role in supporting
the basic needs of millions of Palestinian refugees in
the West Bank. At the same time, we remain concerned
about the ongoing financial shortfall for the Agency
and encourage States Members of the United Nations
to step up their financial support in order to close
the current funding gaps. In this vein, we note that
UNRWA also needs access in order to do its work and
fulfil its mandate.

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines continues to stand
with the State of Palestine as it strives for a peaceful
and just solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
We reaffirm the internationally agreed two-State
solution. Moreover, the current and expanding Israeli
settlements in occupied Palestinian territory constitute
a flagrant violation of international law — a fact that
no amount of legalistic creativity can change — and
these settlements remain a substantial obstacle to peace

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains
concerned about any attempts to deviate from the
settled parameters governing the delicate quest for
peace between the State of Israel and the State of
Palestine. The Security Council has made clear that it
will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines,
including with regard to Jerusalem, other than those
agreed by the parties through negotiations. We reiterate
that the Palestinian people must have the right to govern

I should like to conclude by pointing out that
President Macron will have the opportunity to discuss
these issues with both sides during his visit to Israel
and the Palestinian territories on 22 and 23 January.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
thank our briefers, Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
and Assistant Secretary-General Mueller.

22/30

20-01495

21/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

themselves and reach their potential in a sovereign and
contiguous State.
Finally, those who commit crimes against humanity
and war crimes should be held accountable. Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines therefore welcomes the
recent landmark recommendation of the International
Criminal Court to open an investigation into these
matters. We owe it to the young people in both the
State of Palestine and the State of Israel to resolve the
conflict. Their despair is heartbreaking.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for
their briefings.
The question of Palestine has been dragging on for
more than 70 years. It is at the root of the turbulence in
the Middle East. It is also a wound to the conscience of
humankind. At present, the Gaza Strip is gripped by
endless conflicts and confrontation. Acts of violence
and inflammatory rhetoric by the parties concerned
have been frequent. The construction of settlements and
the demolition of Palestinian homes continue to expand
in scope and scale. The occupied Palestinian territory
is in a grave humanitarian crisis, and the Middle
East peace process is not on the right track. China is
deeply concerned about all of this. Without a just and
reasonable resolution to the Palestinian question, there
will be no lasting peace or security in the Middle East.
We should continue to adhere to the overall goal
of the two-State solution, which is the only appropriate
way to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli issue. Independent
statehood is the inalienable national right of the
Palestinian people; it is a right that cannot be traded
away. The international community, especially parties
with significant influence in the Middle East, should
make joint efforts based on Arabic Peace Initiative, the
principle of land for peace and the relevant Security
Council resolutions and encourage Israel and Palestine
to resolve conflicts through negotiations on an
equal footing.
Resolution 2334 (2016) clearly states that the
construction of settlements in occupied Palestinian
territory, including in East Jerusalem, is in violation
of international law. The parties concerned should
earnestly implements this resolution, immediately cease
all settlement activities in occupied territory, stop the
demolition of Palestinian homes and the destruction of
their property, and prevent violence against civilians.

S/PV. 8706

We should continue to promote dialogue,
negotiations and political consultations. The
Palestinian issue can be resolved only by political
means. Countering violence with violence or the
threat of force will lead nowhere. China encourages
the relevant parties to meet each other halfway, stop
military actions, cease incendiary rhetoric, refrain
from taking unilateral measures that undermine trust,
avoid any escalation of the tense situation in the region,
earnestly safeguard the foundation of the Middle East
peace process and create the favourable conditions for
the resumption of dialogue.
Early this month, Chinese State Councillor and
Minister for Foreign Affairs Mr. Wang Yi visited
Egypt and exchanged views with the Egyptian
leadership, including the country’s Foreign Minister,
on international affairs, the Middle East and the
Palestinian question. He also met with Mr. Ahmed
Aboul Gheit, Secretary General of the League of Arab
States. State Councillor Wang Yi said that China has
been and will always be a builder of peace, a promoter
of stability and a contributor to development in the
Middle East.
We should pay close attention to and help improve
the Palestinian economic and humanitarian situation.
China is concerned at the recent announcement by
the relevant party of another deduction from the tax
revenues collected on behalf of Palestine. We call upon
that party to earnestly fulfil its obligations under the
Paris Protocol and other relevant international treaties,
fully implement relevant United Nations resolutions
and completely lift the blockade on Gaza as soon as
possible in order to create the conditions for improving
the economic and humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory.
China welcomes the General Assembly’s adoption
by an overwhelming majority of the resolution to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (resolution 74/83). The international community
should continue to increase its politicial and financial
support for the Agency and provide concrete assistance
to Palestinian refugees in host countries. It should
also increase its investments with a view to boosting
the reconstruction of the Palestinian economy and
take an integrated approach to promoting peace
through development.

20-0149523/30

S/PV.8706

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

As State Councillor Wang Yi said in an interview
with the Egyptian press, China will continue to stand
up for justice and speak out at various international
forums. China will continue to unswervingly support
the just cause of the Palestinian people as they strive
for the restoration of their legitimate national rights and
the establishment of an independent, fully sovereign
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on
the basis of the 1967 borders.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo
and Ms. Ursula Mueller for their briefings. Particular
thanks go to Ms. Muller for highlighting some positive
aspects, however small, and for inviting us to use them
to give new impetus to our collective actions.
The Middle East peace process is a phrase used by
world leaders time and again to refer to efforts to end
the conflict between Israel and Palestine. It is a conflict
whose undeniable regional ramifications continue to
heighten threats to international peace and security.
One of the most important events of the past 50 years
was the signing of the Oslo Accords of 1993, which
established a series of commitments based on United
Nations resolutions towards an independent, secure and
self-reliant Palestinian State. However, almost 30 years
later, neither Israelis nor Palestinians, for different
reasons, have succeeded in conducting a dialogue that
opens the door to the negotiations necessary to resolve
their disputes. Peace in the region, including the
Palestinian people’s undeniable right to independence,
seemed to be slowly eroding.
Much has changed since then, and the actors are
certainly different, but we believe that it is essential to
the resolution of this long conflict that the parties decide
to relaunch with renewed impetus a peace process
aimed at satisfying the legitimate aspirations of both
peoples to live in peace. Dialogue is the vital avenue
for improving the situation of those affected by the
conflict and for taking firm steps towards sustainable
development based on justice, equal opportunities and
a peace that can be replicated throughout the Middle
East region. Both parties must immediately desist
from acts that contravene international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law, as
well as resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly, and guarantee the health, dignity,
freedom and well-being of a population that has
suffered years of violence and conflict.
24/30

21/01/2020

As an international community, we understand that
our collective action must be aimed at contributing in
an impartial and effective manner to the search for real
solutions to a conflict that so often endangers the lives
of so many civilians. We must move forward and reduce
pointless processes. Open discussions such as today’s
are a platform to send a clear message that there is a
collective will to put the process towards a negotiated
peace back on track, not to point fingers and deepen
divisions. We understand that any participation by the
Security Council must be framed by recognition and
respect for mutual rights, including self-determination
and independence, non-interference and by the legacy
of understandings reflected in previous agreements.
Before concluding, I would like to highlight a few
points. It is essential to prevent the tensions between the
parties from rising. We call for restraint and for respect
for international law and existing ceasefire provisions.
The resumption of dialogue must be the sole and central
objective of all parties. The humanitarian situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory continues to be a
source of concern and deserves the full attention of the
international community. We believe that the Israeli
settlements and their impact on the Palestinian people
foster an atmosphere of tension and insecurity that
affects women and children most. They face violence,
threats, intimidation, restriction of movement and
discrimination. The expansion not only contravenes
international law but also undermines any possibility
of reaching a point where the reconciliation and peace
process between the parties can continue.
However, the deep division among Palestinians
themselves also erodes efforts towards State-building
and inflicts uncertainty that is difficult to bear. It is
perhaps a problem that the Palestinian people must
resolve before they can sit down and talk about a real
and lasting peace with Israel. It is therefore necessary
to insist on a Palestinian electoral process as soon
as possible as the first step towards a new political
transformation that will help strengthen the position of
Palestinians in the concert of nations.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and
Ms. Ursula Mueller for their briefings.
For the first time in 2020, we are holding a debate on
the situation in the Middle East, and unfortunately we
again begin the year with the alarming observation that
not only has the region not seen positive trends, but we
20-01495

21/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

are also witnessing a growing escalation. We view the
killing of the commander of the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard, Major General Soleimani, and his associates, in
Baghdad on 3 January, which was perpetrated on the
soil of a sovereign State Member of the United Nations
without its knowledge or consent, as an unacceptable
act that undermines security and stability in the
region. We call upon all parties to exercise restraint,
demonstrate good judgment and prioritize diplomatic
means. As a result of these actions, the region and
the world found themselves on the brink of a conflict
whose repercussions could have been unpredictable
given that the margin of stability in the Middle East
region is reaching its limit.
Reducing the artificially created tensions around
Iran would facilitate the defusing of tensions in
the region.
The countries of the Middle East and North Africa
must themselves develop parameters to collectively
ensure regional security. To that end, it is necessary to
begin dialogue. Today’s volatile situation in the Middle
East is largely the result of States of the region not yet
having established effective communication channels.
Our shared objective is to help them do so. We have
contributed to the fulfilment of this objective by
proposing a blueprint for security in the Persian Gulf.
We have achieved significant milestones in the
Syria track. Thanks to the collective efforts of the
participants in the Astana format, we have realized
de-escalation and stabilization in much of Syria. On
30 October, the Constitutional Committee began its
work. In order to reach a lasting peace in Syria and
to ensure the return of millions of Syrian refugees to
their homes, we must focus efforts on rebuilding the
country’s economy without political constraints.
On Sunday, in Berlin, an important step
forward was taken towards a political settlement
in Libya. Furthermore, as part of an additional
general de-escalation effort in Libya, meetings
with representatives of the main Libyan forces were
held in Moscow on 13 January. But these are only
preliminary measures; they now must be underpinned
by meaningful efforts, primarily within the United
Nations and through Special Representative Ghassan
Salamé. The Security Council has yet to consider the
final agreements of the Berlin process, but the main
premise for settlement is that it is up to the Libyans to
decide the fate of their country.

S/PV. 8706

We continue to hope that, thanks to the efforts of the
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, progress will also be
made on a Yemeni settlement. In addition, we support
the need for a speedy normalization of the situation in
Iraq and Lebanon by harnessing mechanisms for broad
nationwide dialogue. The establishment of calm in
these countries is necessary for the entire region.
Notwithstanding our attention to the aforementioned
raging conflicts, we cannot overlook the principal
long-standing issue in the Middle East, namely, the
Palestinian-Israeli settlement. Everyone who is familiar
with the history of the region understands that absent a
settlement to the Palestinian problem, lasting peace in
the region cannot be achieved. However, solutions that
are presented as modern and innovative merely stymie
our efforts to resolve the Palestinian issue. Attempts
to erode the existing international legal framework
for a settlement will not help matters. We reject the
fait accompli policy — the recognition of Israeli
sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan Heights,
the transfer of an embassy to Jerusalem, declarations
of plans to annex the Jordan Valley, settlement activity
and the demolition of Palestinian homes — which seeks
to undermine the internationally recognized basis for a
Middle East settlement. Such actions only undermines
efforts to achieve a lasting settlement in the Middle
East on the basis of the two-State principle.
Given those circumstances, it is more important
than ever to mobilize the efforts of the international
community to support the legal framework for a Middle
East settlement, including the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace
Initiative. We must revitalize the work of the Middle
East Quartet of international mediators, namely, the
Russian Federation, the United States, the European
Union and the United Nations.
Moreover, we must overcome the inter-Palestinian
divide between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. In
this regard, we welcome the confirmed readiness of all
stakeholders to participate in general elections on the
basis of previous inter-Palestinian agreements. We trust
that these elections will be held on schedule in all the
Palestinian territories.
Finally, we commend the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, which is helping to stabilize the situation,
and we call upon all stakeholders to continue to support
the Agency.

20-0149525/30

S/PV.8706

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Viet Nam.
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for their briefings.
Viet Nam is deeply concerned about the continuing
violence in the occupied Palestinian territories, which
resulted in the death of nearly 3,000 Palestinians and
46 Israelis in only three months, between September and
December 2019. We condemn all attacks on civilians,
women, children — both Palestinian and Israeli — as
well as assaults on civilian infrastructure, including
schools, agricultural crops and civilian properties.
While the prospect of the two-State solution has yet
to be realized, it is imperative that all relevant parties
exercise the utmost restraint, refrain from all acts of
provocation or violence, end attacks against civilians
and act in strict compliance with international law and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. That is
the only way to ease the people’s suffering and put the
peace process back on track.
We firmly reiterate our calls for Israel to cease all
its illegal settlement activities and fulfil its obligations
under resolution 2334 (2016), as well as to lift the
restrictions on movement of people and commodities
within the occupied Palestinian territories. We also
express our concern about information regarding Israeli
plans to annex the Jordan Valley and parts of the West
Bank. We strongly believe that unconstructive acts,
coupled with new, dangerous flashpoints in the region,
will bring about only casualties and greater suffering
for civilians, not solutions leading to sustainable peace
and development in the region.

21/01/2020

1967 borders, living side by side with the Israeli State
in peace, security and mutual recognition. Given the
destabilizing regional context, it is time for the Security
Council to enhance efforts to prevent jeopardizing the
progress made thus far towards the sustainable safety
and security of the Middle East.
While the root causes of the Middle East issues
have yet to be addressed, Viet Nam is deeply concerned
about the recent alarming developments in the region.
We strongly urge all concerned parties to uphold the
Charter of the United Nations, respect and fulfil their
commitments, exercise the utmost restraint, refrain
from any action that may further escalate tensions and
resolve all conflicts by peaceful means, in accordance
with international law.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the text in writing and to deliver
condensed versions when speaking in the Chamber.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will
suspend this open debate at 1 p.m. and resume at
10 a.m. tomorrow.
I now give the floor to the representative of Norway.

We commend the persistent efforts of the
international community, the mediation role of the
United Nations and Egypt, and we support the mandate
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. We commend all
Palestinian efforts and initiatives of the United Nations
and its States Members to foster unity and improve the
living conditions of the Palestinian people in Gaza.

Ms. Juul (Norway): Absent a credible political
process to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
it is of key importance that we continue to build
the institutional and economic foundations for a
Palestinian State. Norway continues to assist in these
efforts, as we have done since the Oslo Process, and
we will continue do so, including by chairing the next
meeting of the international donor group to Palestine,
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians, in Brussels
this spring.

Viet Nam reaffirms its unwavering support
for the Palestinian people’s legitimate struggle
for their inalienable rights, including the right to
self-determination and to become an independent
and sovereign State. We strongly believe that the
only solution for lasting peace and security is the
establishment of a Palestinian State on the basis of pre-

The recent efforts to resolve outstanding economic
issues between Israel and the Palestinian Authority
(PA) need to continue with a view to improving the
fiscal situation of the PA. Moreover, facilitating
trade and easing restrictions on movement and
access are preconditions for a more sustainable
Palestinian economy.

26/30

20-01495

21/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8706

The recent flare-ups of violence risk escalating
tensions around Gaza. Norway notes the positive
effects of donor efforts and that humanitarian and
infrastructure programmes need to continue. The
ongoing health crisis is of particular concern. We urge
all parties to work closely with the United Nations to
ensure proper supply lines to Gaza.

Promoting peace and security in the Middle East,
in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions,
remains a priority for Norway. We stand ready to
support any endeavour that seeks to further that aim.
If the past weeks have taught us anything, it is that
only diplomacy, de-escalation and credible political
processes can lead to a more stable region.

Norway’s position on the Israeli establishment
of settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, including East Jerusalem, remains
clear. Such settlements constitute a grave violation
under international law and a major obstacle to the
achievement of the two-State solution towards just,
lasting and comprehensive peace.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

Norway welcomes plans to hold general elections
in Palestine this year. Free, fair and inclusive
elections are important for renewing the legitimacy
of Palestinian national institutions. We encourage all
parties, including the Palestinian Authority, Palestinian
factions and Israel, to act constructively in facilitating
and holding elections across Palestine, including in
East Jerusalem and Gaza.
Allow me to make a few remarks on the situation
in the region.
We are deeply concerned about the increased
tensions between the United States and Iran over the
past weeks and the violent escalation in Iraq. While
the situation seems to have calmed down for now, the
conflict remains unresolved. Norway urges all parties
involved to de-escalate, exercise maximum restraint
and engage through dialogue and diplomacy. The people
of Iraq deserve peace and security. Further escalation
will put the stability and territorial integrity of Iraq
at risk. We must safeguard the progress achieved so
far, including through the fight against terrorism and
violent extremism.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is
important for regional and global security and remains
key to continued confidence in the peaceful nature of
Iran’s nuclear programme. While we regret the United
States decision to withdraw from the JCPOA and to
reimpose sanctions, we express our strong concern
about Iran’s steps to reduce its compliance with its
nuclear commitments. Norway urges Iran to return
without delay to full compliance with the provisions of
the nuclear agreement. The efforts of European partners
to preserve the JCPOA, within the framework of the
agreement’s dispute mechanism, have our full support.

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank you, Sir, for your efforts
during your country’s presidency of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representatives whose statements have
focused without deviation on the essence of today’s
topic, namely, the Palestinian question and ending the
Israeli occupation of the occupied Arab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan.
This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations, while the Palestinian question has
been an issue on its agenda for 73 years. We had hoped
that the Organization would play an effective role in
helping us achieve a just solution that would uphold
Palestinian rights and return security and stability to
the Middle East. However, we have seen positions of
the Organization that have never been implemented. It
is as though those positions were simply a smokescreen.
The Palestinian question and ending the Israeli
occupation of occupied Arab territories have been
issues on the agenda of the largest number of meetings,
resolutions and statements allocated to this topic.
However, under the pressure of some permanent
members of the Council, our Organization remains
unable to implement its resolutions and statements,
achieve the hopes of the founding fathers to uphold
the values of justice, based on respect for international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, or put an
end to the aggression, occupation and domination.
What is worse is that Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, has
violated his mandate and neglected to mention the
Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan in his briefings,
with the aim of diverting attention from the dangerous
crimes committed by Israel there.
Given the fact that decades have passed since the
Israeli occupation started, we have the right to ask: Has
the time not yet come for our people in the occupied
Syrian Golan, Palestine and Lebanon to enjoy freedom

20-0149527/30

S/PV.8706

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and liberation from the yoke of occupation? Has the
time not yet come to implement the resolutions of our
Organization? Has the time not yet come to establish
an independent Palestinian State, as affirmed by
General Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 1947, which
was adopted 73 years ago? Has the time not yet come
for the Security Council to uphold its responsibility
to maintain international peace and security and
establish a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East, instead of wasting its energies and resources
and turning the Chamber into a place where certain
prominent countries further their own agendas?
The inability of the United Nations to find a just
and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question
has encouraged some to shirk their legal commitments
and the agreed terms of reference, seek to twist the facts
and entrench the occupation. That has been seen over
the past few months through unilateral and provocative
actions, such as the United States Administration
considering occupied Jerusalem as the capital of Israel,
its declaration of what it referred to as recognition of
Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan and
its attempt to legitimize settlement activity.
My country strongly condemns those decisions
and considers them unilateral conduct on the part of a
party that lacks the legal, moral or political authority to
determine the fate of the peoples of the world or of the
territories that are part and parcel of the Syrian Arab
Republic and occupied Palestine. My country also
reiterates its call on the Security Council to compel
Israel, the occupying Power, to cease its practices of
defiling the history of the occupied Syrian Golan
while stealing its antiquities and plundering its wealth,
including Syrian oil, which it seeks to pillage with the
cooperation of companies, such as the United States
Genie Energy, whose Board of Directors includes
people known throughout history for plundering the
wealth of our countries. They include former United
States Vice President Dick Cheney, Jacob Rothschild,
Rupert Murdoch, former Central Intelligence Agency
Director James Woolsey, former United States Secretary
of Energy Bill Richardson and others.
We also demand that Israel put an end to its crimes
in the Golan and its attempts to change the demography
and Syrian national identity there. Israel must end its
confiscation of land owned by Syrian citizens in the
Golan with a view to expanding illegitimate settlements
and establishing new occupation projects, including the
wind energy project. Israel must refrain from forcing
28/30

21/01/2020

our people in the Golan to register their land, which
they inherited from their fathers and grandfathers, with
Israeli State authorities, threatening to confiscate the
land of those who refuse to do so, and falsely conducting
so-called local elections. All that constitutes flagrant
violations of international law and international
humanitarian law, which some parties address with
double standards and hypocrisy that exceeds all limits.
My Government stresses that the occupied Syrian
Golan is part and parcel of the Syrian Arab Republic.
It must be returned in conformity with the 4 June 1967
borders, as per international law. That is the main
priority of Syrian policy and the compass that we will
never divert from.
Syria underlines its support for the right of the
Palestinian people to determine their own destiny and
establish an independent State on all their national soil,
with Jerusalem as its capital, while guaranteeing the
right of return to refugees, in accordance with resolution
194 (III) of 1948. My country reiterates its demand that
Palestine be allowed to become a full-fledged Member
of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Peru.
Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Peru welcomes the convening of the quarterly open
debate on the situation in the Middle East. We thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for
their very comprehensive briefings.
We have been following events surrounding the
question of Palestine with deep concern. The rigidity of
positions, the absence of dialogue between the parties
and the constant occurrence of violent episodes have
led to a stagnation in the peace process. The current
scenario is unsustainable and destabilizing for the
Middle East and for the international community. We
are alarmed that the prospects of a political solution
appear increasingly distant and that unilateral decisions
and actions or announcements thereof may result in
further escalations of violence.
Peru, guided by its commitment to multilateralism,
international law and the peaceful resolution of disputes,
supports the two-State solution, with internationally
recognized and secure borders based on the pre-1967
20-01495

21/01/2020

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

lines, to be negotiated directly between Israel and
Palestine. Such negotiations must also determine the
final status of Jerusalem. We therefore encourage the
political and religious leaders of Israel and Palestine,
and all those with capacity to influence, to act
responsibly and to promote the re-establishment of a
high-level dialogue that will allow both peoples and the
Middle East as a whole to advance towards sustainable
peace. That will involve, inter alia, compliance with
the resolutions of the Security Council. In particular,
we deem it a matter of urgency to put an end to the
growing practice of settlement-building, the demolition
of property and evictions in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967. Such practices undermine the
two-State solution and contravene the provisions of
resolution 2334 (2016). We also underscore the urgent
need to address, immediately and in parallel, the
serious humanitarian crisis affecting the Palestinian
population, which has been aggravated in recent years
by financing cuts to aid programmes.
To overcome this complex reality, we consider it
essential to address its root causes, particularly the
lack of basic goods and services and employment, as
well as the isolation to which millions of Palestinians
in the Gaza Strip are subjected. The current situation
provides fertile ground for those who promote
violence and extremism. In that regard, we encourage
the continuation of infrastructure and development
projects and the promotion of efforts aimed at enabling
the Palestinian Authority to resume effective control of
the area and ensuring that the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East enjoys stable and predictable funding.
Given the extremely delicate situation in the
Persian Gulf, we echo timely calls for the leaders of
the key actors concerned to demonstrate tangible signs
of moderation, commitment to peace and respect for
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
All differences must be channelled through the political
and diplomatic track and never a military option.
We take this opportunity to urge the Iranian
authorities to reverse measures aimed at reducing their
obligations under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, which is a central instrument for the preservation
of the non-proliferation regime and for regional and
global stability. We also appeal for a careful assessment
of the imposition of any new national sanctions, due
to their implications for Iranian civilians and their
potential to exacerbate current tensions and further

S/PV. 8706

erode trust. Against that backdrop, the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, is particularly pertinent.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month, as well as on its accession to
membership of the Council for the period 2020-2021. I
also extend my congratulations to the other new elected
members of the Security Council and express my sincere
appreciation to the five non-permanent members that
left the Security Council at the end of 2019.
I also thank Ms. DiCarlo and Ms. Mueller for
their briefings.
With regard to the recent escalation of the situation
in the Middle East, we stress the need to make every
effort to seek calm and reduce tensions in order to
avoid any further threat to the security and stability
of the region. We would also like to reaffirm Jordan’s
unwavering support for Iraq in maintaining its security,
stability and prosperity, protecting all factions of the
Iraqi people and countering terrorism. Terrorism is
a danger to all of us in the region and throughout the
world. It constitutes a security and ideological threat
that we must confront collectively, no matter where
terrorist organizations are.
With regard to the Syrian crisis, the international
community must step up its efforts and build on what
has been achieved thus far in order to reach a political
solution that preserves Syria’s unity, cohesion and
sovereignty, restores its security and stability and rids
it of terrorism.
On Libya, we reaffirm the importance of adopting
a political solution and supporting the efforts of the
United Nations as a means to overcome the crisis and
guarantee the security, stability and territorial integrity
of the country.
The Palestinian question remains our central issue
and deepest wound, as it is the main cause of the crises
ravaging the Middle East. Unilateral measures continue,
as do violence, injustice, the building of settlements and
a lack of respect for international law. The frequency
of violations and aggressions perpetrated by Israel, the
occupying Power, in occupied Jerusalem continues to
escalate in a systematic and dangerous manner. The

20-0149529/30

S/PV.8706

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israeli occupation is seeking, by various means and
methods, to impose new conditions that may alter the
Arab and Islamic identity and legal status of Jerusalem.
The safety and integrity of Islamic and Christian holy
sites, especially the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, are also under serious threat by the
Israeli occupation.
Such attacks and violations, which have been
internationally condemned, are in flagrant contravention
of international law and international humanitarian
law. Those breaches of international legitimacy have
repeatedly and systematically been manifested since
East Jerusalem and the West Bank came under Israeli
military occupation in 1967. The numerous resolutions
issued by the various organs of the United Nations,
including the Security Council, consider all such Israeli
measures, violations and aggressions in occupied
East Jerusalem, including the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque/
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, as null and void and without legal
or political effect.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, under the
leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah II, the
guardian of Islamic and Christian holy sites in
Jerusalem, continues to confront attacks on those holy
sites head-on, using all diplomatic and legal means at
its disposal. We will spare no effort in that regard and
will continue to diligently protect, maintain and care
for those holy sites. In that context, we commend the
role played by the Al-Quds Committee, chaired by His
Majesty King Mohammed VI of sisterly Morocco.
A more peaceful world cannot be achieved without
a stable Middle East. Stability in the Middle East is
not possible without peace between the Palestinians
and the Israelis. The two-State solution is therefore the
only path towards peace in the Middle East through
the establishment of a Palestinian State with full

30/30

21/01/2020

sovereignty over its national territory and along the
4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
In that regard, I need to stress that peace in the
Middle East will pave the way for a life full of hope,
opportunities, prosperity and progress for the millions
of young people in our region and throughout the
world who yearn for a better life and future. During
its membership of the Security Council in 2014-2015,
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan initiated the historic
resolution 2250 (2015) on youth and peace and security.
That resolution sought to involve young people as
fundamental partners in peacebuilding and empower
them to harness their capacities to build lasting peace
and combat extremism, as well as to protect them
from the negative impacts of conflict and prevent
them from falling prey to the forces of evil, violence
and extremism. To guarantee the effectiveness of the
Organization and its Charter, we must work together
and keep youth at the top of our priorities, with a view
to building comprehensive and just peace through
this Organization.
In conclusion, I recall the statement that His
Majesty King Abdullah II Ibn Al-Hussein delivered to
the European Parliament last week, “My father, the late
King Hussein, taught me that peacemaking is always
the harder but the noblest way”. Let us work together
through the Council and the United Nations, with our
Palestinian brethren, our friends and our partners, to
seriously address the challenges before us in order to
achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
on my list for this meeting. With the concurrence of the
members of the Council, I intend to suspend this meeting
until 10 a.m. tomorrow, Wednesday, 22 January.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

20-01495
