S/PV.8056

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8056th meeting

Tuesday, 26 September 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alemu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (covering the period from
2 June to 1 September 2017) (S/2017/784)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-29886 (E)
*1729886*

S/PV.8056

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (covering the period from 2 June to
1 September 2017) (S/2017/784)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of South Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. David
Shearer, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for South Sudan and Head of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan; and His Excellency
Mr. Festus Mogae, Chair of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission.
Mr. Mogae is participating in today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Juba.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/784, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan covering the period
from 2 June to 1 September 2017.
I now give the floor to Mr. Shearer.
Mr. Shearer: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
invitation to address the Security Council and touch
on some critical issues in South Sudan. I will provide
a brief update on the situation in the country, as well
as United Nations efforts to protect civilians and build
durable peace, as per our mandate.
As we approach the end of the rainy season,
South Sudan remains beset by social, economic and
humanitarian challenges. The Government appears
emboldened by its recent military gains, including in
some key strongholds of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army in Opposition (SPLA-IO) that are loyal to
leader Riek Machar. Deep mistrust of military forces,
exacerbated by human rights abuses, fuels flights
2/16

26/09/2017

into neighbouring countries. Across the country, the
opposition remains deeply fractured and has suffered
significant military setbacks in recent months.
At the same time, the economic crisis is further
fuelling public frustration and undermines the
Government’s capacity to deliver governance and
services to its people. In many cases, civil servants
have not been paid for over four months and salaries
to security forces are also delayed. Localized conflicts
continue to flare — their impact greatly magnified
by automatic weapons and affecting areas outside
the central conflict. There is now growing discussion
about moving swiftly to elections. I continue to stress
to my Government counterparts that elections must
be inclusive, credible and fair, but they should also
represent the consolidation of a genuine peace process.
Along with others here today, I remain deeply
concerned by the humanitarian situation. This is a
conflict in which the greatest number of casualties are
civilians and not combatants. United Nations agencies
assess that the total number of people in need is
7.6 million. The burden that humanitarians and donor
countries shoulder to support those people with food,
health care and education is enormous. The recent
humanitarian response plan, which at one point was
budgeted at $1.6 billion, is so far 66 per cent funded.
I must underscore that without such humanitarian
support, thousands of people would simply not survive.
The number of people displaced in South Sudan
rose to nearly 4 million during the first half of this
year. Of those, 2 million have fled to neighbouring
countries: Uganda, the Sudan, Ethiopia, Kenya and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I wish to express
my appreciation to those countries for shouldering
that burden.
I continue to applaud the efforts made on the ground
by our humanitarian partners, who reach millions of
the most vulnerable people in the country. However, in
critical areas, and often at critical times, communities
cannot be reached because access is denied. Those
include areas of the Greater Upper Nile region, parts
of the Equatorias and areas south and west of Wau,
where active Government military operations against
the SPLA-IO continue. For example, humanitarian
partners were only in the past month able to reach
the populations of Bagari, outside of Wau, after being
denied access for almost one year. Sustained, regular
access is what is required and needed.
17-29886

26/09/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The splintering of opposition forces has had a
negative consequence on humanitarian efforts. For
example, the World Food Programme’s regular convoys
to Yambio — about two days travel from Juba — now
require 13 separate permissions from armed groups
along their route. Increasingly, combatants are shifting
into criminality along major roadways, with civilian
and aid convoys being a target. Two weeks ago, a driver
for the International Committee of the Red Cross was
killed when his relief convoy was attacked in Western
Equatoria. His death brings the number of aid workers
who have been killed in South Sudan just this year to 18.
Government officials need to take a more positive
attitude towards our humanitarian partners, whom
they often blame for creating a negative international
perception of the country. Removing numerous
bureaucratic impediments, including additional taxes
and fees on humanitarian organizations, is required to
acknowledge the valuable work that they carry out on
behalf of the people of South Sudan.
As the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), we are working hard to support our
humanitarian colleagues. Our modus operandi is to be
robust, nimble and proactive. We have provided surge
support to help protect key humanitarian facilities, such
as in Bunj, in the northern part of the country. However,
sadly, our missions have also included evacuating
personnel during active fighting. I anticipate that, while
we respect each other’s mandates, that collaboration
will intensify if security trends continue.
We are far from the conditions for safe return in
most areas, but we are continuously looking to seize
opportunities to support communities in returning to
their homes, where that is possible. UNMISS will soon
open a permanent presence in Yei and reinforce our
presence in Torit and Yambio — all of which are in the
Equatorias, to the south — to deter violence and human
rights abuses and build confidence for people to return
to their homes. The small Melut protection site in the
north will be closing in coming weeks, in line with the
desire there for people to return to their homes. We
are looking at downsizing protection sites in Wau and
possibly even in Bor.
We are working closely with our humanitarian
partners to align our efforts so that people have a
real choice to return home. The quality of services
inside the protection of civilians sites and outside
communities needs to be looked at to provide more

S/PV. 8056

balance. Having a first-class medical facility inside
a protection of civilians site and no medical support
outside clearly deters people from returning to their
homes. Those efforts will also coincide with UNMISS
efforts to increasingly project our peacekeeping forces
from static duties out into communities where they are
most needed.
However, ultimately, that movement will critically
depend on how the Government and opposition forces
behave. Where there is discipline, the results have been
encouraging, but where those forces continue to prey
on civilians, the protection of civilians site will remain
a necessary refuge. Meanwhile, increased efforts are
being made to identify malign and criminal elements
inside our sites. Identified perpetrators and combatants
will be ejected to reinforce the civilian character of
the sites.
I wish to briefly address the deployment of
the Regional Protection Force (RPF). While the
Government has officially repeated its acceptance
of the RPF and UNMISS has closely adhered to the
Government’s clearances and protocols, the positioning
of the RPF in relation to Juba airport — including at the
Mission’s adjacent Tomping base — remains a vexed
issue. The RPF mandate is clearly and unambiguously
set out in resolutions adopted by the Council. Together
with my Force Commander, I am engaging with the
Government in discussions over unresolved issues and
will reach out to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the African Union (AU) to
meet with the Chiefs of Defence Staff from IGAD RPF
troop contributors and the Government in Juba, as soon
as possible.
We must also remember that the situation on the
ground has changed significantly from a year ago,
when two separate armies were positioned inside Juba.
Today, security threats in Juba, we believe, are more
likely to come from civil unrest that is sparked by
potential economic collapse. However, the intensity of
fighting in the Equatorias was not present a year ago.
As a consequence, those areas are where the more than
1 million people who have fled to Uganda have come
from. The bolstering of UNMISS forces with the RPF,
as it gradually arrives, will enable UNMISS to further
project into those areas, in line with its protection of
civilians mandate.
Allow me to make a few observations about the
current political situation. I believe that the space for

17-298863/16

S/PV.8056

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

compromise over the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan is narrow.
The parties have shown little interest in engaging in
serious negotiations on the way forward, despite the
various initiatives aimed at finding a political solution
to the conflict. The central conflict-resolution strategy
must be political mediation via the IGAD high-level
revitalization forum.
For its part, the United Nations will continue
to support the national dialogue with caution and
conditional on its remaining transparent and inclusive.
I acknowledge that the process might appear partisan to
an increasingly disillusioned and fractured opposition,
but in past months it has provided a useful platform for
open and highly critical discussion. By engaging with
it, we hope to encourage a process that is aligned with
best practices, while still nationally driven.
There is both a humanitarian and a political
urgency to our meeting here today. In the past week,
there has been renewed enthusiasm for and solidarity
with the revitalization process. There are only a few
months remaining in the transitional period stipulated
by the peace agreement. External momentum to support
peace is needed. It is critical now that the international
community show unity of purpose in supporting
an implementable peace process would that lead to
credible elections in due course, but only after a period
of transition marked by inclusivity and stability.
I am committed to continue that engagement.
Together with the Special Envoy for Sudan and South
Sudan, we maintain our good offices to engage all
parties to meaningfully participate in the political
process. We will continue to work with AU High
Representative Alpha Oumar Konaré and support
IGAD and its Special Envoy Ismael Wais, together
with President Mogae and the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, to hasten preparations and
convene the high-level revitalization forum to bring the
parties together. We will bolster collaboration among
the region, the African Union, IGAD and the United
Nations to prevent forum-shopping by the parties.
In all of that, South Sudan needs the unified efforts
and attention of the Security Council, building on the
AU Peace and Security Council collaboration and its
communiqué of a few days ago. We are all aware that the
country risks remaining a source of continued regional
instability and a drain on international resources. The
wider region has a critical role to play in convincing
4/16

26/09/2017

the parties of the need to compromise and find
peaceful solutions. Collectively, we will need to deliver
a clear and unified message to the parties on the way
forward. The consultations of the past few days here in
New York have been encouraging, but we are backing
a process to which we urgently need to add substance. I
count on the continued support of those present.
Finally, I want to thank the members of the Council
for backing UNMISS over the past week as it has been
truly gratifying.
The President: I thank Mr. Shearer for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mogae.
Mr. Mogae: I would like to thank you, Sir, for
your kind invitation to me to brief the Security Council
today. My briefing will build on the previous update
that I provided to the Security Council last month (see
S/PV.8030) on the implementation of the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. I will therefore focus on a quick situation update,
including on the forthcoming evaluation report of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC)
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) high-level revitalization forum.
Last month, I reported an incident of heavy
fighting between the Sudan People’s Liberation Army
in Opposition (SPLA-IO) and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army in Government (SPLA-IG) in some
areas of the country. The scale of the fighting has
changed this month, with the reports from the Cease Fire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism indicating that there has been a relatively
lower incidence of fighting between SPLA-IG and the
Machar faction of SPLA-IO.
However, fighting was reported between forces of
the Taban and Machar factions of SPLA-IO in Unity
and Upper Nile states, causing further displacement of
civilians. SPLA-IO has denied access to a joint patrol of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and citizens along the Nile, so we are unable to provide
a full picture at this time. The situation concerning
the control of Pagak in Upper Nile state remains tense
as SPLA-IG and SPLA-IO Machar make claims and
counter claims.
The Monitoring Mechanism has reported the
displacement of 3,000 civilians into Ethiopia. It
also reports fighting in the Equatorias and armed
robberies in some parts of Eastern Equatoria.
17-29886

26/09/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8056

Intercommunal tensions are reported in some parts
in the greater Bhar el-Ghazal region and the Maban
area, where Vice-President James Wani Igga has been
mediating between internally displaced persons and
host communities.

little substantive progress has been made in the
implementation of the key provisions. I have previously
described the implementation as being modest at best,
and from the evaluation reports presented yesterday
nothing I have heard nothing to change my view.

We in JMEC are acutely aware that the humanitarian
crisis persists mainly owing to the conflict, with
6 million people reporting severe food insecurity and
continued inconsistent humanitarian access. JMEC
remains fully focused on its mandate to monitor and
evaluate the implementation of the peace agreement
and is committed to supporting IGAD in its objective
to convene a high-level revitalization forum. To that
end, yesterday JMEC held an evaluation workshop
to review a comprehensive report on the status of the
implementation of the peace agreement. Once complete,
the report will be presented to IGAD as part of our
contribution to ensuring a successful revitalization
forum. Allow me to elaborate.

Fundamental to the full report is the irrefutable fact
that the permanent ceasefire has been and continues
to be violated by all parties with impunity, and as
such, security has deteriorated to a critical level. Of
underlying importance is the fracturing of SPLA-IO
into two factions — one under the First Vice-President,
General Taban Deng Gai, and the other under the
former First Vice-President, Mr. Riek Machar, who
is now in exile in South Africa. The expansion of the
number of states from 10 to 32, in contravention of the
peace agreement, has also fundamentally and adversely
affected the intended power-sharing formula.

In March, we took the deliberate step of enhancing
our oversized role with the formation of six JMEC
working committees, in line with the six substantive
chapters of the agreement. Their tasks are to
continuously review and evaluate the progress in the
implementation of the peace agreement and to support
and recommend remedial actions to be undertaken.
The working committees have held a combined total
of 38 meetings to date. They have engaged bilaterally
with the Transitional Government of National Unity
and other stakeholders, and they have invited briefings
from key institutions and mechanisms charged with
implementing the agreement.
Consistent with the terms of reference for the
revitalization forum, agreed to by IGAD Council of
Ministers on 2 July, the JMEC working committees
have conducted a full evaluation of the status of the
implementation of the peace agreement and prepared a
report, which is under consideration. I expect the final
report to be published by the end of next week. As I
have said, once the report is finalized and adopted by
JMEC, it will be presented to IGAD and is intended
to mark the starting point for discussion in the
revitalization process.
I shall not pre-empt the final report, but overall
JMEC maintains the view that despite initial reasonable
progress in the formation of the various institutions
and bodies, the implementation of the peace agreement
was disrupted in July 2016 and, as things stand today,

While some progress has been made, it is greatly
disappointing that after two years, there are several
transitional institutions and mechanisms that have
yet to be established, including the special fund for
reconstruction, the economic and financial management
authority, the compensation and reparations authority
and key transitional justice institutions. Most
importantly, there has been no progress whatsoever in
the permanent constitution-making process.
JMEC recommendations are that there must be an
immediate ceasefire and an end to all forms of violence.
There is a fundamental need for the demonstration
of political will by the parties to undertake their
responsibility to implement the provisions of the
agreement. All forms of obstruction to the delivery of
humanitarian aid must be removed. The Transitional
Government of National Unity must expedite and
conclude the constitutional and legislative amendments
and initiate without further delay the permanent
constitution-making process.
In preparation for the return of the displaced
persons, a joint framework should be developed by
the Transitional Government of National Unity, in
collaboration with humanitarian partners. The Security
Council, in collaboration with IGAD, the African
Union and international partners, should put in place
mechanisms to enforce compliance.
In the coming weeks, IGAD will convene a highlevel revitalization forum and I wish to take the
opportunity to reaffirm our complete commitment
to that process. Together with one voice, we can

17-298865/16

S/PV.8056

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

challenge those who believe in the military solution to
the conflict. We urge the Government and all parties
concerned to engage in the inclusive political process.
The revitalization forum convened by IGAD is the best
opportunity to restore peace and rebuild governance in
South Sudan.
If implemented credibly and inclusively, national
dialogue can play a complementary role in delivering
long-term reconciliation. Given current conditions
around the country, mass displacement, severe food
insecurity and the total lack of institutional and
constitutional infrastructure, it is clear that elections
will not be feasible by the end of the current transitional
period. Therefore, the high-level revitalization forum is
the best hope for reigniting the political process.
We hope that the evaluation conducted by the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission will enable
parties, the region and all South Sudanese stakeholders
to pursue the revitalization process from an informed
point of view. We encourage them to take concrete steps
to revitalize the implementation of the peace agreement
without further delay.
The President: I thank Mr. Mogae for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to thank Mr. Shearer for his briefing. I also thank
President Mogae for his briefing and his tireless efforts
to bring peace to South Sudan.
The people of South Sudan are suffering and
the promise of their hard-fought independence is
slipping away. In fact, we are so concerned about the
deteriorating situation in South Sudan and elsewhere in
Central and East Africa that President Trump has asked
me to go to Africa in October. While there, I will go to
Juba as a representative of my Government, but also as
a representative of the Security Council.
Six months have passed since the Security Council
demanded that the warring parties in South Sudan
cease fighting and return to the negotiation table. In
each month since then, we have gathered here to lament
the terrible situation in South Sudan. Each month, we
have urged the parties to stop fighting. We have called
on them to stop obstructing the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS). We have watched in dismay
as hundreds of people have been forced to flee their
homes every day and as hunger has set in.
6/16

26/09/2017

Each month, we have watched the situation in
South Sudan become worse, not better, and we issue
still more calls to action. We are disappointed that
the Council refuses to stem the flow of arms to South
Sudan or punish those who victimize their own people.
Still, we know that the real responsibility and power for
change lies with South Sudan’s leaders, but so far, the
Government of South Sudan has not responded to the
pleas of the Council to create an inclusive Government
and put an end to the fighting. There is a great deal of
work left to do.
The violence and destruction have left 2 million
South Sudanese displaced, 2 million refugees, 6 million
facing near-famine conditions and countless dead.
The impact on children has been especially severe.
Seventeen thousand children have been abducted or
recruited into armed groups. More than 15,000 children
have been pulled apart from their families and other
loved ones. More than 1.1 million children face acute
malnutrition and barely half of school-age children
are in the classrooms. Those are sobering statistics
with dire implications for the safety, well-being and
future of an entire generation. The United Nations
Mission is in South Sudan to respond to the crisis, help
protect civilians and ease their suffering. UNMISS
shelters more than 200,000 civilians at sites across the
country. It tries to reach more, but its operations are
continually frustrated.
We call on the Government of South Sudan to
welcome the assistance of the Mission and cooperate
with it fulfilling its mandate for the South Sudanese
people. The United States is not waiting to act. Earlier
in September, we imposed economic and financial
sanctions against individuals who have obstructed the
peace process, denied access to humanitarian assistance
and interfered with the peacekeeping mission. The
United States will do what it can to reduce the suffering
in South Sudan and the Security Council and regional
actors must do more, but our ultimate message to the
South Sudanese leaders will be that they must seize the
opportunity to take the initiative. They have a way to
stop the violence.
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
has presented them with a way to quickly resuscitate
the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, but time is running out. It
is the last chance at salvaging the peace agreement in
South Sudan. The different parties to the conflict must
use the next several weeks to commit themselves to the
17-29886

26/09/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

process and conclude it. Our hope is that South Sudan’s
leaders will seize the opportunity. If they do not, we
must resolve now, both individually and collectively, to
do more to end the conflict.
As for the people of South Sudan, we look forward
to delivering the message in person very soon that we
have not forgotten or given up on them. The people of
South Sudan have a friend and advocate in the United
States of America.
Mr. Allen: (United Kingdom): At the outset,
let me take the opportunity to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Shearer,
and President Mogae for their briefings. I reiterate the
full support of the United Kingdom for the vital work of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
in difficult circumstances in South Sudan.
Two years ago, the people of South Sudan rejoiced
at the signing of the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. It was
a symbol of hope for the young country, which had so
quickly been plunged again into war by the rivalries
of its leaders. Now, that document is a stark reminder
of all that the Government has failed to deliver for
South Sudan. As the Secretary-General said, the
signatories to the peace agreement have demonstrated
time and again that they are deaf to the distress of their
own people and unmoved by calls for peace from the
international community.
Conflict, hunger and horrific sexual violence have
become commonplace. There has been gang rape, the
recruitment of child soldiers and attacks on schools
and hospitals. Nearly 2 million people are on the brink
of famine and half of the population is food insecure.
Yet, non-governmental organizations report that those
starving are often too afraid to collect life-saving aid
for fear of being attacked on the way home by those
charged to protect them. We cannot even begin to
imagine the choices that the people of South Sudan are
being forced to make.
The suffering is forcing millions of civilians to
flee, creating the largest refugee crisis in Africa and
the fastest growing refugee crisis in the world. Today,
we have been presented with a yet another set of reports
that demonstrate that the Government’s declared
ceasefire is meaningless. Government forces continue
large-scale military operations, which have caused dire
humanitarian consequences and disrupted life-saving

S/PV. 8056

humanitarian operations. Suffering on such a scale
cannot be allowed to continue. South Sudan cannot
continue on its current path.
As President Mogae has rightly stated, the
international community must act and speak with
one voice. In that vein, the United Kingdom strongly
welcomes the joint efforts of the United Nations, the
regional countries of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the African Union to bring
the suffering of the South Sudanese people and the
fighting to an end. Those messages were reiterated at
the high-level meeting on South Sudan on 20 September
and echo of the calls that the Council made in March in
our presidential statement S/PRST/2017/4.
We welcome the leadership shown by the
regional countries of IGAD in launching the highlevel revitalization forum and offer our full support,
as I believe all members of the Security Council do,
to this initiative’s objective of revitalizing the peace
agreement. If it is to succeed, it will take a concerted
and united push from all countries in the region and
a commitment to staying the course. The first priority
for that process must be the laying down of arms once
and for all. There is no military solution to this crisis,
and lasting peace will be achieved only through the
inclusion of all groups, armed or not.
We cannot expect success overnight. We must see
the revitalization forum as a process, not a one-off
meeting, although we must also guard against drift.
Success will require all the parties, particularly the
Government, to demonstrate the commitment and
the political will to pursue peace, which have been
lacking so far. The United Kingdom therefore calls
on all parties to the Agreement, as well as estranged
and other opposition groups, to respond positively and
constructively to this opportunity for dialogue. We
agree with others that at this stage elections would be
premature. The United Kingdom has repeatedly stated
that there must be consequences for those who seek to
obstruct peace, and we have long called for sanctions
against spoilers.
We therefore support last week’s African Union
Peace and Security Council communiqué and its call
for all the necessary steps, including sanctions, to
be considered against all who continue to obstruct
efforts to restore peace and security in South Sudan.
The international community, including the Security
Council, must be prepared to act against those who

17-298867/16

S/PV.8056

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

continue to impede progress towards peace and make
the people of South Sudan suffer. We should make
it clear to them that they will face sanctions if they
do not participate fully in the IGAD process. As the
communiqué says, South Sudan can no longer be treated
in a routine manner. The United Kingdom stands ready
to support the region and use all the tools at its disposal,
collectively and individually, to compel the parties to
choose peace.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank Mr. David Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for South
Sudan, and Mr. Festus Mogae, Chair of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, for their
briefings, which have given us a very complete picture
of the latest events in South Sudan.
The civilian population is suffering the terrible
consequences of the prolonged crisis in South Sudan,
whose own politicians are chiefly responsible for the
situation. We should never lose sight of the horrendous
suffering that the South Sudanese have had to undergo
for far too long. The principal cause of the country’s
crisis is the fact that its political leaders have put their
personal ambitions for power above the needs of their
people. To date, 4 million civilians have been driven
from their homes, 1.9 million of them internally
displaced and more than 2 million as refugees, while
6 million — half the population — are facing high
levels of food insecurity, including 1.7 million who are
on the brink of starvation.
What is most alarming is that the situation seems
only to be getting worse. The clashes between groups
in various parts of the country continue, while there
has been no tangible progress on the implementation
of the August 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. As if that were
not enough, humanitarian workers, who in many cases
are the only lifeline for the people most in need of help,
are operating in an increasingly hostile environment,
with limited access to those in need and under direct
attack by all the parties to the conflict.
Given this difficult situation, Uruguay urges all
parties to fulfil their promise to end the hostilities
immediately and commit in good faith to a dialogue
process on implementing the peace agreement. We
should point out that President Kiir has launched a
national dialogue process and, most recently, announced
a unilateral ceasefire in May. In addition, we urge
8/16

26/09/2017

the Government of South Sudan to restore political
freedoms which are essential to peace, ensure respect
for human rights and hold the perpetrators of human
rights violations accountable. It will also be crucial to
ensure a secure and respectful environment that will
enable humanitarian staff to carry out the enormous,
difficult and urgent task of assisting those who are most
in need.
Despite the complexity and difficulty of the
situation in South Sudan, the international community
is still working as hard as it can to revitalize the peace
process. For example, in September 2016 the Council
visited the country, and issued a presidential statement
in March (S/PRST/2017/4). And we are also grateful for
the efforts of the United Nations, the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, among other stakeholders. In our view,
and as Mr. Mogae has repeatedly stated, all the parties
seeking a solution to the conflict must speak with one
voice, while sending a firm and unequivocal message
to the groups involved in the conflict. In that regard,
we commend the coordination by the United Nations,
the African Union and IGAD of a number of events that
took place on the margins of the general debate of the
General Assembly. We also look forward to IGAD’s
convening of the high-level revitalization forum on
the August 2015 peace agreement, which will be a
good opportunity to revitalize the political process in
South Sudan and lay the groundwork for the holding of
democratic elections at the end of the transition period.
Finally, we would like to highlight the tireless
efforts of Mr. Shearer and the staff of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan in fulfilling their
appointed tasks. We also look forward to seeing the
full and speedy deployment of the Regional Protection
Force, which will no doubt help to increase stability in
the country.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Mr. Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and President
Mogae, Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, for their comprehensive briefings.
As the serious overall situation in South Sudan
continues unabated, our message also remains
unchanged. The violations of the ceasefire and
restrictions on humanitarian access must stop and the
Government of South Sudan must cooperate fully with
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
17-29886

26/09/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

First Vice-President Taban Deng Gai committed to
action on each of those areas at the General Assembly
last week (see A/72/PV.19), and the Government must
demonstrate concrete results in that regard. The Council
should remain united in sending a strong message to the
Government and the opposition.
The human costs of the ongoing conflict are
enormous. Nearly a third of the South Sudanese, many
of them women and children, are internally displaced
or have become refugees. Half of the population is food
insecure. The international community’s continued
efforts are needed to fully fund the humanitarian
response plan. On 19 September, Japan announced that
it would provide $3 million in emergency grant aid to the
World Food Programme and the Food and Agricultural
Organization to help address food insecurity in South
Sudan. But unhindered access and protection for
humanitarian personnel are essential.
The only solution to these challenges is through the
political process, and Japan continues to underline the
importance of ensuring a genuinely inclusive political
process that encompasses a national dialogue. We
strongly support the efforts led by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to organize the high-level
revitalization forum. Like others, we welcome the
African Union Peace and Security Council’s strong
communiqué of 20 September, which sends the message
that while this process represents a unique window of
opportunity, it is also the parties’ last chance to achieve
true peace and stability.
We commend the robust posture of UNMISS under
the leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Shearer. The deployment of the
Regional Protection Force is also a positive development
and we look forward to its completion as soon as
possible, with full cooperation among the Government,
the troop-contributing countries and UNMISS. The
situation in South Sudan remains extremely difficult,
but the revitalization efforts and UNMISS’s work offer
a way forward. Japan will continue to support the
people of South Sudan in their quest for lasting peace
and security.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. David Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as well as
Mr. Festus Mogae, Chair of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, for their substantive briefings.

S/PV. 8056

We believe that it will be possible to stabilize the
situation in South Sudan only if there is a lasting ceasefire
and the start of an inclusive national reconciliation
process. We note that certain progress has been made in
that regard, in the form of the gradual implementation
of President Kiir’s initiative, launched in May, to
begin a nationwide dialogue, with the participation
of every ethnic group, political actor and population
sector, aimed at achieving national reconciliation and
ending the conflict in South Sudan. We agree with the
Secretariat that this can be viewed as a supplement to
the process initiated by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) for revitalizing the August
2015 peace agreement. In that regard, we welcome the
efforts of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
in promoting intercommunal reconciliation at the
local level.
We have once again been compelled to turn our
attention to the dire humanitarian repercussions of
the crisis in South Sudan. Its escalation is having
extremely negative repercussions in the subregion,
producing a significant spike in the influx of refugees
into neighbouring countries. In our view, it would not
be fair to lay all the blame for the persistent violence
entirely at the Government’s door. It is impossible for
the unilateral ceasefire that Mr. Kiir announced in May
to be implemented without reciprocal measures on the
part of the opposition.
We continue to believe that threatening the
Government with targeted sanctions or an arms
embargo would not help to solve the crisis, and might
in fact exacerbate it. During our recent visit to Addis
Ababa, the members of the Council were able to see
for themselves how wary the regional players are about
increasing the sanctions pressure.
We are pleased that the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force is under way in South Sudan. We trust
that IGAD and the Secretariat will continue working
with the South Sudan Government on mutually
acceptable modalities for the operation, including the
involvement of the Regional Protection Force in the
area of Juba airport. That is a requisite of the basic
principles of peacekeeping.
We call on South Sudan and the troop-contributing
countries to help the Regional Protection Force reach
operational readiness. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s personal involvement in the efforts to
achieve a settlement in South Sudan and commend the

17-298869/16

S/PV.8056

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

cooperation among the African Union, IGAD and the
United Nations. We hope that the current preparations
for the IGAD-led revitalization forum for the peace
agreement will enable it to succeed. While noting
the Kampala and Nairobi mediation efforts, we share
the Secretary-General’s opinion that those processes
require tight coordination. We would also like to note
the importance of ensuring that the regional Powers
maintain a united approach to the settlement of the crisis
in South Sudan. Attempts to advance short-sighted
national agendas, let alone to compete with neighbours
in the region where South Sudan is concerned, could
have disastrous consequences for the peace process.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking Special Representative
Shearer and Chair Mogae for their comprehensive and
insightful briefings.
My country is concerned about the slow
implementation of the South Sudan Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, since it remains the only viable option
for achieving sustainable peace, and we appreciate
the work of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) in organizing the anxiously
awaited high-level revitalization forum, which aims to
include all parties in the effort to effectively implement
the Agreement. At the same time, we must ensure that
the national dialogue launched in May is truly inclusive
and transparent. Such a dialogue requires a much wider
collaboration among the Transitional Government, the
African Union, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) and IGAD. We also commend the
efforts of Presidents Museveni and Konaré, as well as
other stakeholders, to bring peace to South Sudan.
The crisis in South Sudan can end only if all these
peace initiatives are well coordinated. We support the
communiqué adopted on 20 September at the African
Union Peace and Security Council ministerial meeting
on the situation in South Sudan, and join others in
underscoring how important it is that all stakeholders
speak with one voice, thus avoiding mixed messages
being sent to the parties in South Sudan. The support
of the African Union, working closely with the United
Nations, is integral to calming intentions and making
improvements on many fronts. But we must also
acknowledge that the conflict in South Sudan cannot
be resolved or managed exclusively through political
negotiations, because security and development are
interdependent. If we are to address complex causes
10/16

26/09/2017

of conflict we must design effective strategies for
international assistance in many areas, including
sustainable economic growth, infrastructure and
road-building, intercommunal reconciliation and
preservation of the environment.
We are seriously concerned about the fact that,
despite the ceasefire declaration and generally
limited mobility, owing to the rainy season, military
operations have continued in Jonglei, Upper Nile
and the Equatorias, leading to a sharp escalation in
humanitarian-access incidents, extreme food insecurity
and the numbers of refugees and internally displaced
persons. We therefore urge all parties to restore the
permanent ceasefire and immediately stop attacking,
arresting and detaining UNMISS and humanitarian
personnel. It will be important to make the perpetrators
of such violations accountable, and we welcome the
recent progress made in establishing the Hybrid Court.
Kazakhstan also appreciates the progress achieved in
deploying the Regional Protection Force, which will
play a key role in protecting civilians and improving
the security environment. We welcome the decision of
the Kenyan Government to participate in the Regional
Protection Force and hope that the remaining issues
will be resolved speedily and the deployment process
completed on time.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan emphasizes the need for
the regional and international communities to foster
constructive understanding and trusting, mutually
beneficial relations if we are to achieve the goal we
all share of peace and security in South Sudan. We
therefore believe that Mr. Shearer’s latest meeting
with President Kiir represents the beginning of an
improved working relationship between UNMISS and
the Transitional Government.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank Special
Representative Shearer and President Mogae for their
sobering reports on the situation in South Sudan. Like
others, we are deeply concerned about this level of
continued fighting. After four years of conflict, the
civilian population continues to suffer from a lack on
the part of the stakeholders of the political commitment
and will needed to find a peaceful solution. But
momentum is now building around regional efforts to
end the conflict. We welcome the strong leadership
shown by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the African Union (AU) and
fully support the process for revitalizing the Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
17-29886

26/09/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

South Sudan, as was discussed at the IGAD Plus Plus
meeting last week. We call for the swift convening of
IGAD’s high-level revitalization forum on South Sudan
and urge that it be substantive. It represents a unique
opportunity to bring all the stakeholders together, and
we urge all parties to engage in the process in good
faith. The steps outlined in the African Union Peace
and Security Council communiqué of 20 September
provide a road map for the way forward. We welcome
the proposal to convene regular tripartite meetings
between the United Nations Special Envoy, the AU
High Representative and the IGAD Special Envoy as a
way to ensure better coordination and impact.
As we discussed in detail during our recent visit
to Addis Ababa and with the African Union, only a
political solution will end the crisis. To that end, an
immediate cessation of hostilities by all parties — the
Government and armed groups alike — is paramount,
not only to alleviate the suffering of civilians but to
enable a meaningful and inclusive political process.
Under the current circumstances, with massive
displacement, elections cannot be held in a free, fair
and inclusive manner.
The Security Council must remain united in its
support for intensified regional efforts. We must strive
to bring the international community together so as to
speak with one voice, as many have said here today
and as the African Union Peace and Security Council
communiqué calls for. As Council members, we must
also live up to our own responsibilities by being
prepared to follow through on our decisions. That
means standing by the provisions of the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/4) that we adopted six months
ago, including preparing for further measures if
needed, in lockstep with the African Union Peace and
Security Council.
As we heard at last week’s high-level meeting
on the humanitarian situation in South Sudan, the
situation for the people there continues to worsen, with
more than half of the population in need of assistance.
We call on the Government to facilitate the work of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and
humanitarian organizations, and to ensure that relief
workers are protected. In that regard, we welcome
the deployment of the first company of the Regional
Protection Force and expect that the outstanding issues
regarding its full deployment will be resolved swiftly.

S/PV. 8056

We commend UNMISS for its continuing efforts
to protect civilians, but we are still very concerned
about the allegations of violations and abuses of
human rights and international humanitarian law, and
regret the fact that UNMISS’s ability to monitor and
verify such violations and abuses, including sexual
violence, is hindered by insecurity and restrictions on
its freedom of movement. We stress the importance of
establishing a Hybrid Court without delay and welcome
the African Union efforts to finalize a memorandum of
understanding with the Government towards that goal.
It will be an important step towards combating impunity
and hopefully a strong deterrent to atrocity crimes.
With initiatives for peace in South Sudan moving
forward, we should consider ways to strengthen the
participation of women in the process. We encourage
UNMISS to support women’s full and active
participation of in those processes and encourage
the Secretary-General to continue to highlight both
violence against women and the participation of women
in his reports.
The suffering of South Sudan has gone on far too
long, and we call on all stakeholders to end the conflict.
The current efforts of IGAD and the African Union
need our full support. The momentum must not be lost.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Like other Security
Council members, I thank Special Representative
Shearer for his briefing and the dedication with which
he is implementing the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), in accordance with
the three-tiered approach to the protection of civilians.
I also thank President Mogae for updating us today
and welcome his call to the international community
to speak with one voice on the South Sudanese crisis.
Italy considers three fundamental aspects in assessing
the situation in South Sudan — the humanitarian
situation, human rights and national reconciliation
and the peace process. The continued violations of the
ceasefire are forcing thousands of South Sudanese to
leave their houses, villages and lands every day. The
humanitarian situation in South Sudan is an emergency
involving half the country’s population. Neighbouring
countries are called on daily to stanch this human
haemorrhage with their limited means and the risk that
the instability will soon spread to more areas of the
region. Working for a shared solution for peace in South
Sudan also means healing this wound on the African
continent. While we all have a moral imperative to help

17-2988611/16

S/PV.8056

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

26/09/2017

South Sudan, for regional actors it also represents a
geopolitical burden.

the armed clashes may further intensify when the dry
season begins.

The tragic situation in South Sudan has been
further exacerbated by serious human rights violations.
The conflict encourages impunity, sexual and genderbased violence and the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, as well as constraining freedom of opinion
and speech. All of this is slowly destroying the young
South Sudanese nation. We firmly believe that without
justice, there can never be true national reconciliation.
We welcome the conclusion of the preparatory work
by the African Union, with the support of the United
Nations Office of Legal Affairs, for establishing
a Hybrid Court, and hope that the South Sudanese
authorities will quickly follow up in accordance with
chapter 7 of the peace agreement.

Ukraine continues to believe that there can be
no military solution to the crisis in South Sudan. A
genuine political process within the framework of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan is the only viable option for
addressing the current challenges in South Sudan. The
leadership and other stakeholders in the country must
not only demonstrate their political will, but prove their
commitment to peace through their concrete deeds.

Finally, with regard to the peace process, in
the past two weeks some small but important steps
forward were made at a meeting held in New York.
The communiqué issued after the thirteenth meeting
of the United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force,
the African Union Peace and Security Council, the
high-level summit convened by the Secretary-General
and other events all came out in support of the IGAD
high-level revitalization forum. With Ethiopia, Italy
co-chairs the IGAD Partner Forum, which has been
strongly supportive, politically and financially, of
IGAD efforts to improve regional stability.
As we have consistently stated since we joined the
Security Council, the crisis in South Sudan is also a
regional one. It is up to IGAD to lead international action
for reconciliation there, with the support of the African
Union and the United Nations. We therefore reiterate
our support to the revitalization forum, agreeing that
this is “a last chance for the parties to really achieve
sustainable peace and stability in South Sudan”, as the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union stated
in its communiqué of 20 September.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank Special
Representative Shearer and President Mogae for their
detailed updates, and most of all for their tremendous
efforts to restore peace in South Sudan.
The situation in South Sudan remains volatile.
Despite the declared ceasefires and the effects of the
rainy season, the fighting has continued throughout the
country, bringing only more civilian casualties, more
destruction of infrastructure, more displacement and
more food insecurity. Moreover, the fear looms that
12/16

International support for a peaceful resolution of
the conflict in South Sudan reached an unprecedented
level last week. It is remarkable that three major
organizations — the United Nations, the African
Union and the Intergovernmental Authority for
Development — were united in their desire to put an
end to the suffering of the South Sudanese people. My
delegation welcomes the outcome of the African Union
Peace and Security Council ministerial meeting on
South Sudan held in New York a few days ago. We believe
that the communiqué issued after the meeting sends a
clear message that the status quo is not sustainable. We
also fully agree that the situation in South Sudan can
no longer be treated in a routine manner, including in
the Security Council. Urgent steps and decisions must
be taken if we are to ensure that the current momentum
does not become yet another lost opportunity for peace
and stability in South Sudan. In this light, I want to
highlight three points.
First, the fighting must stop. No political process
has a chance of succeeding under the whizz of bullets.
We call on all stakeholders to cease hostilities and
commit to a permanent ceasefire without preconditions
and in good faith.
Secondly, the political dialogue must be inclusive,
transparent and independent. The commencement
of activity of the National Dialogue Committee is a
positive step forward. To succeed, it must enjoy the
full support of all major groups of South Sudanese
society. As it was underscored in the African Union
Peace and Security Council communiqué, the national
dialogue should complement, and not be perceived as
as replacement for, the full implementation of the peace
agreement and the revitalization process led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development Council
of Ministers.
17-29886

26/09/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

That brings me to my third and final point.
Ukraine looks forward to the high-level revitalization
forum, which should create new momentum for the
implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in South Sudan. In that regard, it is crucially
important that all actors involved fully coordinate their
efforts and speak with one voice.
In conclusion, I want to underline that there can be
no more excuses for not having peace in South Sudan.
The international community is ready and willing to
assist the Government of South Sudan. In turn, the
Government of South Sudan must finally deliver on its
own commitments.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. David
Shearer, as well as the Chair of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission, President Festus Mogae,
for their thorough briefings. Faced with such a
bitter and, at times, discouraging assessment of this
persistant conflict, I would like to focus on two points
in particular.
First of all, upon having the magnitude of the daily
tragedy recalled to us, I commend the efforts of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and of the humanitarian staff who provide critical
assistance to people in South Sudan. The figures are
staggering and point to the sheer scale of the crisis,
which is worsened by the particularly dire conditions
in South Sudan, particularly for those who deliver aid
to the population.
South Sudan is indeed among the most dangerous
countries for humanitarian workers, 18 of whom have
been killed since the beginning of this year. We cannot
tolerate this situation. We firmly condemn the attacks
and access restrictions targeting UNMISS personnel as
well as humanitarian actors.
We call upon all parties to respect international
humanitarian law and provide access to the most
vulnerable people. Enabling humanitarian staff to do
their work in conflict zones is a core requirement that
must be upheld. Such attacks against humanitarian
workers, facilitated by the proliferation of weapons in
South Sudan, serve as a reminder of the importance
of considering the imposition of an arms embargo
to deprive parties to the conflict of opportunities to
perpetrate such violence.

S/PV. 8056

In this difficult context, the protection of
civilians remains imperative. France welcomes the
efforts of UNMISS in carrying out its mandate under
Mr. Shearer’s stewardship. The robust posture that he
has adopted to provide better protection for civilians
is critical while the violence persists. The deployment
of the first Regional Protection Force units is an
encouraging development, although unfortunately this
occurred more than a year after the Council’s decided
to establish it. It is crucial that the deadlock be broken
as soon as possible.
Secondly, I would like to underscore the
importance of moving the political process forward.
We are aware that a lasting settlement to the crisis
in South Sudan can only be political and can only be
achieved with regional support. The launch of the highlevel revitalization forum for the 2015 peace agreement
should help advance this process. France commends
the commitment of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and calls upon the African Union
Peace and Security Council to ensure that the forum be
made a reality as soon as possible, as is explicitly called
for in the 20 September Communiqué. The parties must
address these initiatives and fully commit themselves
to the success of the forum.
The progress reports proposed by the Peace and
Security Council, as well as the threat and imposition of
sanctions against those seeking to hamper these efforts,
should contribute to rapid progress being made. France
welcomes the efforts of various stakeholders to make
the forum a reality, in particularly the IGAD Special
Envoy, the African Union High Representative and the
Special Envoy to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, as well as Special Representative Shearer and
President Mogae.
Smooth coordination by all in this undertaking is
the key to success. France considers it equally critical
to continue working to ensure an inclusive national
dialogue so as to contribute to building lasting peace.
We are further encouraged by the call of the Peace and
Security Council for the establishment of the Hybrid
Court stipulated by the peace agreement. The struggle
against impunity is indispensable for achieving lasting
peace in South Sudan.
The commitment of both our Council and the region
are critical in order to bring about peace in South Sudan.
Together we must take advantage of the next few weeks

17-2988613/16

S/PV.8056

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to build upon these efforts for the benefit of the people
of the South Sudan.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China wishes to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Shearer, and the Chair of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, President
Mogae, for their respective briefings.
Since the beginning of the year, the Transitional
Government in South Sudan has been committed to
the resolution of the issue of South Sudan. The national
dialogue launched by the South Sudanese Transitional
Government and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) is preparing to hold the South
Sudan high-level revitalization forum. During the
previous session of the General Assembly, the United
Nations, the African Union (AU) and IGAD held a
high-level meeting on South Sudan. The AU Peace and
Securiy Council also had a ministerial meeting on the
South Sudan issue.
Parties attending those meetings enhanced
communication and reached consensus. China
welcomes such a development. At the same time, we
also note that the situation in South Sudan is very
fragile: there is continued armed conflict, slow political
progress, a dire humanitarian situation and a severe
economic recession. South Sudan needs the continued
assistance of the international community.
First and foremost, it is imperative that we encourage
all parties to the conflict to return to the political
track in order to achieve a cessation of hostilities and
a ceasefire. China supports the national dialogue and
the high-level revitalization forum on the South Sudan
peace agreement, which is an important opportunity
for South Sudan to achieve political reconciliation
and implement the Agreement. In that connection,
the international community should enhance its
level of support. At the same time, the parties must
enhance coordination and synergy in order to reach a
political settlement.
The AU, IGAD and other regional countries
and organizations must seize this opportunity for
greater involvement in the mediation process, while
coordinating and cooperating in order to fully utilize
their respective strengths and advantages. In that
connection, the Security Council should play a
coordinating role so as to ensure that the AU and IGAD
can assume leadership roles in the mediation process.
14/16

26/09/2017

Secondly, the leadership role of the South Sudanese
Government must be fully respected in terms of
dealing with internal affairs. To ultimately address
this issue, efforts must be made by the South Sudanese
Transitional Government and its own people. Only
by mobilizing this initiative on the part of the South
Sudanese Transitional Government can assistance
from the international community be much more
productive and efficient. Before proposing solutions,
the international community should engage with the
South Sudanese Government in full consultation in
order to avoid forcefully imposing any solutions.
Thirdly, the matter of economic assistance merits
attention in order to address the root causes of the
South Sudanese crises. The severe economic recession
and people living in hardship are important root causes
of the South Sudanese question. On 23 September, the
First Vice-President of South Sudan, Mr. Taban Deng
Gai, delivered a speech at the General Assembly (see
A/72/PV.19) in which he expressed the hope that there
would be increased support from the international
community for South Sudan in order to enhance social
cohesion and allow the South Sudanese people to
engage in post-war construction.
While the international community is providing
support to South Sudan — for example, in conducting
blood transfusions — there must be greater input into
economic foundations such as agriculture, energy and
infrastructure. That will make South Sudan far more
self-reliant, including in being able to ensure its own
blood supply.
The Chinese Government has consistently supported
the South Sudanese peace process through both bilateral
and multilateral channels, including the Security
Council, to promote development in South Sudan.
To date, there are over a 1,000 Chinese peacekeepers
working in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
Since the beginning of the year, China has provided
$5 million in humanitarian assistance through the
World Food Programme and has also donated through
its bilateral channel 8,550 tons of food aid to the country.
China is willing to continue to play its constructive role
in helping South Sudan achieve lasting peace, stability
and sustainable development.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Festus
Mogae and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. David Shearer, for their briefings today.
17-29886

26/09/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

With great sadness, we see that South Sudan is
experiencing a serious political, security, humanitarian
and economic crisis, which has shown no improvement
in recent months. To the contrary, seen in the most
generous light, the situation has stalled. Millions of
South Sudanese people need humanitarian aid. The
conditions for displaced persons and refugees are
alarming; women and children are suffering from
food insecurity and lack basic services; and there
have been outbreaks of such diseases as cholera and
measles — just to mention some of the problems in
the country. Restrictions on access to humanitarian
aid is therefore inadmissible. The parties must ensure
unimpeded and safe access for all humanitarian
workers and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) on a permanent basis.
We condemn the clashes that have been taking
place in the Upper Nile region. We continue to believe
that the first step towards peace is the immediate
cessation of hostilities between the parties. Although
the Government declared a ceasefire, it sadly was not
carried out. If clashes persist, there will be no way
to establish a dialogue. We regret the obvious lack of
political will.
The solution to the conflict in South Sudan will be
through a credible political process and an inclusive
dialogue that will lead to compliance with the 2015
Agreement. Accordingly, we should support the
initiatives of the regional organizations. We emphasize
that both the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) have taken a stance
in a timely in order to firmly address the main measures
that need to be taken immediately. The African
Union Peace and Security Council’s communiqué of
20 September called for the parties to join efforts that
were recently undertaken to create momentum and
restore the political process in South Sudan through a
high-level revitalization forum upon the initiative of
IGAD. It is important that there be complementarity
among the initiatives, and efforts need to be unified.
Another important item is to submit a memorandum
of understanding for establishing the Hybrid Court. We
believe that accountability would help the processes of
reconciliation and recovery that are key to establishing
lasting peace. It is vital that this process be led
by the African Union, and we would highlight the
willingness of the Government to move forward with
the establishment of the Court.

S/PV. 8056

With respect to the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force (RPF), we applaud the good offices
of the Special Representative in facilitating the arrival
of the Rwanda advance team. It is important to work
together with the Government to allow for the proper
functioning of the RPF. Similarly, we look forward to
the deployment of the Ethiopian troops in the coming
weeks. The RPF presence will enable UNMISS to
address the conflict, protect civilians and provide
humanitarian assistance more effectively.
In conclusion, we would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNMISS
for the work and sacrifices they have made in South
Sudan. Their focus on protecting civilians is noteworthy.
We express our greatest support for this work.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming your duties as the
President of the Security Council for this month. I
assure you of our delegation’s support and cooperation
for the remaining days of your presidency.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge and thank Mr. David Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for South
Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), and President Festus Mogae, Chair
of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission,
for their service to the people of South Sudan.
I would like to begin by expressing my appreciation
to you, Mr. President, and to the other members of the
Security Council for giving me this opportunity to
share our views on the Secretary-General’s letter of
15 September 2017 to the Security Council, and on
his report on the security and humanitarian situation
in South Sudan and the role of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (S/2017/784). Although there
are allegations in the report whose accuracy can be
debated, my intention is not to argue or contest those
allegations; rather, I want the Council and the parties
concerned to know that it is not the policy of the
Government of South Sudan either to interfere with the
UNMISS mandate or to hinder humanitarian access.
My delegation further acknowledges the fact that
many difficult circumstances and challenges remain for
UNMISS in the Republic of South Sudan. There are
also signs of improvement and some progress that we

17-2988615/16

S/PV.8056

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

hope to build upon. We hope to build upon the close
consultation, cooperation and manner with which the
Government and the leadership of UNMISS resolved
the issue of the Rwandan advance team of the Regional
Protection Force. We hope to build lasting trust so as
to improve working relations between the Government
and the United Nations.
Our delegation to the General Assembly conducted
a series of meetings on the situation in South Sudan with
the leadership of United Nations agencies and funds,
including the Secretary-General. We also held bilateral
meetings with many Member States. Our delegation
received several messages from the international
community during those meetings, including the
ministerial communiqué of the African Union Peace and
Security Council issued in New York on 20 September,
which my delegation acknowledges. Accordingly, the

16/16

26/09/2017

Government will analyse and review those messages,
and we hope that the Government will come out with
more policies designed to enhance cooperation and
improve the day-to-day communications and interaction
between governmental agencies and UNMISS.
In conclusion, we hope that in his next quarterly
report the Secretary-General will note an improved
environment for UNMISS and humanitarian organizations
in the Republic of South Sudan.
The President: I would like to express my
appreciation to President Mogae for having joined us
and for his excellent briefing,
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

17-29886
