234Mh

United
Nations
.

PLENARY MEETING

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

(Qosing meeting)

Tuesday. 16 September 1975,
at 10.30 a.m.

SEVENTH SPEaAL SESSION

Of/icial Records

NEW YOlK

6. Mr. REYES (Philippines), Chairman of the Credentials
Committee: On behalf of the Credentials Committee I have
the hQnour to present to the Assembiy the following brief
report.

CONTENTS
Programme of work

............................

Agenda item 3:
Credentials of representatives to the seventh special session
of the General Assembly (concluded):
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee
.

7. The Credentials Committee held one meeting, on 10
September 1975. It had before it a memorandum by the
Secretary-General dated 9 September 1975 from which it
appeared that the credentials issued by Heads of State or
Government or by Ministers for Foreign Affairs had been
communicated, as provided for in rule 27 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, by all Member Sta'~es
except 51. The detailed information is contained in
document A/I0228.

1

Agenda item 7:
Development and international economic co-operation
(concluded)

Report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Seventh Special
Session
.
Agenda item 2:
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
Closing of the session

.

2
10

8. In the light of the remarks made by the Committee's
Legal Counsel and by the representative of Senegal, which
are duly noted in palragraphs 5 and 6 of the report, the
Chairman proposed that the Committee should decide to
accept the credentials of representatives of all Member
States referred to in paragraph 4 of the document and
proposed the draft resolution contained in paragraph 7 of
the report for adoption by the Committee ~ The resolution
was adopted without a vote.

10

President: Mr. Abdelaziz BOUTEFLIKA (Algeria).
Programme of work
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from 'French): Members will recall that at the 2348th plenary meeting. on 11
September, the Assembly decided to prolong the special
session, the closing date of which had been set for Friday,
12 September, and to hold a plenary meeting on Saturday,
13 September, or at the latest on the morning of Monday,
15 September.
.

9. The Chairman then proposed that the Committee
should recommend to the General Assembly the adoption
of a draft resolution, and that proposal was approved
unanimously by the Committee. The draft resolution
recommended by the Committee is contained in paragraph
10 of the report. On behalf of the Committee,·I now
commend this draft resolution for the consideration of the
Assembly.

.

2. For reasons known to the Assembly, the meeting in
question could not be held before today.
3. May I take it that the Assembly wishes once again to
change its decision with regard to the duration of the
seventh special session and to close the session formally.
today, Tuesday, 16 September?

10. The PRESIDENT (interpretation [rom French): The
Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution
recommended by the Credentials Committee in paragraph
10 of its report [AI10228} . May I take it that the
Assembly approves this draft resolution?

It was so decided.

AGENDA ITEM 3
The

Credentials of representatives ~o the Seventh Special Session of the General Assembly (concluded)-:
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee

dra.ft

resolution

was

adopted

(resolution

3361 (S-V,II)).

11. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): Be..
fore turning to the next item on the agenda, I call upon the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to explain his
Government's position.

4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): We·
shall first consider agenda item 3 (b). The report of the
Credentials Committee on this item is contained in document A/I0228.

12. Mr. ALLAF (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from Arabic): Mr. President, I apologize for asking to speak
when we are at the fmal staP,e of our work but if I take a
few minutes of the Assembly's time it is because I consider
it my duty to explain that the General Assembly has just
adopted a report of the Credentials Committee that

5. I invite the Chairman of the Credentials Committee,
ME. Narciso G. Reyes of the Philippines, to present the
Committee's report.
• Resumed from the 2326th meeting.

I

A/PV.2349

••
2349th meedDI-16 Sep....._1975

26. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously by the
Committee. May I take it that the General Assembly also
adopts it unanimously?

The

draft

resolution

was

adopted

which cover or touch upon the major elements in international economic relations. These decisions are, of \course,
directed towards the achievement of a new international
economic order.

(resolution

3362 (S-VII».
27. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
Ad Hoc Committee also recommends the adoption of two
draft decisions which are set out in paragraph 12 (a) and (b)
of its report.
.
28. I request members to turn 'their attention to the draft
decision contained in paragraph 12 (a) of document
A/I0232 relating to land-locked developing countries. This
draft decision was adopted unanimously by the Committee.
May I take it that the General Assembly also adopts it
unanimously?

The draft decision was adopted.
29. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
second draft decision, which appears in paragraph 12 (b) of
document A/I0332, concerns the World Conference of the
International Women's Year. It was adopted unanimously
by the Committee. May I take it that the General Assembly
also adopts it unanimously?

. The draft decision was adopted.
30. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In
view of the fact that some provisions of the resolution and
of one of the decisions just taken require action by the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session, may I propose
that a decision be taken to include in the draft agenda of
the thirtieth session an item entitled "Development and
international economic co-operation: implementation of
~he decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its
seventh special session"? If there is no objection to this
proposal, it will be so decided.

It was so decided.
31. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): As
members are aware, the recommendations and decisions by
the Ad Hoc Committee were made after a series of long and
arduous consultations and negotiations among the entire
membership of the United Nations. Representatives have
also had an opportunity to explain their positions or
reservations in that Committee. May I therefore appeal to
those who have included their names in the list of speakers
kindly to be as brief as possible in view of the limited time
before us.
32. I shall now call on representatives who wish to speak
on any or all the decisions just taken.
33. Mr. WILLESEE (Australia): Mr. President, as this
morning sees the closure of the seventh special session and
of the twenty-ninth regular session of the General Assembly
we pay a tribute to the guidance you have given at these
sessions.
34. As all delegations recognize, there are a great variety
of matters covered by the decisions taken this morning,
. ,

'""",. ..

3

35. It will be recognized that the circumstances of
particular countries which support the thrust and objectives
of the document cannot have been taken fully into account
in the circumstances of its preparation. This is qUite
understandable, for to have done so on such complex and
interrelated issues would have required a series of negotiations going well beyond, the scope of our efforts in the past
two weeks.
36. Moreover, because of the very pressures under which
we have ,lad to work, n.ot all delegations have been able to
be present at 'all the discussions, formal and informal, which
have produced the package before us. The detailed elaboration and implementation of what is contained in the
programme will, as the document itself provides, require
further detailed consideration and negotiation in various
other forums. We regard this as the necessary next step
follOWing our efforts during the past two weeks.
37. It follows that, until this process of elaboration and
negotiation has progressed, general support for the programme cannot be regarded as giv!ng rise to commitment
on each and every specific point. It is nevertheless an
undertaking to examine all proposals on their merits as
furth~r events progress.
38. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translationfrom Chinese):
TIle special session of the General Assembly devoted to
development and international economic co-operation is
drawing to a close. The current session, a continuation of
the sixth special session of the General Assembly, is an
important session. In the past two weeks, a fierce struggle
has been going on between the third-world countries on the
one hand and the super-Powers on the other concerning the
question of whether to uphold or oppose the basic
principles of the Declaration and the Programme of Action
adopted at the sixth special session I resolutions
3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)J and the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States I resolution 3281 (XXIX)I and
whether to reform or preserve the old international
economic relations. The proceedings of the session fully
demonstrate the mighty force of the awakening and unity
of the third-world countries and give expression to their
strong will to destroy the old internation.al economic order
and develop their national economy self·reliantly; they also
reflect the deepening of the struggle of the third-world
countries against colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism
in the economic field. They have once again exposed, with
an abundance of facts, the ruthless super-Power exploitation and plunder, and forcefully repudiated the fallacious
arguments of the super-Powers. They pointed out in all
seriousness that imperialist oppression and exploitation are
the root-eause of the poverty and backwardness of the
developing countries and the biggest obstacle to the
development of their national economy. They urgently
demand immediate action to implement earnestly the
correct principles embodied in the resolutions of the sixth
special session and put forward a series of reasonable
proposals on six important issues concerning international
economic relations.

4

Genenl ARembly - Seveftth Special s.ion - JIIeury .........

39. Through a series of struggles, the' session finally
achieved relatively positive results. The Chinese delegation
supports the resolution adopted by the current session. In
our opinion, 'this document basically reflects some of the
just propositions and re.:.sonable demands of the developing
countries in the fields of international economics and trade.
The document hQs correctly pointed out that the Declaration and the Programme of Action adopted by the sixth
special session of the General Assembly and the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States lay down the
foundations for the new international economic order. It
has also stressed the need for increasing the capacity of .
developing countries, indiVidually and collectively, to pursue their development so as to eliminate the economic gap
between the developed and developing countries. To
implement the basic principles of the resolutions of the
sixth special session, the document has formulated certain
guidelines for action and concrete measures in the fields of
international trade, the transfer of real resources, the
ref~rm of the international monetary system, science and
technology, !ndustrialization, food and agriculture, etc. T'ue
document has confirmed the' principle of formulating an
integrated programme for commodities and the indexation
of prices, which are aimed at improving the terms of trade
of the developing countries and stabilizing and increasing
their export earnings. It requests the adoption of measures
r:quired to implement the Lima Declaration and Plan of
Action adopted at the Second General Conference of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
[UNIDO] /A/lOll2, chap. IVI. The document has also
prOVided for the unshirkable responsibilities and obligations
which the developed countries should undertake for the
development of the developing countries.
40. With regard to the question of food and agriculture,
we support the correct position and' determination of the
developing countries to develop agriculture independently
so as to attain basic self-sufficiency in food grains gradually.
In our opinion, it is of far-reaching significance for us
developing countries to change the situation in which one
has to rely.on imported food for fee(.J1C the people. We are
firmly opposed to the super-Powers using food as a means
for control and exploitation. The food reserve of each
country is a matter falling entirely within its ,internal
affairs, and policies and measures in this regard can only be
worked out by the country concerned in the light of its
actual conditions. The establishment of an international
food reserve and all other international co-ordinating
activities on the question of food should be explored and
negptiated on the b~sic principle of respecting the sovereignty of all countries.

41. We support the just proposals of the developing
countries for a full and effective participation in the
decision-making process in international monetary affairs
and for reforming the international financial institutions.
The state of affairs of a few big Powers, particularly a
super-Power, controlling international financial institutions
must be ended, and irrational regulations and systems must
be reformed.
42. The Chinese delegation would like to state here once
again that the International Monetary Fund [IMF], the
World Bank and some other international financial organizations have to date still obstinately refused to implement

General Assembly r-'solution 2758 (XXVI); continued to
pursue their policy of creating "two Chinas", a policy
which is hostDe to the Chinese people. Therefore, China
wm participate in none of the activities undertaken under
their auspices.
43. As a result of the sabotage and obstruction of the
super-Powers, certain important propositions and reasonable demands contained in the working paper of the Group
of 77 /A/l0003/Add.l, annex 11 have not been written
into the resolution of the session. The proceedings of the
session clearly show that the establishment of the new
international economic order is by no means all plain sailing
and that the obstacle comes mainly from the two superPowers. One super-Power is resorting to its habitual tactics
of offering inducement and making threa~s by soft and hard
means, in an attempt to underinine the unity of the
third-world countries and sap their fighting wm, so as
stubbornly to maintain the old economic order. The other
super-Power, which styles itself as "socialist", is even more
insidious in its tactics. While trumpeting sham assistance, it
tries hard to cover up its true exploitation and obliterate
the contradictions between the poor and the rich countries
in order to shirk its responsihility as a biggest exploiter. In
drafting conference paperj, U indulged in seeking its selfish
interests and openly ~sh'd the developing countries to
delete from the WOlking paper such correct wordings as "in
the interest of the developing countries" and "the acceleratt1d development of the developing countries". Its &im
was sImply to maintain and enhance its privDeged position
of exploiting and plundering the third-world countries in its
intensified. contention for spheres of influence with the
other sup"r-Power in the economic field.

44. What is even more disgusting is that this super-Power
trie~ to tamper with the correct wording in the documents
of the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Non-Aligned Countries, held in Lima in August / see
A/102l7 and Co".ll, which reaffirmed the determination
to eliminate colonialism, neo-colonialism and all forms of
foreign aggression and domination and the economic and
social c.onsequences thereof as a prerequisite for development, and instead forcibly asked the third-world .countries
to accept the so-called "disarmament" and "detente" as the
"prereqUisite for development" in its attempt openly to
justify colonialism and neo-colonialism, foreign aggression
and domination, to upset the orientation of our session and
sabotage the just struggle of the third-world countries. It is
only natulal that these unreasonable demands have been
firmly resisted and rejected by the third-world countries.
45. Recalling its repeated attempt at the sixth special
session to delete the word "new" from the expression "a
new international economic order" and imtead begin the
phrase ',Vith the word "maintain", and judging from the
performances of this super-Power at this session, one can
see full well its sham support for and real opposition to the
third-world struggle for ,the establishment of the new
'international economic order.
46. The positive achievements reached at this session are
the result of the united struggle of the numerous thirdworld countries, as well as their common efforts in alliance
with some second-world countries. However, the resolution
already adopted is only something on paper and it requires
protracted and arduous struggles to translate it into reality..

.

i

)

,

,.

'.
2349th meetinl - 16 September 1975

47. Unity is strength and victory can be won only through
struggle.· In recent years, the united struggles of the
developing countries have constantly developed, and their
mutual co-operation has been increasing steadily, thus
giving a powerful impetus to the excellent situation of
anti-imperialism and .anti-hegemonism. They have adopted,
individually and collectively, the policy of self-reliance and
have won one victory after another in defending the
sovereignty over their natural resources, achieving nationalization, controlling and administering the transnational
corporations and forming and strengthening raw material
exporting organizations.

"ti

I

48. We are deeply convinced that the struggle of the
third-world countries to reform the ineqUitable old international economic relations and to develop their national
economy independently is an irresistible historical trend.
Although they may yet encounter resistance and sabotage
of one kind or another on their road of advance, they are
sure to overcome gradually the obstacles raised by the
super-Powers and march from victory to victory .

. ;

)

,

49. Mr. FLORIN (German Democratic Republic) (interpretation from Russianf: On behalf of the Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, the People's Republic of Bulgaria,
the Hungarian People's Republic, the Mongolian People's
Republic, the Polish People's Republic, the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic~
the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the German
Democratic Republic, I Saltould like to signify our agreement
in principle with the resolution just adopted.
50. The delegations of the socialist countries view the
seventh special session of the United Nations General
Assembly as an important step in the developing struggle
for the elimination of the persistent injustice in international economic relations which does serious harm to the
economies of developing countries. In the view of those
delegations, at the present time in circumstances of
continuing detente, favourable conditions are being created
for the attainment of appreciable progress in this direction.

51. The delegations of the socialist countries note with
satisfaction that, in the discussion at this session and in the
fmal document, stress is laid on the significance of the
Declaration on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order and the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States which confirm the principle of peaceful
coexistence, establish a clear interdependence between
social and economic development and the strengthening of
international peace and security, and contain a number of
progressive principles which should underlie international
economic relations.
52. The delegations of the socialist countries hav\', in the
course of the session, expressed their position of principle,
which on the whole is favourable to the concrete proposals
of the Group of 77, and also their general approach to the
problem of'economic co-operation and development. The
position of the socialist countries on these problems is also
well known from previous statements in the United
Nations. In their support for the struggle of the countries of
Asia, Africa and Latin America for· the elimination of the
heritage of colonialism in the· economic realm, the socialist
countries at the same time do not accept and will never

5

accept the idea of dividing the world into the so-called
"n~ ...th" and the so-called "south," and so-called "poor"
am.: the so-called "rich" countries, nor the idea of equal .
ob~igations for the economically developed countries towards the developing countries without any account being
taken of the radical differences in their social and economic
systems. This attitude applies also to a number of concrete
provisions of the final document of this session which are
founded on th&t concept.
53. The socialist States intend to continue to do everything in their power to promote the implementation of
measures in· the field of international politics which will
create the necessary conditions for the normal development
and the social and economic progress of all countries and
peoples.
54. In so far as concerns economic relations between the
socialist countries and the young independent States of
Asia, Africa and Latin America, these relations will continue to be developed on the basis of equality and common
advantage. Furthermore, the socialist countries will continue to provide economic and technical ass~stance to
developing countries in accordance with our resources and
the specific desires expressed by developing countries and
in ways which are in keeping with the social and socioeconomic system of socialist States and which have fully
proved themselves.
55. The effectiveness of the assistance which the countries
of the socialist community are providing to the developing
countrit"~ was once again confirmed in the statements of the
representatives of. developing countries who spoke in the
general debate at this session. And this is a convincing
response to certain slanderous fabrications. The purposes of
those purveying these inventions are fundamentally at
variance with the aspirations of peoples for the strengthening of peace and security and, particularly, for the
successful development of the developing countries.
56. I would like to take this opportunity to express my .
gratitude and my thanks for his tireless efforts and active
work to the President of the seventh special session,
Mr. Bouteflika; and to the Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Committee, Mr. Pronk; the Chairman of the Group of 77,
Mr. Garcia Robles; our partners in the negotiations; the
staff members of the Secretariat; the interpreters, and so
many other unseen helpers. They have all made their
personal contributions to the work we have accomplished,
and we very much appreciate it.
.
57. Mr. VINCI (Italy): As Italy at present holds the
presidency of the Council of the European Economic
Community [EEC], I have been asked by my partners to
say a few words on behalf of the whole EEC.
58. I shall start by stating that EEC welcomes wholeheartedly the text of the resolution which we have just
unanimously adopted. This is a gratifying feeling for all
delegations that have been involved in the prolonged and
often strenuous negotiations. This result has indeed been
made possible only by the encouraging spirit of cooperation and dialogue that prevailed throughout the
session, and because of the substantial concessions that
were made by all sides. I have been impressed by the

,..

6

atmosphere of conciliation and mutual understanding. The
Secretary-General himself, Kurt Waldheim, to whom we
feel indebted for the quiet and helpful work he has done in
the background, expressed the same feeling in the remarks
he made yesterday in a public statement.
59. We can'therefore all congratulate ourselves. Special
congratulations, of course, are to be made first of all to our
distinguished President, Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, who ha:
guided our work with patience and statesmanship. We
extend equally our sincere expression of appreciation and
gratitude to the Chairman and other officers of the General
Committee and the secretariat of the Ad Hoc Committee;
to the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee, Ambassador Bennani; to Mr. Perez Guerrero; to Ambassador
Garcia Robles, and to all the heads of delegations who have
contributed so much to the success of this special session.
60. We also extend our gratitude to all the members of the
staff, the interpreters and all those who have helped us
throughout this session.
61. As for the detailed results of this session, I set forth
our views last night, in general terms, in the Ad Hoc
Committee. I said then that we were satisfied with those
results. But I did not say this with any feeling of
complacency. We are all aware that we have begun a process
that will be long and that will be far from smooth for
everybody. We can and must accept as a fact that we will be
able to face and to solve the challenges of our times only by
co-operation and not by confrontation. We have started on
the road of co-operation. let us keep alive the goodwlll
that has emerged on all sides at this special session.

62. Mr. MOYNIHAN (United States of America): On
behalf of the United States, which styles itself "nonsocialist", I would like to make these brief remarks.
63. The French term for a special session of the United
Nations General Assembly is ~'session extraordinaire."
Taken most directly into English, this reads "extraordinary
session", and I cannot but feel that the great majority of
the nations which have now unanimously adopted this
resolution have also concluded that the special sesdon has
indeed been an extraordinary one. Perhaps never in the
history of the United Nations has there been so intensive
and so genuine a negotiation among so many nations on so
profoundly important a range of issues. We have shown that
we can negotiate in good faith and, in doing so, reach
genuine accord. Not least, we have shown that this can be
done in the unique and indispensable setting of the United
Nations. The system works.
64. At the outset of this special session the United States
asserted that we had assembled here with an opportunity to
improve the condition of mankind. We may well ha.ve done
so. Rather, it may well turn out that we have done so, for
that t2:;k is yet ahead. We have~ however, unmistakably
begun.
65. Mr. RAE (Canada): The results of this special session
represent a significant and perhaps historic achievement. In
t.~c past two weeks negotiations have taken place in an
extremely co-operative and constructive atmosphere on the
full range of issues relating to economic co-operation and

development in the international fi~ld. The results, to us,
are most heartening. The achievement of such a wide area
of agreement on the range of complex issues on our agenda
will serve the interests of the international community as a
whole. This session marks an important step on the road
towards lessening the disparities between devoloped and
developing countries.
66. The meaningful and productive dialogue on which we
have embarked is also a milestone for the consensus
approach in the United Nations and for the -essential role
which the United Nations must play. This will be an
example for the future work in this body and will inspire
each of our Governments in the formulation Qf its policies
in the period aheld.

!

I
I

1

r
~.

67. In conclusion, Canada looks forward to working in a
constructive and positive way with all Governments in all
international institutions and conferences in the years
ahead towards the building of a new international economic
order.
68. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet· Socialist Republics)
(interpretation from Russilln): At the meeting yesterday of
the Ad Hoc Committee of the Seventh Special Session the
representative of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, and
today in the plenary meeting of the General Assembly the
representative of the German Democratic Republic, clearly
explained the position of the group of socialist countries of
Eastern Europe and of the Mongolian People's Republic
with respect to the final document that has been adopted at
the seventh special session of the General Assembly. The
adoption of this document and its approval by the General
Assembly leads the delegation of the Soviet Union to make
the following statement.
69. In the Soviet Union we attach great importance to the
seventh special session of the General Assembly, now
draWing to a close, which was convened on the initiative of
the developing countries and with the support of the
socialist countries, in order to consider the problems of
development and international co-operation.
70. The delegation of the Soviet Union supports all the
provisions in the text, which summarizes the work of the
special session and aims to eliminate the injustices and
inequalities in international, economic relations, which are
detrimental to the developing countries and an obstacle to
equal and mutually advantageous co-operation among
sovereign States, regardless of their social system and their
level of development.
71. International relations must now be cleansed of all the
consequences of colonialism and neo-colonialism and of the
uncontrolled sway of multinational corporations and other
foreign monopolies in the developing countries.
72. The evolution and the results of th, seventh special
session confmn the need to ensure the application of
progressive principles embodied in United Nations resolutions on the establishment of a new international economic
order, as well as the principles contained in the Charter of
E~onomic Rights and Duties of States. This confirms, as
members know, the need to strengthen international peace
and security and the principles of peaceful coexistenc~, as

,r
i

t-.,

I

2349tb meedq - 16 &ptember 1975

well as reaffl1'llling the duty of States to seek to contribute
to general and complete disarmament under effective
international control, the link between disarmament and
economic development, the application of the principles of
most-favoured-nation status and non-discrimination in
trade, equality and mutua! advantage, the recognition of
the sovereignty of States over their own natural resources,
and other progressive principles.
73. All these 'provisions and principles, and others too,
were reaffirmed in the Lima Declaration of the non-aligned
countries. These principles and provisions must be the basis
for political and economic relations among States and for
practical efforts to implement the decisions of the seventh
special session of the GenerAl Assembly. Favourable conditions now exist for this, resulting from the relaxation of
tensions in international relations and the improvement of
the international climate. The Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe made an invaluable contribution to
this process. The international political scope and the
histoncal significance of that Conference are now recognized, as well as its immense importance for the solution of
the key problems of our time-for the strer,gthening of
peace and security for peoples, for making the process of
detente irreversible and for the confirmation of the Leninist
principles of peaceful coexistence and the development and
of eqUitable co-operation among all States. I~ mould be
noted that all this has become possible mainly due to the
constructive foreign policy of the Party and Government of
the Soviet Union and of other countries in t'1e socialist
community, and to the active personal contribution of the
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Leonid Brezhnev. We
share the views of the developing countries, whose representatives, speaking at this rostrum, have stated that
without peace there can be no development. We know this
from our own experience dUring the patriotic war that
lasted for four years.

an

J

f

7

that the Soviet delegation regards those portions of the
fmal document which are based on this false notion. The
Soviet Union accepts the final document in so far as it is in
keeping with the general position af the Soviet Union on
this matter, even if some provisions are insufficient and
incomplete.
77. As regards co-operation with developing countries, ~le

Soviet Union grants considerable economic aid to those
countries, and we intend to continue this aid according to
the present formulas and methods of co-operation which
best correspond with its economic and social structure and
which have stood the test of time. The Soviet Union will
act on the basis of specific and economically' viable
proposals, taking into account both the needs of the
developing countries and its own capacities.
78. In conclusion, we wish to express our gratitude to the

delegations of countries which, in their statements in the
general debate d~ring this session, have spoken of the
friendly aid provided by the Soviet Union and its peoples to
the developing countries in order to accelerate the development of their national economies.
79. What can be said of the routine dose of hostDe
inventions regarding one of the super-Powers, vented by
one of the speakers from this rostrum who represents a
country seeking to become the one and only super-Power, a
"mono-super-Power"? If the speaker really believes what
he has been saying on this subject, I can only pity him. And
if in this hall there is anyone sufficiently naive to believe
what has been said by that speaker, I can only feel
compassion for him too. But the speaker himself has once
again asserted. that his country, donning the garb of a
developing country, is at the same time against peace,
security, detente and disarmament".
80. Mr. GARCIA ROBLES (Mexico) (interpretation from

.

Spanish): At the last meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee,

75. During the general debate the Soviet delegation

81. I shall not now repeat what I said barely a few hours
ago. I only wish to supplement it by making special
mention of the effective and discreet co-operation which
we received in the course of negotiations, particularly in the
many critical moments, from the President of the General.
Assembly, Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, and the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, Mr. Kurt Waldheim.

74. The Soviet delegation has not opposed the adoption as
a whole of the final document which the developing
countries submitted. Our pOI'ition stems from the traditional co-operaticn and unity or action established between
the socialist countries and tile non-aligned developing
countries when taking progressive decisions within the
United Nations.
expressed its support for the various apposite proposals
made by the Group of 77. In the course of both the debates
and the useful consultations between the group of socialist
countries of Eastern Europe and the Group of 77, the
Soviet delegation entered certain reservations with regard to
the draft fmal document.
76. In this respect the Soviet delegation wishes in par':'
ticular to emphasize once again that neither in theory nor
in practice can the Soviet Union accept the false notion
according to which the world is diVided into the "north"
and the "south", "poor" and "rich" whereby the socialist
(;ountries are placed on an equal footing with the developed
capitalist countries as regards the historical reo;ponsibility
.for the backwardness of the developing countries and their
state of present poverty in the economic crisis which has
gripped the capitalist world. It is in the light of this position

.,

which was held 211.: dawn today, I already had an opportunity to express my gratitude to some of those who,
within the Ad Hoc Committee itself and in the course of
informal negotiations held outside that Committee, have
made the greatest contribution to the success of this special
session of the General Assembly which we shall close today.
Among these, a prominent place belongs to Mr. Jan Pronk,
the Chairman of the Committee.

82. The seventh special session has cQnvincinglyproved

that the new international economic order· is something
which, although still in its infancy, is far from being a mere
point of dogma or a rhetorical figure ..On the contrary, it
already constitutes, and will every day become more and
more, the pivot on which the economic relations of States
will turn.
83. It seems to me that in our work we have fully
demonstrated that the Declaration and Programme of

8

GenenlA8embly - Seventh Special s-kln - PIeJwy Meetia.

Action, which were adopted at the sixth special session, and
the Charter of Economic Right~ and Duties of States,
adopted at the twenty-ninth session, are far from being
elements that might produce destruction or chaos but are,
on the contrary-as was maintained at the outset by the
100 or so developing countries which constitute the
so-called Group of 77-balanced instruments the implementation ot which wlll represent the best guarantee of the
legitimate interests of both the developing and of the
developed countries.
84. Mr. HAMMADI (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic):
On behalf of the Iraqi delegation, I should like to make
some comments. At the same time I am happy to be able to
express the satisfaction of the Iraqi delegation at having
been able to make our modest contribution to the work of
this session and to the adoption of the documents of this
session. These documents are, indeed, the fruit of a
dialogl!~ which has been going on for many years on the
international economic order and, above all, on the far
from satisfactory terms of trade between developed and
developing countries.
8S. Iraq supports this resolution, which is a compromise.
It is not for us the final result which would be the
culmination of all the aspirations of the developing countries. Nevertheless, we, the Arab countries, have proved
throughout the &egotiations and at the stage of international action that we have always supported the developing
countries, and we sh&ll continue steadily and sincerely to
make our contribution in this sphere. It is important for us
for this document to be implemented in good faith and
without any political pressure. The Iraqi delegation believes
that the vote on this document leaves open a way to rectify
the economic situation in the world, particularly with
regard to the terms of trade as between the poor and the
capitalist industrial countries. The Arab countries, which
have always supported and will continue to support the
developing countries, reaffirm that they will always champion the cause of economic justice throughout the world
because they belong to the "have nots", which for so many
years have struggled to obtain better terms of trade.
86. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): W.e
have thus concluded consideration of agenda item, 7. I now
call on the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim.
87. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I listened with great
interest to the statements which were delivered dUring the
general debate.• also followed with care the unfolding of
th~ consultations and negotiations which took place
throughout the session and which culminated in the
decisions the Assembly has just adopted.
88. From all this it is quite clear that the problems
connected with the new international economic order are
now being tackled by all Governments at the highest level
of political responsibility. Indeed, the world's attention is
today. more than it has ever been, focused on the problems
of poverty and development, which dictate a new course in
international relationships. These problems are finally
reaching the top of the agenda of the international
community, .lotwithstanding the political stalemates and
the dangerous or even explosive situation in so many areas
of our globe.

89. What is also encouraging is that the discussions and
negotiations which take place in a number of forums inside
and outsic:!<e the United Nations system are all about
measures 811d solutions which have originated in years of
painstaking analysis and discussions within this Organization. The imaginative steps agreed upon last week in the
World Bank and IMF, namely, the use of reserve assets for
development, the subsidization of interest charges and the
beginning of a reform of the international decision-making
process, were already prominent 10 years ago in the debates
of the first session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development [UNCTAD].'

,

.~

j

90. I recall these facts not in a spirit of self-satisfaction
but because they should strengthen our faith in the
capacity of this Organization to deal constructively with
momentous problems. In fact, are there concrete signs that
the different problems of economic. co-operation are being
handled elsewhere more expedit!ollsly than they are here?
The truth of the matter is that economic co-operation
everywhere is enormously difficult in a world of strong
national aspirations and considemble inequalities.

91. We should not reseni the fact that there is at present a
"negotiation explosion". It is a te~;tktlony to the seriousness
with which the problems of de';~lopment and poverty are
now being tackled. And the multiplicity of efforts often
produce new constructive id'!~as. But let us not forget that
the General Assembly has already gone quite far in defining
the framework within which negotiations must take place.
It is the initiator and the guarantor of the new international
economic order. Such an order can only emerge from
concrete and practical measures. If promoted elsewhere,
these should be linked with the United Nations.
92. I know that these considerations are very much in the
minds of many representatives, and I would add that this
body, representative of 138 Governments and sometimes
described as solely addicted to rhetoric, has shown very
convincingly that it can fmd, through ingenuity and
goodwill, the negotiating methods which make it possible
to overcome the handicap of its sheer size by practical and
flexible devices, without at the same time' excluding
anybody from the main action. In this context I wish to
pay a tribute to the manner in which the Group of 77,
EEC, other intergovernmental and regional group~ as well as
individual Governments approached with .realism and foresight the extensive preparation.s for and the deliberations of
this special session.
I

93. This negotiation is about change; it is not about a
smoother management of the status quo. It strives to bring
real improvement in the conditions of th\: poorer countries,
to afford to them a measure of economic security wit.'1out
which any planning is so futile, to set in motion mechanisms for a more equitable distribution of the world's
ever-increasing wealth and to enhance the participation of
. all nations, including the weakest, in the decision-making
process which is shaping the future of our world.
94. We have observed more favourable conditions for such
a negotiation. And we could well ask ourselves, What is it
that has brought about this improvement? No doubt there
is the cumulative effect of years of constant and ubiquitous
effort to raise the consciousness of tho;,) world to a rw

,

'.

,

,

Id
le
1t

)f
tile

j

)r

."~

le
19

.>1

"1

~

i

~

I

,s
n

n
,e
h
It

.g
~

n
g

a
:s

e
11

t
~

..
1
I

p~rception of the scourges of mass poverty, malnutrition,
illiteracy and unemployment. But it is also clear today that,
after years of stagnation in world·wide~ co-operation, there
has been, as a result of the events of 1973 in the field of
energy, a change of heart, an inclination to negotiate in
earnest and furthet to consider solutions to the issues which
have been for so long pending on the international agenda.
It is most gratifying that this time the discussions have
taken place on the basis of well·thought-out documents
submitted from all sides of this Assembly.

95. Important ideas have made their way through the
chain of events and negotiations in the last two years. The
first stage of a constructive and realistic comp~ct of policies
and measures has been achieved. Some parts of it require
further and intensive work. There is among these the old
issue of a real commitment to capital transfers. But the
most difficult aspect of the future phases of negotiation is
related to primary-commodity problems. These problems
have proved among the most intractable. It was in 1954
that the United Nations established for the first time a
committee on commodities,. and the situation has hardly
changed since then. The h.ternational community cannot
afford not to negotiate continuously on primary corn·
modities. It is a paramount exigency of those countries
which have hardly any other income to sustain themselves.
The present state of affairs cannot under any set of criteria
be considered satisfactory. The extraordinary gyrations
which affect these markets where the vagaries of the
business cycle are disproportionately amplified and where
weather cOl'~ditions so frequently introduce an unpre·
dictable element, cannot be considered as an example of
"global rationality".
96. It may be that it is exceedingly difficult for the
various interests involved to agree on a better form of
organization. But it may also be that, after the period of
turbulence in the markets through which the world
economy has just passed, tht,re is a greater disposition to
pay a price for a measure of stability-for mstance, through
the financing of stocks, a greater discipline in the management of prices and export quotas, and efforts to overcome
the administrative difficulties inherent in commodity arrangements. Important proposals have been made in this
respect, including those for an integrated approach, which
emerged from UNCTAD.
97. Recently, the question of commodities has been
linked with schemes of income guarantee for primaryproducing countries. This gives an additional dimension to
future negotiations.
98. ~n the backdrop of the negotiation there lurks the
question of the price of oil, which is mentioned sometimes
bluntly, more often h~sitant~y. It is my sincere hope that
we are approacl1ing the m()ment when it will be possible to
discuss this question dispa~sionately, without the anath-.
emas of not so long ago, and t'1at it can be seen as one of
the relevant elements of a mme orderly and stable world
economy. One problem often emphasized today is the
possible impact of oil policies on ~hort·term economic
trends at a time when tlle world economy is going through
the most difficult phase of its post-war history. But the oil
1 Permanent Advisory Commission on International Commodity
Trade, established by the Economic and Social Council in resolution
S12 A (XVII) of 30 April 1954.

question touches on man.y other aspects of international
relationship: permanent sovereignty over natural resources;
the division of gains between producers, consumers and
intermediaries; the international price relationship; the
possible depletion of energy sources; and the interest of
future generations. I am confident that all these aspects will
be taken into accuunt in the spirit which has marked this
special session.
99. There is another aspect of the current situation which
should offer the United Nations system great opportunities.
There is now a pool of available capital of unprecedented
size that can be utilized for initiating action for a more
eqUitable international division of labour. The United
Nations has a long experience of pre-investment and
training programmes. It has an organized network of
information and local facilities. It has also a natural
aptitude for assessing the international impact of national .
decisions. One suspects that, without any measure of
consultation, capital investments of the present magnitude
could in some fields at least transform situations of acute
shortage into IJnes of embarrassing gluts. There ar" also the
less obvious opportunities: which the Unit\':d Nations
system might help to discover ~a countries which have no
oil but in which, nevertheless, L1-te changes in the situation
may point to nf'lW and pwfi~able investments. Indeed, '.l~me
of the decisions of the Second General Conf~rence of
UNIDO, 1.1 Lima, are £pecifically oriented towards these
ends.
100. Much time and effo.rt will be devoted in the months
to come to the necessary strengthening and restructuring of
the United Nations system. The report of. the- Grou\) of
Experts 2 certainly deserves careful study. The action
proposals to be prepared by the Ad Hoc Committee
established by this Assembly {see resolution 3362 (S-VI),
sect. VII. para. 11 will, I am confident, enable the General
Assembly to adopt the necessary measures in this respect. It
should be a "problem-oriellted" restructuring designed to
enhance and facilitate the solution of specific problems
which are particularly topical in the framework of the new
international economic order.
101. There are areas where the action of the United
Nations system is deficient and its structure ill-adapted to
the t'lsk of tod3Y; and I would particularly draw attention
to tht: ':uestion of energy.
102. In retrospect, we can reflect upon the mistakes made
over the last 30 years: the premature abandonment of coal
mines, the indiscriminate switch to petroleum-even by
countries rich in coal but poor in. petroleum resources-and
the subsequer.lt rush into nuclear energy, with all the
atttendant risks and public apprehension. We must also note
tJle failure to: explore dynamically the potentialities of new
sources, which are less depletable and less polluting and on
which, as far back as 1961, the United Nations convened a
major conference.3
2 A New United Nations Structure for Global Economic Cooperation: report of the Group of Experts on the Structure of the
United Nations System (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.7S.II.A.7).
3 United Nations Conference on New Sources of Energy, held at
Rome from 21 to 31 August 1961. For the report of the
Conference, see United Nations publication, Sales No. E.62.1.21 and
corrigendum.

rtw.

-

9

!laJ
es;
nd
he
of
rill
lis

:h
~s.

ld
re
id
od

)f

1I
1I •
If

e
e
e
s
)

l

..!

103. The fundamental nature of the problem is t10day seen
more clearly: the need for a long-tenn perspective lin a fi181d
where investments yield results only after a long period and
the necessitY for a global approach at a time when. the
possibility of scarcity and the need to share are among the
major themes of public reflection. If the United Nations is
to be of re;ll assistance in these matte:rs it requires a
stronger machinery and a more rationai arrangement of
functions.
104. There is a rmal message which I should like to leave
with you, although it refers to a theme which has not
figured prominently in these ·discussions, principally deinternational
voted as they were to. the conduct
relations, but which I feel is really the essence of our
problem.

nr

JOS. We are today witnessing a drastic reappraisal of our
earlier working hypotheses, a questioning of our system of
values and of the definition of our proximate as well as our
long-tenn goals. We are perceiving that our policies are not
producing the minimum improvement in the appalling
living conditions of a very high proportion of the world's
population, and that the significant progress which has been
achieved in production and productive capacity is not being
felt in those layers of the population that are most in need
of a better deal. In short, we are not advancing towards the
objective of social justice. Styles and patterns of development are naturally viewed as falling within the responsi~ility of national Governments. Yet they m~\st be a concern
of this Organization if its 1dgher objectives ,ve not to be
overlooked or betrayed. Important programmts within the
United Nations system are being reoriented so as to serve
more directly the objectives of greater employment, better
nutrition, less illiteracy, the integration of women in
economic life-in short, towards the eradication of mass
poverty. I myself insisted on these priorities in my report
published on the occasion of the first review and appraisal
of the International Development Strategy ,4 but a real
debate did not take place on that occasion. I believe the
time has. now come when this Assembly should become
more cognizant of a state of affairs which it cannot
condone, and I hope that our programmes as well as our
debates can more directly reflect this primordial concern.
106. After having established last year the principles for a
new economic order, this session has tackled in a practical
way the key elements of such a new order. We all knew that
dUring a period of two weeks we would not be able to solve
all the problems w~ are faced with, but I think we all note
with great satisfaction that it was possible to start a
negotiating process which led last night to the adoption of
most important decisions, decisions that were confirmed
today. What is necessary now is to pursue these issues and
to translate them into concrete agreements in the period
ahead.
.. United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.1i.A.6 and corti·
aendum.

.....

"

ill

107. This has been not only a highly important session but
also a very arduous one. I am particularly gratef\111 to the Ad
Hoc Committee under the distinguished chainnanship of
Mr. Pronk and its subgroups and their 'J1ainn~n for their
perseverance and determination to arrive at solutions.
Indeed, I should like to pay a personal tribute to all the
representatives in this Assembly for their individual contributions and their dedicated work.
108. Mr. President, I cannot conclude this statement to
the Assembly without expressing to you personally my
sincere gratitude for your dedication, outstanding leadership and skill in the conduct of one of the most significant
sessions of the Assembly in the history of the United
Nations. We are, i"ldeed, all deeply indebted to you.
109. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): We
have thus concluded our work. The decisions we have
reached are such that the seventh special session of the
General Assembly will go down in history as a milestone in
the history of progressive ideas and the expression of a
firmer commitment to the implementation of the Declaration and Programme of Action of the sixth special session
and the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States
that was adopted by the twenty-ninth session.
110. No one is solely responsible for this success. It is the
result of the efforts of all; it is the expression of a new
dynamism ~nd of greater solidarity among certain sectors of
activity of the international community.
111. . I should like to express my gratitude to members of
the Ad Hoc Comrrittee and to all the regional groups. The
task of the Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Pronk, was
very arduous, and his outstandbtg efforts have earned him
our gratitude and congratulations.
112. Our Assembly has achieved such results that this
special session will most certainly be another decisive gain
for the community of peoples in their struggle for more
progress and justice.
AGENDA ITEM 2

Minute ofsilent prtlyer or meditation
113. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
would now invite representatives to rise and observe a
minute's silence for prayer or meditation.

The representatives stood in silence.
aoJing of thf' session
114. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
decline closed the seventh special session of the General
Assembly .

The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

I

J

I
.'

r
