99

Ill. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the l'irst Committee

within the area, as envisaged in the Declaration of the In­
dian Ocean as a Zone of Peace, and respect for the inde­
pendence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the lit­
toral and hinterland States,
Calling for the renewal of genuinely constructive efforts
through the exercise of the political will necessary for the
achievement of the objectives of the Declaration of the In­
dian Ocean as a Zone of Peace,
Deeply concerned at the danger posed by the grave and
ominous developments in the area and the resulting sharp
deterioration of peace, security and stability which par­
ticularly seriously affect the littoral and hinterland States,
as well as international peace and security,
Convinced that the continued deterioration of the politi­
cal and security climate in the Indian Ocean area is an im­
portant consideration bearing on the question of the ur­
gent convening of the Conference and that the easing of
tension in the area would enhance the prospect of success
being achieved by the Conference,
1. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee
on the Indian Ocean and exchange of views of the Com­
mittee; 102
2. Takes note of the discussions on substantive matters
in the Working Group established in accordance with the
Ad Hoc Committee's decision of 11 July 1985;
3. Emphasizes its decision to convene the Conference
on the Indian Ocean at Colombo as a necessary step for
the implementation of the Declaration of the Indian
Ocean as a Zone of Peace adopted in 1971;
4. Notes that the Ad Hoc Committee has been unable,
during its four weeks of work in 1986, to complete
preparatory work relating to the convening of the Confer­
ence on the Indian Ocean, and urges the Committee to
continue its work with vigour and determination;
5. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee, taking into ac­
count the political and security climate in the region, to
complete preparatory work relating to the Conference on
the Indian Ocean during 1987 in order to enable the open­
ing of the Conference at Colombo at an early date soon
thereafter, but not later than 1988, to be decided by the
Committee in consultation with the host country, with a
clear understanding that if preparatory work is not com­
pleted in 1987 serious consideration will be given to ways
and means of more effectively organizing work in the Ad
Hoc Committee to enable it to fulfil its mandate;
6. Emphasizes that the Conference called for in resolu­
tion 34/80 Band subsequent resolutions and the establish­
ment and maintenance of the Indian Ocean as a zone of
peace require the full and active participation and co­
operation of all the permanent members of the Security
Council, the major maritime users and the littoral and
hinterland States;
7. Decides that preparatory work would comprise or­
ganizational matters and substantive issues, including the
provisional agenda for the Conference, rules of procedure,
participation, stages of the Conference, level of representa­
tion, documentation, consideration of appropriate ar­
rangements for any international agreements that may ul­
timately be reached for the maintenance of the Indian
Ocean as a zone of peace and the preparation of the draft
final document of the Conference;
8. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee at the same time to
seek the necessary harmonization of views on remaining
relevant issues;
102 Ibid.. Forty-first Se1sio11. Supplement .Vo. 29 (A/41/29)

9. Requests the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee to
consult the Secretary-General at the appropriate time on
the establishment of a secretariat for the Conference;
10. Renews the mandate of the Ad Hoc Committee as
defined in the relevant resolutions, and requests the Com­
mittee to intensify its work with regard to the implementa­
tion of its mandate;
11. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to hold two
preparatory sessions in 1987 each of a duration of two
weeks for completion of preparatory work;
12. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to submit to the
Conference a report on its preparatory work;
13. Requests the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee
to continue his consultations on the participation in the
work of the Committee by States Members of the United
Nations which are not members of the Committee, with
the aim of resolving this matter at the earliest possible
date;
14. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session a full report
on the implementation of the present resolution;
I 5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ren­
der all necessary assistance to the Ad Hoc Committee, in­
cluding the provision of summary records, in recognition
of its preparatory function.
96th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41/88.

Question of Antarctica
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 38/77 of 1 S December I 983,
39/152 of 17 December 1984 and 40/156 A of 16 Decem­
ber 1985,
Having considered the item entitled "Question of Ant­
arctica",
Welcoming the increasing international awareness of
and interest in Antarctica,
Bearing in mind the Antarctic Treaty 103 and the signifi­
cance of the system it has developed,
Taking into account the debate on this item at its forty­
first session, 104
Convinced of the advantages of a better knowledge of
Antarctica,
Affirming the conviction that, in the interest of all man­
kind, Antarctica should continue for ever to be used exclu­
sively for peaceful purposes and that it should not become
the scene or object of international discord,
Recalling the relevant paragraphs of the Political Decla­
ration adopted by the Eighth Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Harare
from 1 to 6 September 1986,105 and the resolution on Ant­
arctica adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organi­
zation of African Unity at its forty-second ordinary ses­
sion, held at Addis Ababa from 10 to 17 July 1985, 106 as
well as the decision of the Council of Ministers of the
103 United

Nation,, Trl.'aty Serie,, vol. 402, No. 5778. p. 72.

104 Official Record, of the General Assembly. Forty-first Session. F,n,

Commitree. 49th to 51st meetings; and ibid.. First Commitree, Sessional
Fascicle, corrigendum.
IOS A/41/697-S/18392, annex. sect. I, paras. 198-202.
""' A 140/666, annex II. resolution CM/Res.988 (XLII).

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

100

League of Arab States held at Tunis on 17 and 18 Septem­
ber 1986,
Conscious of the significance of Antarctica to the inter­
national community in terms, inter alia, of international
peace and security, economy, environment, scientific re­
search and meteorology,
Recognizing, therefore, the interest of mankind as a
whole in Antarctica,
Taking into account the provisions of the United Na­
tions Convention on the Law of the Sea, 107
Noting with appreciation the expanded study on the
question of Antarctica submitted by the Secretary­
General, 108
Noting the increased flow of information from the Ant­
arctic Treaty Consultative Parties, and expressing concern
at the continuing non-availability of information to the
Secretary-General on certain issues affecting the question
of Antarctica,
I. Requests the Antartic Treaty Consultative Parties
to keep the Secretary-General fully informed on all as­
pects of the question of Antarctica so that the United Na­
tions could function as the central repository of all such
information;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to fol­
low all aspects of the question of Antarctica and to pro­
vide an updated report thereon to the General Assembly
at its forty-second session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session the item entitled ..Question of Ant­
arctica".
96th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 38/77 of 15 December 1983,

39/152 of 17 December 1984 and 40/ 156 B of 16 Decem­
ber 1985,
Having considered the item entitled .. Question of Ant­
arctica",
Recalling the relevant paragraphs of the Political Decla­
ration adopted by the Eighth Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Harare
from 1 to 6 September 1986, 105 and the resolution on Ant­
arctica adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organi­
zation of African Unity at its forty-second ordinary ses­
sion, held at Addis Ababa from 10 to 17 July I 985, 106 as
well as the decision of the Council of Ministers of the
League of Arab States held at Tunis on 17 and 18 Septem­
ber 1986,
Recognizing that the management, exploration and use
of Antarctica should be conducted in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Na­
tions and in the interest of maintaining international peace
and security and of promoting international co-operation
for the benefit of mankind as a whole,
Aware that negotiations are in progress among the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties, with the non­
Consultative Parties as observers, to which other States
107 Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference 011 the Luv.·
of the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nation, publication. Sales No. E.K4. V.1).
document A/CONF.62/122.
108 A/41/722.

are not privy, with a view to establishing a regime regard­
ing Antarctica's minerals,
1. Reaffirms that any exploitation of the resources of
Antarctica should ensure the maintenance of international
peace and security in Antarctica, the protection of its envi­
ronment, the non-appropriation and conservation of its re­
sources and the international management and equitable
sharing of the benefits of such exploitation;
2. Calls upon the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Par­
ties to impose a moratorium on the negotiations to estab­
lish a minerals regime until such time as all members of
the international community can participate fully in such
negotiations;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session the item entitled "Question of Ant­
arctica".
96th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

C
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 40/156 C of 16 December 1985,
Having considered the item entitled "Question of Ant-

arctica",

Noting with regret that the racist apartheid regime of
South Africa, which has been suspended from participa­
tion in the General Assembly of the United Nations, has
continued to participate in the meetings of the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Parties,
Recalling the resolution adopted by the Council of Min­
isters of the Organization of African Unity at its forty­
second ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 10 to
17 July 1985,106
Recalling also the relevant paragraphs of the Political
Declaration adopted by the Eighth Conference of Heads
of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Harare from 1 to 6 September 1986, 105
Recalling further that the Antarctic Treaty 103 is, by its
terms, intended to further the purposes and principles em­
bodied in the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting further that the policy of apartheid practised by
the racist minority regime of South Africa, which has been
universally condemned, constitutes a threat to regional
and international peace and security,
I. Views with concern the continuing participation of
the apartheid regime of South Africa in the meetings of the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties;
2. Appeals once again to the Antarctic Treaty Consul­
tative Parties to take urgent measures to exclude the racist
apartheid regime of South Africa from participation in the
meetings of the Consultative Parties at the earliest possible
date;
3. Invites the States parties to the Antarctic Treaty to
inform the Secretary-General on the actions taken regard­
ing the provisions of the present resolution;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
in this regard to the General Assembly at its forty-second
session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session the item l"ntitled "Question of Ant­
arctica".
96th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
