General Assembly-Fifth Session

54
443 (V).

Administrative unions affecting Trust
Territories

The General Assembly
Decides to carry over the item relating to administrative unions affecting Trust Territories for consideration
at the next regular session of the General Assembly.
320th plenary meeting,
7.? December 1950.
444 (V).

Technical assistance to Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Considering that, under the expanded programme of
technical assistance for economic development of underdeveloped countries ( resolution 222 (IX) of the Economic and Social Council), the Non-Self-Governing
Territories arc eligible to receive technical assistance
on the request of the Administering Members concerned,
Noting with appreciation that resolution 321 ( XI)
of the Economic and Social Council draws the attention of the Administering Members to the facilities
available under the expanded programme of technical
assistance,

I. Invites the Administering Members which need
technical assistance for the economic, social and educational advancement of their Non-Self-Governing Territories to submit their requests;
2. Recommends that the Adn1inistering Members include yearly in the statistical informaticm transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter as full a report as
possible on all applications made in behalf of their respective Non-Self-Governing Territories and on the
manner in which technical assistance received from the
United Nations and the specialized agencies has been
integrated 'into long-range development programmes in
such Territories.
320th plenary meeting,
12 December 7950.
445 (V). Work of the Special Committee on
Information transmitted under Article 73 e
of the Charter

The General Assembly,
1. Takes note of the report" of the Special Committee
011. Information transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter on the work of its 1950 session;
2. Confirms its recognition of the importance of
international collaboration in regard to economic, social
and educational conditions in Non-Self-Governing Territories as expressed in resolution 331 ( IV) adopted
by the General Assembly on 2 December 1949;
3. Approves the special report on education 9 as a
brief but considered indication of the importance of
8
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 17.
u Ibid.

educational advancement and the problems still to be
faced in the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. l m:itcs the Secretarv-General to communicate this
special rl'port to the l\1e"rnbers of the l; nited Nations
n·spunsihle for the administration of Non-Self-Governing TnritoriE's and to the United I\ations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization for their consideration ;

S. Vot,'s with interest the special studies carried nut
h thl' United Nations Eclucational, Scientific and Cultmal Organization for the education and training of
teachers, and expresses the hope that full account will
hl' takl'n of such studies in the formulation of policies
uu this matter in the N 011-Self-Governing Territories:
(J. Not"s the intentio11 10 of the L'nited Nations Educational, Scientific an<l Cultural Oq~anizatinn to place
before the Special Committee for its consideration at
its 1951 session documents relating to the use of the
indi,l!Tnmts or natinnal languages for teaching purposes
;1 nd the eradication of illiteracy;

7 . . 1pprm·es the arrangemeuts 11 proposed by the
Special Committee for its work in 1951;
8. lm·itcs the ,;pecializcd agencies concerned, with
a vil'w to the preparation of studies, based on the information transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter
and relevant supplemental information, in respect of
economic conditions and development to he considered
by the Special Committee in 1951, to collaborate with
the Secretary-General in the study of problems of the
1)rices of tropical export crops and arrangements for
their marketing, migrant labour in Africa, the development of co-operative societies in peasant communities
aud the economic value of preventive medicine.
320th plenary meeting,
12 December 1950.
*

*

*

In uccordmic,· ,,·itlz the tt'r1ns of resolution 332 (IV),
the Fo11rth CommittCJ.', at its 191st meeting on 30 Noz,emhcr 1050, clrctcd. on behalf of the General Assembly, two
members to the Special Committee to fill the 11aca11cies
,rca/,'d by the cxpiraticrn of the terms of oRicc of Sweden
and Vcnc::Hcla. The States Members ,:/ccted were: CUBA
:rnd PAKISTAN.

4-46 (V).

Information on human rights in NonSelf-Govt'rning Territories

The General Assembly.
Recalling the recommendation contained in resolution 327 (IV) adopted by the General Assembly on
2 December 1949,
Noting the provision contained in article 2' 2 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights that no distinction shall be made on the basis of the political,
jurisdictional or international status of the country or
territory to which a person belongs, whether it be
10
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Fourth Committee, 186th meeting-.
11 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 17, Part One, paragraphs 113-131.
12 See resolution 217 A (III).
