General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

192

-----

Nations Children's Fund, for their invaluable assistance
to the ongoing work of the Voluntary Fund for the
United Nations Decade for Women;
4. Urges the regional commissions concerned that
have not already done so to strengthen their programmes for women from within regular budget
resources;
5. Requests all relevant organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system to review their financial and
technical support activities to assess both the involvement of and the impact on women, and to report to the
General Assembly every second year, beginning at the
thirty-sixth session, on the results of the reviews and, as
appropriate, corrective actions taken;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the voluntary
contributions pledged by Member States and appeals to
Member States that are in a position to do so to consider
giving or increasing their support to the Fund in order
to ensure the availability of resources sufficient to meet
rapidly multiplying demands in developing countries;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to rep0rt annually on the management of the Fund as well as on the progress in the implementation of its activities;
(b) To continue to include the Fund on an annual
basis as one of the programmes of the United Nations
Pledging Conference for Development Activities.

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980
35/138.

Expression of appreciation to the Government
and people of Denm11rk on the occasion of the
World Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Taking into account the significance and the results of
the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women, held at Copenhagen from 14 to 30 July 1980,
Expresses its deep appreciation to the Government
and people of Denmark for acting as host to the World
Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women.

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980
35/139.

Channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations

---. ----- -

--

-

Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General, rn
Convinced of the need to improve the efforts of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies with regard
to the participation of youth in achieving the objectives
of the Charter of the United Nations,
Equally convinced of the valuable contribution that
youth can make in promoting co-operation among
States and in implementing the new international
economic order and the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, 81
Bearing in mind the importance of the existence of
channels of communication for the proper information
of youth and youth organizations and their effective
participation in the work of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies at the national, regional and international levels,
Convinced that the existence and the proper functioning of channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations form a
basic prerequisite for the successful preparation, celebration and follow-up of the International Youth Year:
Participation, Development, Peace,
I. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
implement fully, at the world-wide level, the adopted
guidelines for the improvement of the channels of communication between the United Nations and youth and
youth Organizations;
2. Requests !he Secretary-General to assist Governments and the regional commissions in the implementation of the adopted guidelines and to promote that implementation at the national and regional levels;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the relevant bodies of the United
Nations system, including the regional commissions, to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session
on the progress achieved in the implementation of the
adopted guidelines at the international, regional and
national levels;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General, taking
into account the views expressed by Governments either
in their replies or in their statements before the General
Assembly, to submit to the Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session, for adoption, proposals for additional guidelines, consistent with the guidelines already adopted by
the Assembly in its resolution 32/ 135, and on the basis
of the draft additional guidelines contained in the annex
to its resolution 34/ 163, as well as the suggestions of the
Secretary-General in his reports to the Assembly at its
thirty-third/ 2 thirty-fourth 8 -' and thirty-fifth 8 ~ sessions.

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/ I 35 of 16 December 1977,
in which it adopted guidelines for the improvement of
the channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations,

Recalling its resolutions 33 /6 of 3 November 1978 and
34/163 of 17 December 1979, in which it invited Member States, the regional commissions and regional and
international youth organizations in consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council to comment on
the guidelines and to offer additional suggestions
regarding the further development of those guidelines,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/25 of 2 May 1980 concerning co-ordination
and information in the field of youth,

35/140.

Status of the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women

The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the purposes of the United
Nations, as stated in Articles I and 55 of the Charter, is
to promote universal respect for human rights and fun'" A/35/503.
"See sect. V, resolution 35/56, annex.
"A/33/261.
"A/34/199
"A/35/503.
