United Nations

S/PV.4746

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4746

th meeting
Tuesday, 29 April 2003, 3.40 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aguilar Zinser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Mexico)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Raytchev
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou
Mr. Valdés
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Fall
Mr. Khalid
Mr. Konuzin
Ms. Menéndez
Mr. Wehbe
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Williamson

Agenda
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-33849 (E)

*0333849*

S/PV.4746

The meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and with the consent of the Council, I
shall take it that the Council agrees to extend an
invitation to His Excellency Mr. Nana Addo-Dankwa
Afufo-Addo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana, to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Nana Addo-Dankwa
Afufo-Addo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Afufo-Addo
(Ghana) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and with the consent of the Council, I
shall take it that the Council agrees to extend an
invitation to His Excellency Mr. Mamadou Bamba,
Minister of State and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Côte d’Ivoire, to participate in the discussion, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Mamadou Bamba,
Minister of State and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Côte d’Ivoire.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bamba
(Côte d’Ivoire) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and with the consent of the Council, I
shall take it that the Council agrees to extend an
invitation to His Excellency Mr. Dubem Onyia,
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, to

2

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Dubem Onyia,
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Onyia
(Nigeria) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and with the consent of the Council, I
shall take it that the Council agrees to extend an
invitation to the representative of Senegal to participate
in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fall
(Senegal) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should also
like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Guinea, His Excellency Mr. François
Lonsény Fall, who is with us today as head of the
delegation of Guinea.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 25 April 2003 from the
Permanent Representative of Ghana to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that the
Executive Secretary of the Economic Community
of West African States, Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
be invited to address the Security Council on
Tuesday, 29 April 2003, in accordance with rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council.”
That letter has been published as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/2003/500.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

S/PV.4746

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Community of West African States, Mr. Mohamed Ibn
Chambas, and invite him to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
As President, I am pleased to welcome the
Ministers or Ministers of State for Foreign Affairs of
Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea and Nigeria, who are part
of the ECOWAS mission, to address, with the members
of the Security Council, the situation in Côte d’Ivoire.
This meeting follows up on the statement of
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Executive Secretary of
ECOWAS, at the Council’s public meeting on 11 April
2003, when we discussed the relationship between the
Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations in facing the new challenges to
international peace and security.
We favour strengthening mechanisms of
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and ECOWAS, to create a process leading to
lasting and stable peace in Côte d’Ivoire and to
implement measures designed to achieve security and
stability in that country and in the rest of the West
African region.
I am happy now to welcome the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, to whom I
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: First, let me warmly
welcome the distinguished Foreign Ministers of
countries of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) who are here with us today, and to
thank ECOWAS, as well as France, for the important
role they are playing in the search for peace and
stability in Côte d’Ivoire through their support for the
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Accord. On
the military front, their peacekeeping activities have
played a key role in averting escalation in the fighting.
Secondly, let me thank the members of the
Council for the consistent attention they have given to
the crisis in Côte d’Ivoire and to the role of the United
Nations in the peace process. My Special
Representative, Mr. Albert Tevoedjre, is currently
chairing the follow-up committee established in

accordance with the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement, and
I am pleased at the progress that Prime Minister
Seydou Diarra has made in establishing the new
Government.
The presence of such a high-level ECOWAS
delegation shows today how seriously West Africa
takes the problem immediately confronting us; namely,
how to replenish the depleted financial resources of the
ECOWAS Peace Force for Côte d’Ivoire (ECOFORCE)
so that it can continue playing its essential role in
promoting peace in Côte d’Ivoire.
In this context, we must acknowledge the help
already given by those donor countries and institutions
that have been assisting ECOWAS since the beginning
of its involvement in Côte d’Ivoire, and particularly for
the deployment of ECOFORCE.
At this critical time, when the various Ivorian
parties have at last begun taking important steps to
implement the Accord, ECOWAS has found it
necessary to decide on a substantial increase in the size
of ECOFORCE in order to make it more effective. I
appeal to members of the Council, and the broader
international community, to quickly provide ECOWAS
with the additional financial resources that will be
required to sustain ECOFORCE for the next six
months.
In order to complement the peacekeeping efforts
launched by ECOWAS and France, I have
recommended the establishment of a small United
Nations operation comprising military liaison
components, as well as human rights, civil affairs and
media components. I hope that Council members will
shortly authorize this mission so that the United
Nations can strengthen its role in the Ivorian peace
process.
In conclusion, let me assure the ECOWAS
ministers that the United Nations will continue to
cooperate with them as we work together to help the
Ivorian people recover the stability and prosperity for
which their country was so well known in the past.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
The next speaker is His Excellency Mr. Nana
Addo-Dankwa Afufo-Addo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ghana and current Chairman of the
Economic Community of West African States, on
whom I call.

3

S/PV.4746

Mr. Afufo-Addo (Ghana): We are here as a result
of a mandate given to us by the Mediation and Security
Council of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) to try to advance the peace process
in Côte d’Ivoire.
On 7 April, the Council mandated a team of
Foreign Ministers of five ECOWAS countries —
Guinea, a member of the Security Council, Senegal,
Nigeria, Côte d’Ivoire and Ghana — to come to the
West to apprise Governments and the Security Council
of the measures that are being taken to try to
consolidate the process of peacemaking in Côte
d’Ivoire and to seek the Council’s support for those
measures.
As the Council knows, since the crisis broke out
in Côte d’Ivoire, ECOWAS has been active, within its
means, to try to contain and stabilize the situation in
Côte d’Ivoire. It has done so principally, first of all, by
negotiating a ceasefire among those who are fighting,
and also by contributing to the negotiations on a new
Government of national reconciliation in Côte d’Ivoire.
That Government is now in place, and the
developments that have taken place since it came into
being are convincing all of us that, indeed, Côte
d’Ivoire is now returning to the path of normalcy and
peace. It is, therefore, essential on the part of the
Community to give the new Government and that
process the maximum amount of support.
It is in the light of that that the Defence and
Security Commission of ECOWAS decided that it
would be necessary to expand the force that was put
into Côte d’Ivoire from a force of 1,200-odd soldiers to
a force of some 3,200 soldiers. The mandate given to
the original force was essentially a role in monitoring
the ceasefire. It has now been decided that that
mandate should be transformed to include several other
elements: first, the protection of the new Government;
secondly, the ability to patrol the borders, especially
the western border of Côte d’Ivoire, which is a source
of great concern; thirdly, responsibility for the
demobilization and disarmament of the various militias
in Côte d’Ivoire; and, lastly, the creation of the
conditions that would allow the new Government to
have full control of the national territory.
Clearly, the redefinition of this mandate and the
expansion of the force have obvious financial
implications. Despite the willingness of ECOWAS to
find a home-grown solution to the problem, the means

4

available to the Community are not what they should
be. It is for that reason that the Mediation and Security
Council decided to mandate this group that is before
the Council today to tour certain capitals and to come
to this body to seek its support for the financing of this
expanded force in Côte d’Ivoire.
We began our journey yesterday in Washington,
where, in our view, we had an extremely fruitful
interchange. We have come here today, and from here
we shall be going to Europe — principally to Paris,
Rome, Berlin, London, The Hague and Brussels — to
press the case for assistance in financing the force. The
intention is to conclude our tour at Brussels on 12 May
with a meeting of those who are interested in
assisting — a donors’ conference.
We are very grateful to the President and the
other members of the Council for the opportunity they
have given us to present our case and to say one
fundamental thing: Côte d’Ivoire is an extremely
important nation within the West African region. Both
economically and politically, it is one of the most
important States in West Africa. The Ivorians
themselves have shown a willingness to try to find
accommodation and understanding among themselves
within the context of the very difficult circumstances in
which they have found themselves during the last six
months. It is our belief that it is the duty of the
Community — and, indeed, if I dare say so, the duty of
the international community as assembled here in the
Council — to support the process that the Ivorians
themselves have initiated. The most concrete support
that can be given to that process is to enable this force
to operate and to create the conditions that will allow
Côte d’Ivoire to return to full normalcy and peace and
to be able — at the end of the process, in October
2005 — to conduct credible, free and fair elections,
which we believe will be the most effective way of
bringing this crisis to an end.
I am grateful for the opportunity to have
addressed the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker is his Excellency Mamadou Bamba, Minister
of State and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Côte
d’Ivoire, on whom I now call.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
On behalf of the Government of Côte d’Ivoire, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General and the members of
the Security Council for their significant contribution

S/PV.4746

towards the restoration of peace and stability in my
country.
Since the signing of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement at Accra, political developments overall
have been relatively satisfactory. A Government of
reconciliation has been formed and is meeting on a
weekly basis, with a Government council meeting on
Tuesdays and a council of ministers meeting on
Thursdays. Having seen the Government at work, I can
say to the Council that the general working atmosphere
is very good. The ministers, who are drawn from all the
political spheres, are determined to make an effort to
move Côte d’Ivoire towards peace and stability. The
Government’s first important decision pertains to
security in Côte d’Ivoire. The Government has
therefore banned all demonstrations which are
accompanied by violence. It has also banned all
militias and so-called self-defence committees.
A meeting of the Government council was held
today at Abidjan. The Government has taken the
decision to mobilize combat helicopters. We have
noted that there are increasingly fewer violations of the
ceasefire on the front lines. The Government is now
establishing security corridors to promote exchanges
between Côte d’Ivoire and neighbouring countries. In
that context, the Minister of Trade has already visited
Niger, Burkina Faso and Mali in order to gain the
support of those Governments so that trade can be
established with those countries as soon as possible.
The Government has also sent a delegation to Burkina
Faso so that we may very soon initiate train service
between Abidjan and Ouagadougou.
The people of Côte d’Ivoire are aware of their
country’s role in the subregion. We are also aware of
the fact that the problems in Côte d’Ivoire are affecting
all the neighbouring countries of the subregion. It is for
that reason that we would solemnly like to say here that
the Government will abide by all of its international
commitments, in particular with the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement of Kleber and Accra. However, despite the
Government’s efforts, the situation continues to be
fragile. It is not easy to restore confidence among
belligerent forces in a very short period. But the
Government is determined to make the march towards
peace irreversible, and it has made reconciliation
among Ivorians and between Ivorians and their
neighbours a reality.

Our concern today is with the situation in the
western part of the country, where there are rebels from
Liberia and Sierra Leone. It can be said that there is
war in that part of the country today.
On the diplomatic level, the heads of State of
Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia met two days ago in Kara,
Togo. One of the main decisions to come out of that
meeting concerned the interposition of forces along the
700 kilometre border between Côte d’Ivoire and
Liberia. Those forces will essentially be composed of
national forces from Côte d’Ivoire, and forces from
Liberia, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Peace Force for Côte d’Ivoire
(ECOFORCE) and France in the context of Operation
Unicorn. The second decision was to hold a meeting,
either today or tomorrow, between the chiefs of staff of
the Liberian and Ivorian armies in order to implement
the first decision, to which I have just referred.
A second major concern pertains to the flow of
small weapons in the region. This is a factor for
destabilization. For that reason, we believe that what is
occurring in Côte d’Ivoire could take place in any
country if nothing is done to control the dissemination
of such weapons in the subregion.
That was a brief summary of the situation. I
should like to say that we need the ongoing assistance
of the Security Council and of the entire international
community in order for us quickly to emerge from this
crisis situation and for peace and stability to be
restored to Côte d’Ivoire and to the subregion. Côte
d’Ivoire needs ECOFORCE, and we hope that it will
remain in Côte d’Ivoire until the upcoming elections in
2005.
We hope also that, with the support of the
international community and with the presence of
ECOFORCE, we will be able to implement all the
provisions of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement in an
atmosphere of peace and calm. We keenly hope that the
international community will agree to contribute to
ECOFORCE, so that it can play its role side by side
with the French soldiers of Operation Unicorn.
Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): It is always
gratifying for me to return to New York and to meet
again with all my friends around this table. I wish also
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
with the members of the Security Council. We are very
pleased to be able to have this exchange of views under
your presidency. We acknowledge and fully appreciate

5

S/PV.4746

your personal commitment to the development of an
effective partnership between the Security Council and
regional organizations.

accord fully with the efforts of the Security Council to
restore peace in Côte d’Ivoire and stabilize West
Africa.

Your delegation, on 11 April last, convened an
open meeting of the Security Council on that issue, and
we welcome that. That meeting was an opportunity to
stress the complementary nature of the Security
Council’s actions with those of regional organizations
and the need to enhance their capacity for intervention.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to say how gratified we are to see the representative of
Guinea once again occupying his country’s seat at the
Council table.

This afternoon’s meeting is therefore taking place
in the framework of the active partnership that was set
up between the Security Council and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) some
time ago. The mission of ECOWAS, our subregional
organization, is to create conditions of peace and
stability in West Africa in order to facilitate the
integration of our States.
We were very encouraged by the adoption by the
Security Council on 4 February last of resolution 1464
(2003) and especially by its full support for
ECOWAS’s efforts to promote peace and security in
Côte d’Ivoire. I need hardly stress the consequences of
the Ivorian crisis for the whole of our subregion, and
especially the need to give ECOWAS the means it
requires in order that we may continue our determined
efforts to restore peace in Côte d’Ivoire.
Indeed, we already have some experience in
restoring peace in West Africa. This was made clear in
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau, and now we
are in Côte d’Ivoire. It would be presumptuous of us to
tell the members of the Security Council that
peacekeeping or peace-building operations require
significant logistical and financial resources, which
are, unfortunately, not always within reach of our
countries. That is why we are looking to the members
of the Council today to work with us in our initiative,
which is fully in accord with the Council’s mandate.
We have no doubts about the concern of the members
of the Council as to the Ivorian crisis, and we count on
their support for the efforts of ECOWAS for the benefit
of peace and stability, a goal that is so important to the
Security Council.
That is the fundamental reason for our presence
here today. We are convinced that with the Council’s
continued support for our organization — if it indeed
does continue — and with assistance from our bilateral
and multilateral partners, the action that we have
undertaken in Côte d’Ivoire will be successful and

6

I give the floor to Mr. Dubem Onyia, Minister of
State for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria.
Mr. Onyia (Nigeria): I wish fully to align myself
with the statement made by the leader of the delegation
of Guinea, the Foreign Minister. He has said all that
needs to be said.
I wish simply to add that there is a need for us to
come together and for the Security Council to take
seriously the issue of Côte d’Ivoire. It is important,
because we cannot stand by and watch Côte d’Ivoire
deteriorate to the level of Sierra Leone before the
intervention of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) and of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL).
If we want to look at the problems of the
subregion holistically and ensure peace and stability
there, this is the time to come to the aid of Côte
d’Ivoire. Looking at the problem in Côte d’Ivoire will
contribute to the resolution of all the other problems
within the subregion.
I personally do not have anything to add to what
the leader of the delegation said earlier.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
Executive Secretary of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), to whom I give the
floor.
Mr. Chambas: Mr. President, you have been very
kind to the ECOWAS secretariat. Under your
presidency, this is the second time you have given the
opportunity to the executive secretariat to address the
Council, which we deeply appreciate.
We have had the privilege of participating in two
meetings organized by the Council in the past two
months. Under the Guinean presidency, there was a
meeting on 18 March on the proliferation of small arms
and mercenaries in West Africa. Then, as you will
recall, Sir, under your presidency, on 11 April, we had

S/PV.4746

a meeting in this Council on regional organizations and
the Security Council facing new challenges to
international peace and security.
Certain themes were common in the discussions
at these two meetings: first, the link between instability
and deepening poverty; secondly, the link between the
easy availability of arms and the existence of a system
of violence and instability in certain subregions,
including our own; and thirdly, the link between
prolonged crisis and the emergence of a network of
mercenaries and unemployed youths ready for hire in
various conflicts.
The discussions of the Council at the two
meetings underscored the importance and the role of
regional organizations in breaking the cycle of violence
in their respective subregions and in taking the
necessary diplomatic and political measures —
supported, of course, by member countries in the
subregions to create conditions for peace and stability,
which are essential for fighting poverty and nurturing
democratic Governments.
ECOWAS has taken up this challenge. We have
shown no lack of political will to act and intervene in
conflicts in the subregion, whether in Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Guinea-Bissau, as seen in the past, or now
in Côte d’Ivoire.
Of course, our major limitation has been the lack
of financial wherewithal: the financial resources to
carry through with our commitments. That is what
faces us as we attempt to stabilize Côte d’Ivoire and
restore normality, peace and prosperity.
I believe that the Council is now challenged to
find ways in which it can support worthy subregional
efforts to maintain peace and security, which, after all,

is the primary responsibility of the Security Council. I
know that in this discussion there have been
suggestions, inter alia, that we might begin to look at
cases of successful subregional deployment of troops
under Chapter VIII to stabilize crisis situations and ask
ourselves whether it might not be prudent for the
Council to provide the requisite resources for such
forces. We think that the Council should indeed
encourage
ECOWAS
and
other
subregional
organizations to continue to play a leading role, for
instance, as we are doing in Côte d’Ivoire. Indeed, it
should encourage the creation of the right synergy and
collaborative working relationships between ECOWAS
and the Council to deal with these problems of peace
and security.
In that regard, we very much welcome the
scheduled visit by the Security Council to the
subregion during the presidency of the United
Kingdom. We look forward to continuing these
discussions during that impending visit.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Executive Secretary of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) for the kind words he
addressed to me.
We have listened attentively to statements by the
Secretary-General, by the Ministers or Ministers of
State for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana,
Guinea and Nigeria and by the Executive Secretary of
ECOWAS.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I should now like to
invite Council members to a private meeting to
continue our discussion of this subject.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

7
