United Nations

S/PV.6546

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6546th meeting
Monday, 6 June 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Messone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Berger
Mr. Vinay Kumar
Mr. Salam
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Security Council mission
Briefing by the Security Council mission to Africa (19 to 26 May 2011)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-36348 (E)

*1136348*

S/PV.6546

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to Africa
(19 to 26 May 2011)
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by the five Permanent Representatives who led the
Security Council mission to Africa: first, His
Excellency
Mr.
Gérard
Araud,
Permanent
Representative of France and leader of the Addis
Ababa segment; secondly, Her Excellency Ms. Susan
Rice, Permanent Representative of the United States,
and His Excellency Mr. Vitaly Churkin, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, who together
led the Khartoum and Juba segment; and thirdly, His
Excellency Sir Mark Lyall Grant, Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, and His
Excellency
Mr.
Baso
Sangqu,
Permanent
Representative of South Africa, who together led the
Nairobi segment of the mission.
I would like here to welcome the return of the
members of the Council and the Secretariat who took
part in the Council mission to Africa.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I will
speak on behalf of Ambassador Araud, who could not
be with us this afternoon.
As in past years, the Security Council in May
conducted a weeklong mission to Africa. From 19 to
26 May, the Security Council visited Addis Ababa;
Khartoum and Juba, in the Sudan; and, finally, Nairobi,
where it considered the issue of Somalia, since it was
not able to go to Mogadishu. The Security Council was
able to meet with the political authorities of the
countries visited and with representatives of the United
Nations on the ground, in particular those responsible
for Council-mandated peacekeeping operations. The
mission also made it possible for the Security Council
to meet representatives of civil society.
France coordinated the first segment of this
mission, the visit to Addis Ababa. I will therefore

2

speak about that segment, and then my United States,
Russian, British and South African colleagues, who led
the other segments, will take the floor.
As is well known, the Security Council now
meets with the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union every year. Last year the meeting was
held in New York; under the rule of alternation, it was
held this year at the headquarters of the African Union,
in Addis Ababa, on 21 May. The Peace and Security
Council was chaired by the Permanent Representative
of South Africa to the African Union, Mr. Pepani. The
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, also took part in the meeting.
During the meeting, which lasted more than four hours,
the Security Council was able to discuss with the
Permanent Representatives members of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union how the two
institutions can work together and to assess their
cooperation in terms of conflict prevention and
settlement and of peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The members of the Security Council and of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
reasserted the primary responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace and
security and the mandate of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union with regard to the
promotion of peace and security in Africa. They also
reasserted the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations with regard to regional
arrangements in the settlement of conflicts.
The meeting enabled us to consider in detail four
issues that are currently on the agendas of both
institutions: Libya, Côte d’Ivoire, the Sudan and
Somalia. Each was the subject of frank and substantive
discussions, with the objective being to establish a
common vision that would allow the United Nations
and the African Union to implement their actions more
effectively. Following the meeting, an outcome
statement was adopted that welcomes in particular the
enhancement of cooperation between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union. It refers also to the concerns of and the
priorities expressed by both Councils with regard to
Libya, Côte d’Ivoire, the Sudan and Somalia.
In addition to meeting with the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union, the Security
Council met with the Prime Minister of Ethiopia,
Mr. Meles Zenawi. The discussions, which lasted for

11-36348

S/PV.6546

more than an hour, allowed us to consider mainly the
situation in the Sudan and in Somalia, as well as the
issues of Eritrea and Libya.
Before the Permanent Representatives of the
United States and the Russian Federation — who will
deal with the Sudan segment — take the floor, I should
like to close by thanking the team at the United
Nations Office to the African Union in Addis Ababa,
which was established on 1 July 2010, for the support
and the welcome they provided us during the Security
Council’s visit, and in particular the Head of the
Office, Mr. Zachary Muburi-Muita.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): On behalf
of Ambassador Churkin, with whom I co-led the trip to
the Sudan, I would like to make the following report.
Unfortunately, the situation in Abyei rapidly
deteriorated as we travelled to the region. Thus, our
mission had three overriding purposes: first, to urge a
halt to the fighting and to restore calm to Abyei;
secondly, to press the North and the South to quickly
resolve all outstanding issues necessary to pave the
way for two peaceful and successful States beginning
on 9 July; and thirdly, to better understand what an
independent South Sudan will need from the United
Nations and the international community.
The crisis in Abyei affected both our itinerary and
our agenda, and we were unable to visit the Abyei area
as planned. But being on the ground in the Sudan
enabled us to press this critical issue with both parties
and to respond to the emerging crisis in real time. That
included issuing a strong press statement while we
were in Khartoum that called for the immediate
withdrawal of all forces from Abyei and its environs.
Our visit to the Sudan included travel not only to
Khartoum but also to Wau, Juba and Malau. We began
in Khartoum, where we met with several Government
officials. Foreign Minister Karti, unfortunately, was ill
and did not join our meeting as planned. However, we
met with the Minister of State for the Presidency, Amin
Hassan Omer; Ambassador Daffa-Alla Elhag Ali
Osman, our colleague here at the United Nations; and a
number of other Sudanese interlocutors.
We reiterated the Council’s commitment to
supporting two viable and successful States as of
9 July. We emphasized the need for a peaceful
resolution to the Abyei conflict. We deplored the
19 May attack on a convoy of the United Nations

11-36348

Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), and pointed out that
the escalatory response from the Sudanese Armed
Forces was unacceptable and constituted a gross
violation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA). We expressed the Council’s deep concern over
the level of violence in Darfur and the Sudanese
Government’s continued restrictions of access for
humanitarian organizations and the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).
We asked the Government of the Sudan to fulfil
its commitment to processing all UNAMID visas in a
timely manner — an urgent issue, given that UNAMID
had more than 800 visa requests pending at the time of
our meeting. The Government said that it would follow
through on its visa commitments; it also reaffirmed its
support for the Doha process and committed to lifting
the state of emergency in Darfur after the adoption of a
final document from the Doha negotiations.
The Council also stressed the need for the
Government to protect the rights of southerners living
in the North. The Government assured us that the basic
rights of southerners in the North would be protected.
The Sudanese cancelled a previously scheduled
meeting with Vice-President Taha at the last minute. As
Ambassador Churkin explained at the press conference
later that day, this was an important opportunity missed
by the Government to discuss Abyei and other pressing
issues with the Council.
Separately, we received informative briefings on
UNMIS and UNAMID that added to our understanding
of their work and the challenges that they face in the
field day to day. Joint Special Representative Gambari
and Force Commander Nyamvumba detailed the
increasingly robust posture of UNAMID. We
welcomed the news that the Mission has increased its
patrols to an average of 160 per day, up from
approximately 90 per day in late 2010. The
humanitarian briefing, however, was dispiriting. We
learned that only 250 or so international staff remain in
Darfur, which, as members of the Council know, is an
area roughly the size of France. That number used to
be around 1,000.
In Khartoum, we also met with former South
African President Thabo Mbeki, the Chair of the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel. He
helpfully outlined his efforts to facilitate negotiations
on outstanding CPA issues and the key post-

3

S/PV.6546

referendum arrangements. President Mbeki emphasized
that we are at the point at which these arrangements
must be resolved by parties at a senior political level.
The Council agreed and expressed its strong support
for his ongoing work.
We visited the Mayo Camp for internally
displaced persons on the outskirts of Khartoum, where
we heard the concerns of southerners about a lack of
protection, health care, education and job prospects.
Many have lived in the camp for decades, but all
expressed a keen desire to return to the South. These
hopes remain largely unrealized for that group in the
face of poverty, insufficient transportation and security
concerns. Some returnees have reportedly been
attacked as they journeyed back to the South.
We also met with Misseriya and Ngok Dinka
representatives during our time in the Sudan. We felt
that it was critical to hear first hand from both groups.
In each meeting, we emphasized the Council’s
commitment to implementing the CPA and to finding a
peaceful solution to the crisis in Abyei.
After Khartoum, the Council visited Wau in
Western Bahr el-Ghazal, South Sudan. We were moved
by the deep commitment of the staff at the Mary Help
Centre. Our tour of its health clinic, school and related
facilities underscored the lack of infrastructure
throughout the South. We were fortunate to have the
opportunity to speak with students and representatives
of civil society organizations. They described their
excitement about independence, as well as the vast
challenges still to be overcome. Several asked for the
international community’s help in demarcating the
North-South border and in creating a buffer zone
between northern and southern forces. We heard
repeatedly of the economic hardship caused by the
North’s recent closure of several border crossings.
Above all, we heard the expression of a strong
yearning for greater educational opportunities and
better health care.
From Wau, we went to Juba, where the Council
had a productive meeting with President Salva Kiir,
Vice-President Riek Mashar and the Government of
South Sudan’s ministers. We reiterated our view that
the fates and well-being of the peoples of the North
and South are intertwined, and urged both parties to
resume and intensify their dialogue to resolve the
status of Abyei and all remaining issues. We reiterated
our grave concern regarding events in Abyei, including

4

the Council’s condemnation of the attack undertaken
by the Sudan People’s Liberation Army on the United
Nations convoy on 19 May. President Kiir agreed that
stability in the South depends on a stable neighbour in
the North. He provided a broad overview of the
remaining CPA and post-referendum issues and, with
respect to Abyei, expressed regret to the United
Nations for the attack on its convoy.
The Council travelled by helicopter to Malau, a
small village in Jonglei state, to view a demonstration
by a newly formed livestock protection unit. The tour
of Malau underscored the magnitude of the challenges
facing the South, particularly with respect to internal
security. While the livestock protection unit is a worthy
initiative, the economic, social and political effects of
cattle-rustling and associated child abductions remain
daunting.
We later visited Jebel Kujur, a way station in Juba
operated by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, where vulnerable
returnees are provided with food, water and medical
services while the International Organization for
Migration arranges for their onward transport. We
spoke with recent returnees as they waited to load their
possessions onto buses to continue their journey to
other parts of the South. Nearly 341,000 southerners
living in the North returned to Southern Sudan and the
three areas between 30 October 2010 and 3 May 2011.
We made a point again of including civil society
groups in as much of our programme as possible. In
particular, we had a working lunch in Juba with a wide
range of representatives of non-governmental
organizations. Their work to provide services is
inspiring.
The Council also conducted an important initial
discussion regarding the successor mission to UNMIS,
which we are continuing in New York. Last week’s
consultations were another important step in this
ongoing assessment.
Throughout our time in the Sudan, we
emphasized the Council’s commitment to the full
implementation of the CPA and the need for the parties
to resolve outstanding issues before the South gains its
independence on 9 July. The crisis in Abyei only
reaffirms the urgency of meeting that deadline. We
urged the leaders with whom we met to act quickly to
reach the political compromises necessary to
facilitating two peaceful and successful States

11-36348

S/PV.6546

emerging next month, when we will welcome the
Republic of South Sudan to the international
community.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In the spirit of our close cooperation during
the mission itself, Ambassador Rice has just briefed the
Council in both our names.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
leg of the Security Council visit in Nairobi was jointly
chaired by Ambassador Sangqu and myself. We also
worked very cooperatively, but we both have
statements to make on this occasion. I will brief
colleagues on the meetings that the Council held with
the
Transitional
Federal
Institutions,
the
representatives
of
Galmudug,
Puntland
and
Somaliland, and members of Somali civil society.
Ambassador Sangqu will then brief on the meetings
that the Council had with African Union and
Intergovernmental
Authority
on
Development
colleagues and with the Kenyan Government.

transition. President Ahmed and Speaker Aden
expressed their views on the political transition, in
particular on the timing of elections — on which issue
they continued to differ. The Security Council mission
expressed grave concern about the impact that the
discord between the Transitional Federal Institutions
was having on the political process and the security
situation. It also underlined, in very clear and very
strong terms, that it expected the Government and
Parliament to reach agreement on the issue of elections
rapidly, and no later than the forthcoming consultative
meeting in Mogadishu.

I would first like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Mahiga and the staff of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia and the
United Nations Support Office for the African Union
Mission in Somalia, as well as the members of the
United Nations country team, for welcoming the
Council and supporting our visit. We are very
appreciative of the work that they are doing under
difficult circumstances.

Later that day, the Security Council met the
Presidents of Galmudug and Puntland and
representatives of Somaliland to discuss issues of
regional security. All highlighted the progress that their
Governments had made on security and development,
but stressed the threats that their people faced from
piracy and terrorism. They outlined the measures that
they had taken in response to those threats, including
the passing of an anti-piracy law in Puntland and the
conviction of 90 pirates in Somaliland. All called for
greater international assistance for their efforts in that
regard. The Security Council mission recognized the
need for the international community to support further
stabilization, peacebuilding and socio-economic
reconstruction in Somalia, in particular in areas of
relative stability, and stressed the need for a
comprehensive response to tackle piracy and its
underlying causes.

On 25 May, the Security Council held discussions
with the Transitional Federal President, the Prime
Minister and the Speaker of Parliament on the political
transition in Somalia. The Security Council mission
urged the Transitional Federal Government and the
Transitional Federal Parliament to engage fully,
constructively and without further delay in the
consultative
process
facilitated
by
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mahiga,
including the forthcoming meeting to be held in
Mogadishu; to focus on implementing reforms to build
their legitimacy, representativeness and credibility; and
to deliver tangible results on the completion of core
transitional tasks.

In its final meeting on 25 May, the Security
Council discussed a range of issues, including the
political transition and the security and humanitarian
situation in Somalia, with representatives of Somali
civil society. In setting out their priorities, the civil
society representatives highlighted the need for a new
constitution to be developed through an inclusive
process, for AMISOM to receive greater international
support, for humanitarian assistance to be delivered
more effectively and for Somalia to receive more longterm development assistance. Several speakers
stressed, however, that security was key, as the Somali
private sector could develop quickly in conditions of
greater security and political stability.

The Security Council mission underlined that it
was vital that the progress made by the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and Somali national
security forces in consolidating security and stability in
Mogadishu were reinforced by progress on the political

Ambassador Sangqu will now brief on the further
meetings that the Security Council held in Nairobi.

11-36348

Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): As Ambassador Sir
Mark Lyall Grant indicated, I co-led the Security

5

S/PV.6546

Council mission to Kenya. I wish to focus my briefing
on the meetings held with the Government of Kenya
and
with
the
African
Union
(AU),
the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS)
and the United Nations Support Office for the African
Union Mission in Somalia (UNSOA).
The Security Council met with the Vice-President
and Prime Minister of Kenya. The Vice-President, the
Honourable Stephen Kalonzo Musyoka, described the
situation in Somalia as the biggest threat to
international peace and security and placed the security
challenge of Somalia both in its international and
regional context and in its domestic context for Kenya.
Kenya shares a long border with Somalia and hosts the
Dadaab refugee camp, which is the largest such camp
in the world. The country also plays an important role
in the prosecution and imprisonment of pirates who
operate off the coast of Somalia. The Vice-President
expressed the view that the international community
had failed Somalia. In that regard, he expressed
concern that AMISOM was not receiving the requisite
support from either the international community or the
Security Council. The Vice-President echoed the AU’s
request for additional support and called on the
Security Council to strengthen AMISOM’s troop levels
to 20,000 and for the imposition of no-fly zones and a
naval blockade. Kenya also requested greater
assistance in its fight against piracy and in dealing with
the influx of refugees from Somalia.
With regard to political developments in Somalia,
the Vice-President expressed concern that the
Transitional Federal Government had not taken
advantage of the increased security, and stated that the
Somali political leadership should stop the personal infighting and place the interests of Somalia and Somali
people first. The concerns expressed by the VicePresident with regard to terrorism, piracy and support
for AMISOM were also echoed by the Prime Minister,
the Honourable Mr. Raila Odinga.
With regard to political developments in Somalia,
the Prime Minister stated that the environment for
conducting elections before August did not exist. He
proposed that clear timelines be developed for
finalizing the constitution-writing process. Both the
Vice-President and the Prime Minister cautioned
against fatigue by the international community when it
comes to Somalia. They appealed for effective

6

multilateral support for ensuring a lasting solution to
the Somali conflict.
In the joint meeting with the United Nations
country team heads, UNPOS, UNSOA and His
Excellency Mr. Jerry Rawlings, the African Union
High Representative, Ambassador Boubacar Diarra,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union, and AMISOM Force
Commander Major General Nathan Mugisha, the
members of the Security Council had the opportunity
to discuss end-of-transition and post-transition
arrangements.
Ambassador
Mahiga,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, updated the
meeting on the latest political developments and
stressed the need for the Security Council and the
international community to speak with one voice in
reinforcing the Council’s decision, as agreed in its
presidential statement of 11 May (S/PRST/2011/10*).
In that statement, the Council emphasized the
importance for the Transitional Federal Institutions
(TFIs) to reach agreement as soon as possible on the
holding of elections, and that no extension could be
considered without an agreement among the parties on
the date for the elections.
During the discussion on the activities of
AMISOM to maintain peace and security, the
AMISOM Force Commander updated the Council on
its recent military successes. The Force Commander
and the AU Special Representative also outlined some
of the main challenges besetting AMISOM. At the
political level, the continued political uncertainty
represents a major threat to security. At the operational
level, the effectiveness of AMISOM is severely
curtailed by, among other things, the lack of equipment
and logistical support, the lack of air and maritime
support, the lack of protective vehicles and the lack of
predictable financing. In addition, the lack of
agreement and predeployment training have also
delayed the deployment of AMISOM troops to the
authorized level of 12,000.
President Rawlings underlined the need for
coordination among IGAD, the AU and the Security
Council, as well as for the territorial integrity of
Somalia to be respected. In that connection, he
expressed the AU’s support for the need for
benchmarks and timeframes to be linked to any
extension for the TFIs, as well as the creation of the
monitoring mechanism for the implementation of such
benchmarks.

11-36348

S/PV.6546

The joint meeting with our IGAD and AU
partners and the Government of Kenya was most
useful. We left the meeting with a sense of convergence
among the international role players regarding the posttransition phase in Somalia.
During our interactions in Nairobi, we
experienced an overwhelming expression of support
and confidence across the board in the sterling
leadership of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Mahiga and his team in facilitating the
Somalia consultative conference to be held in
Mogadishu, as well as his collaborative efforts with
IGAD to facilitate agreement among the Somali
leadership on the post-transition phase.
In conclusion, these meetings underscore the
need for a comprehensive strategy for dealing with the
security, humanitarian and development challenges in
Somalia. I would like to express my gratitude to
Special Representative Mahiga and his team for their
tireless efforts to assist the people of Somalia in
securing a peaceful future. My gratitude also goes to

11-36348

the African Union and AMISOM for their continued
commitment and sacrifice in securing peace and
stability in Somalia. Finally, I wish to add my voice to
that of Ambassador Lyall Grant in thanking the United
Nations Secretariat, at the levels of both Headquarters
and at UNPOS and UNSOA, for facilitating and
arranging the programme in Nairobi. My thanks also
go to all those who assisted us during our visit.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the members of the Security Council, I should like to
thank all the ambassadors and the members of the
Security Council and the Secretariat who participated
in the mission for the way in which they discharged
their important responsibilities on the Council’s behalf.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. I now invite members to meet for brief
consultations.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

7
