United Nations

S/PV.6642

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6642nd meeting
Friday, 28 October 2011, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Messone
Mr. Berger
Mrs. Chowdhary
Mr. Salam
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Karev
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2011/598*)
Letter dated 20 October 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2011/654)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-56959 (E)

*1156959*

S/PV.6642

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/598*, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on women and peace and
security.

The meeting was called to order at 9.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2011/654, which contains a
letter dated 20 October 2011 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.

Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security (S/2011/598*)
Letter dated 20 October 2011 from the
Permanent Representative of Nigeria to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2011/654)

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I give him the
floor.

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Burundi, Canada,
Chile, Croatia, Estonia, Finland, Indonesia, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Morocco, Nepal, the Netherlands, Peru, the
Republic of Korea, Senegal, Solomon Islands, Spain,
the Sudan, Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine and Vanuatu to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Michelle
Bachelet,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Lazarous Kapambwe, President of the Economic
and Social Council, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Orzala
Ashraf Nemat, representing the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

2

begin

its

The Secretary-General: I commend Nigeria’s
choice of theme for today’s debate, and I thank the
President and Council members for agreeing to start
earlier than usual to allow me to participate in this very
important meeting.
The Security Council has emphasized repeatedly
that involving women in conflict prevention and
mediation is essential to building peace and reinforcing
the foundations of democracy. This understanding was
further acknowledged by the award of this year’s
Nobel Peace Prize to three extraordinary women
peacemakers: President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and
Leymah Gbowee of Liberia; and Tawakkul Karman of
Yemen. Their examples should inspire us to intensify
our efforts to ensure women’s full participation in all
conflict prevention and resolution processes.
The Executive Director of UN-Women, Michelle
Bachelet, will present my report on women, peace and
security (S/2011/598*). As it indicates, women’s
participation remains low both in official and observer
roles. This has to change, and I am determined that the
United Nations system should lead by example.
In the past year, the number of women leading
United
Nations
peacekeeping,
political
and
peacebuilding missions has risen from six to 33
missions. My Special Representatives for Children and
Armed Conflict and on Sexual Violence in Conflict are
female, too. The Department of Political Affairs has
increased the proportion of women candidates in its
roster of senior mediators, team members and thematic
experts to 35 per cent. A gender and inclusion expert is
now serving in the United Nations Standby Team of
Mediation Experts, and guidance will soon be issued
for UN mediators addressing conflict-related sexual
violence in ceasefire and peace agreements.

11-56959

S/PV.6642

In the field, our teams are supporting women so
they can engage in peacebuilding and conflict
prevention, management and reconciliation in West
Africa, Central Asia, the Balkans and South-East Asia.
In Afghanistan, our Mission continues to engage with
women’s networks struggling against the abuse of
women. We have also worked for the inclusion of
women in the High Peace Council and in provincial
peace councils. In Darfur, our Mission worked to
ensure that more than 30 per cent of civil society
representatives at the Doha peace negotiations were
women. The United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan is working with women parliamentarians
in that country to enhance the role of women in
conflict resolution, mitigation and peacebuilding.
In turn, I encourage Member States to increase
the number of women in senior positions in
international and regional conflict prevention. This
means more women in senior governance roles, at the
top of security institutions, and serving as diplomats.
The next few months will see international meetings to
support recovery in South Sudan, Somalia, Afghanistan
and Libya. Let us use these opportunities to ensure that
women’s voices are heard.
As members of the Council know, I have
presented a strategic framework to accelerate the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It has
targets and indicators for 2014 and 2020, and a
baseline is being assembled to track progress and
ensure accountability. I will welcome further
improvements in the flow of information to the Council
on progress in the situation of women in armed
conflict. I also urge Member States to do more —
including through additional funding — to implement
the strategic framework’s priorities and protect the
rights of women and girls.
While there has undoubtedly been progress, I am
deeply concerned about the persistence of serious
abuses of women’s rights. Last year at this time, I
lamented the mass rapes that had occurred in Walikale,
in the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
My alarm has not diminished. We must respond swiftly
and effectively to such crimes wherever and whenever
they occur. We must hold those responsible to account.
Let us make women’s dignity, safety and needs a
priority.
I am committed to working with the Council to
ensure the full implementation of resolution 1325

11-56959

(2000) and its related resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009), 1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010). I look forward to
hearing members’ proposals for bringing women from
the margins of conflict prevention and mediation into
the centre, where they belong.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I give the floor to Ms. Bachelet.
Ms. Bachelet: It is an honour to address the
Security Council and present the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2011/598*). I thank the Secretary-General for his
leadership. While noting progress, the report stresses
that much more can and must be done to fully engage
women in conflict resolution and mediation. As the
Security Council has emphasized, women’s full
participation in peacemaking is fundamental to
building peace and security.
This awareness was underlined by the award of
this year’s Nobel Peace Prize to three women
champions of peace, justice and democracy: President
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf of Liberia, her compatriot
Leymah Gbowee, and Tawakkul Karman of Yemen.
This is the first time that the Nobel Committee’s
citation included a direct reference to resolution 1325
(2000).
For each of the three Nobel Peace Prize winners
this year, there are thousands of women around the
world who persist in their pursuit of peace in spite of
massive obstacles. Their commitment to non-violence
and equality can stimulate breakthroughs where there
is resistance to change. It is our job — particularly in
view of the theme of this open debate today — to make
sure that doors are opened to women for conflict
prevention and mediation.
The report of the Secretary-General summarizes
progress in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) over
the past year in the four main areas of prevention,
participation, protection, and relief and recovery. A
strategic framework is included in this year’s report to
guide the United Nations implementation of the
resolution up to 2020 and to strengthen United Nations
system accountability.
In the area of conflict prevention, improvements
have been registered in coordinated efforts to prevent
conflict-related human rights abuses of women, from
increased prosecutions and improved information about

3

S/PV.6642

security threats to community vigilance efforts. During
the past year, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict has
displayed determination to tackle impunity and prevent
future attacks on women. The rise in prosecutions for
conflict-related sexual violence is having a deterrent
effect. To make further progress, the report notes that
the fight against impunity must be paired with efforts
to empower women so they can sustain the demand for
accountability. There is also a need to strengthen the
involvement of women and the inclusion of gender
perspectives in early-warning and community conflictprevention systems to make them more effective.
In the area of women’s participation in conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and recovery, the report
calls for further action to open doors and provide seats
to women in official and observer roles. As the topic of
this year’s open debate addresses women’s
participation in mediation, it is crucial that we consider
what can be done concretely about the low numbers of
women in mediation. The report calls for specific
measures and financial incentives by Member States to
include women in official delegations. Special envoys
and mediators are encouraged to meet with women
leaders and peace activists at the earliest possible
moment in mediation processes, to hold regular
consultations with women’s civil society groups as
standard operating procedure and to share information
from those meetings with the Security Council and the
Secretary-General.
In the area of protection, the report shows a
mixed picture. Missions in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Haiti and Darfur show that protection
patrols and community policing within and around
camps, as well as escorts for women during livelihood
activities such as gathering water and firewood, have
helped deter sexual and gender-based violence. Against
examples of good practice, however, there are
continuing reports of human rights violations that
reinforce the need to ensure respect for international
legal obligations and provide protection to women
against atrocities.
Finally, in the area of relief and recovery, the
report notes improved awareness and responses to the
needs of women and girls in past conflict-needs
assessments, basic service design and delivery, the
provision of temporary employment, and transitional
justice
programmes,
including
reparations
programmes. There are good examples to build on,

4

such as the cooperation between the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Food
Programme in Haiti, which created temporary
employment for 240,000 Haitians, 40 per cent of them
women.
Overall, the United Nations system is working to
increase
post-conflict
spending
on
women’s
empowerment and gender equality to a minimum of
15 per cent of post-conflict financing within a few
years. The Peacebuilding Fund recently issued a
$5 million gender-promotion initiative and a call for
proposals to support women’s participation in
peacebuilding, and has committed to doubling its
spending on women’s empowerment by 2012.
The report points out that a total of 32 countries
have produced national action plans on resolution 1325
(2000), with another 12 anticipating the finalization of
their plans soon. Several regional organizations have
adopted policies on women, peace and security. At the
United Nations, a set of tools have been developed to
better equip the United Nations system to ensure that
women engage in conflict prevention, resolution and
recovery, and that stronger protection environments are
built for women. UN-Women coordinated the
production of the strategic framework, which was
requested by the Security Council last year to guide the
United Nations implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in the next decade. It includes a monitoring
system and targets for effective coordination and more
concentrated impact.
During the past year, focus has been placed on
advancing coordination, accountability and coherence
in the implementation of women and peace and
security commitments through joint initiatives within
the United Nations system. I would like to
acknowledge and thank the Department of Political
Affairs for its collaboration on gender and mediation. I
also thank the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict for their
collaboration on early-warning and pre-deployment
troop training on the detection and prevention of sexual
violence in armed conflict.
Work is currently under way with the United
Nations Development Programme and the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights to improve
attention to crimes against women in transitional
justice systems, as well as with the Peacebuilding

11-56959

S/PV.6642

Support Office to strengthen responses to women’s
needs in post-conflict peacebuilding. In regions around
the world, recent “open day” country-level meetings
between women in civil society and senior United
Nations leaders have generated increased women’s
participation and contribution to peace and security.
Looking forward, the report concludes with
recommendations
for
the
Security
Council’s
consideration, addressing three broad areas. First, there
is a call for targeted actions in situations on the
Council’s agenda to build women’s engagement in
conflict resolution and recovery. Secondly, there is a
need to improve the information the Council receives
on women and peace and security. Thirdly, there is a
need for specific catalytic measures by Member States.
I would like to note the active role that the
Council has played in the last year. All three of the
Council’s missions in 2010 included consultations with
women’s groups. Recently, the Council produced new
or renewed mission mandates that call for specific
actions to ensure women’s inclusion. The report
encourages more systematic actions of that type. It also
suggests that more such briefings as the one I provided
in April would be of value to the Council in furthering
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Finally,
Member States are urged to develop national planning
instruments to advance women and peace and security
commitments, to devise practical measures to increase
the numbers of women in official and observer roles in
conflict resolution processes, to increase the number of
women in the security, governance and foreign service
sectors, and to invest in women’s post-conflict
recovery and justice needs and reparations.
In conclusion, I would like to quote a
representative of Afghan civil society who spoke at the
London Conference on Afghanistan last year. She said:
“women’s engagement is not an optional extra
component of stabilization and recovery; it is a
critical
precursor
to
success.
Women’s
empowerment will enable you to deliver longterm stability, democratization and development”.
If women’s participation is essential, not optional, why
is it often the missing ingredient in conflict prevention
and mediation? As we go forward, we need determined
leadership by all of us — the Security Council,
Member States, civil society and the United Nations —
to fully engage women in mediation and conflict

11-56959

prevention. This will advance peace and security and
deepen democracy around the world.
The President: I thank Ms. Bachelet for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kapambwe.
Mr. Kapambwe (Zambia), President of the
Economic and Social Council: Thank you, Madam
President for inviting me to address the Security
Council, in my capacity as President of the Economic
and Social Council, on the important issue of women,
peace and security.
The Security Council’s consideration of the
subject of women, peace and security 11 years ago,
which resulted in the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), was a landmark event in the recognition of
importance of women’s equal participation and full
involvement in the maintenance of peace and security,
including in conflict management, peacekeeping and
post-conflict peacebuilding. The engagement of the
Security Council on this issue built on the work done
by the Economic and Social Council on gender
equality and women’s empowerment. I wish to believe
that the Economic and Social Council was catalytic in
that regard by virtue of its historic adoption of agreed
conclusions on gender mainstreaming at its substantive
session in 1997 and of the annual follow-up that it has
carried out on the matter since then.
Those of us from the continent, which has
suffered so many conflicts, know and understand the
terrible impact of war. We also know that women and
girls suffer disproportionately — indirectly and
directly — as victims of violent conflict.
We also know that unless women are key players
in rebuilding their societies, including by playing key
roles in negotiating peace agreements, national
reconciliation and in relaunching economic recovery,
such efforts will not succeed. We also know that gender
equality and the empowerment of women are crosscutting issues for all development policies and, indeed,
should be a cornerstone for all policies, including for
peacemaking and peacebuilding.
The Economic and Social Council devoted its
2010 annual ministerial review last year to the
internationally agreed development goals and
commitments in regard to gender equality and the
empowerment of women. The ministerial declaration
adopted by the Council broke new ground in that, for

5

S/PV.6642

the first time, an intergovernmental body highlighted a
number of cross-cutting issues where action was
expected to positively enhance gender-related goals.
These cross-cutting issues are also relevant with regard
to the role of women in contributing to peacemaking
and peacebuilding.
I wish briefly to highlight some of these crosscutting issues, which are of particular relevance to this
debate and call for a common approach by the United
Nations system at the normative, programmatic and
operational levels.
First, discriminatory attitudes and gender
stereotypes, including in the education sector, must be
ended. This implies a strong advocacy role by the
United Nations for women’s human rights and the
elaboration of media strategies and tools for outreach,
in particular when these rights are violated or
threatened to be violated.
Secondly, all forms of discrimination and
violence against women and girls must be ended. The
United Nations system is called upon to develop a
more coherent response to this phenomenon, including
through the Secretary-General’s campaign on violence
against women. Special attention should also be paid to
the recognition that sexual violence can be both a cause
and a consequence of HIV/AIDS, as shown in conflict
settings where both are endemic.
Thirdly, the full empowerment of women must be
promoted, including equal participation of women and
men in decision-making. While the need to involve
women in peace processes has been extensively
addressed, progress is needed in all spheres of society
in order to strengthen the potential of women as agents
of change and their ongoing contribution to conflict
prevention.
Fourthly, it is important to address the critical
role of men and boys as an important component of
gender policies. Special initiatives should be taken to
mobilize civil-society organizations which are male-led
or working on male engagement for gender equity,
especially in conflict-prone countries, where women
and girls pay a terrible price.
Fifthly, promoting the full integration of women
into the formal economy is also particularly relevant in
post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding contexts,
where new opportunities should be offered to women
as part of the dividends of peace and as a way to

6

consolidate social peace. The development and security
pillars of the Organization are strongly interconnected
in this respect.
Sixthly, ensuring that women and girls with
disabilities are not subject to multiple and aggravated
forms of discrimination. Women with war-related
disabilities deserve particular attention and support.
The coordinated involvement of humanitarian,
development, health and protection actors should be
promoted by our intergovernmental bodies in order to
target this category of women and girls.
By highlighting these cross-cutting issues, I have
tried to propose a method for action through which the
United Nations can act more coherently and our work
can have increased impact. If we — the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and its Commission on the Status of
Women, as well as the Peacebuilding Commission —
act in concert and in an integrated way, we can help to
ensure progress in the many areas highlighted by the
indicators to track the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2011/598*) that is before us today.
As my predecessor suggested last year at the
tenth-anniversary celebration of the adoption of that
important resolution, the Economic and Social Council
could do its part by ensuring follow-up and monitoring
of the indicators developed by its Statistical
Commission on violence against women. Given its
strong experience in reviewing the achievement of
development objectives, particularly the Millennium
Development Goals, the Council could engage in this
task with real know-how and institutional backup from
the United Nations system at large and by its
subsidiary bodies.
The members of the Economic and Social
Council also commit to providing the requisite
guidance to the agencies, funds and programmes on
implementing the actions required to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), particularly those linked to the
coordination of humanitarian action, the transition
from relief to development and the promotion of the
active role and participation of women in sustainable
development.
The President: I thank Mr. Kapambwe for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat.

11-56959

S/PV.6642

Ms. Nemat: I would like to thank the
representative of Nigeria, the President of the Security
Council, for the invitation to speak here today. I have
the honour of speaking on behalf of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security, a coalition of
international civil society organizations that advocates
for the equal and full participation of women in all
efforts to maintain international peace and security.
Personally, as a long-time advocate for the rights of
women in Afghanistan, I am delighted to sit at this
high-level table.
As the Secretary-General has reported, we have
seen some progress in the implementation of the
women, peace and security agenda, particularly within
the United Nations system. The establishment of the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), once
adequately funded, and with advice from women’s
human rights defenders, offers Governments and civil
society new possibilities for effectively advancing
gender equality and the empowerment of women. The
increased number of references to women, peace and
security in United Nations reports and mandate
renewals by the Security Council are also most
welcome. So, too, is the Security Council’s adoption in
December 2010 of resolution 1960 (2010) on women,
peace and security, which focuses on strengthening the
prevention of, and the response to, conflict-related
sexual violence.
However, we also agree with the SecretaryGeneral that implementation remains far from even.
This is particularly true with respect to the
implementation of the provisions contained in
paragraph 1 of resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security, namely, the
“increased representation of women at all
decision-making levels in national, regional and
international institutions and mechanisms for the
prevention, management, and resolution of
conflict”.
The theme of this open debate is therefore
particularly timely. As I know from experience in
Afghanistan, women are crucial to all efforts to create
and maintain peace and security, and there are
examples from around the world — in Liberia, Kenya,
Sierra Leone, Nepal, Yemen, Guatemala, Northern
Ireland and in many others — that demonstrate that
women can be effective leaders in conflict prevention

11-56959

and in all aspects of peacebuilding. Nevertheless, we
continue to face political and practical barriers to
exercising our right to full and meaningful
participation in every peace process. It is particularly
frustrating that we are repeatedly marginalized, despite
the many national and international commitments
already made to including us at the decision-making
table.
There are three urgent steps that the United
Nations and its Member States must take: increasing
women’s role in the prevention of conflict; fulfilling
women’s right to participate fully in decisions
regarding the future of their countries, including in
peace processes; and ensuring that women’s equal
rights are fundamental to peace accords and all
political settlements.
As to the first step — increasing women’s role in
the prevention of conflict — the most effective way to
ensure peace and security for all is, of course, by
preventing conflict. Too often, however, national and
international efforts to do so ignore or, worse,
undermine the important work women are already
doing in their communities to address the root causes
of conflict.
In looking for ways to effectively prevent
conflict, national and international authorities should
ask us women what lessons we have already learned
and what recommendations we have for addressing the
root causes of conflict. And if we are to continue and
increase our work in conflict prevention, we need the
Council’s support in ensuring our safety and in
guaranteeing independent investigations into any
attacks on us, the effective control of arms transfers
and sustained funding for the development of our
programmes.
Secondly, in fulfilling women’s right to
participate fully in decisions regarding the future of
our countries, including in peace processes, it is vital
that women in conflict-affected areas be fully able to
exercise their equal right to shape their country’s
future. The United Nations and its Member States have
repeatedly expressed a commitment to that principle.
However, there has been little or no sense of urgency in
seeing that through. A commitment to women’s equal
and full participation requires our immediate
involvement in the drafting and negotiating of all peace
agreements and in the reform of relevant political,
security and justice institutions.

7

S/PV.6642

The next 12 months will see, for example, new
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
continuing political transition in the Middle East and
North Africa, and ongoing efforts to bring peace to
Afghanistan. In all such situations, we strongly urge
the Council to support the full participation of women
in constitutional and legislative reform, to support
women political candidates and to provide safe
environments for women to fully exercise their rights
in electoral processes.
The development of women’s leadership in peace
processes must be promoted at the local, national and
international levels. To ensure that the voices of the
most marginalized are heard in those processes, the
efforts of women’s groups to strengthen the links
between communities and negotiations at the national
level require greater investment and protection.
There is an important connection between highlevel political commitment and its translation to the
field or local level. For example, in Afghanistan, when
we asked for protection for women provincial
candidates, central authorities immediately agreed to
provide that protection. However, when the provincial
women candidates approached the local authorities, the
women and their security concerns were dismissed or
mocked, and they were told that such protection would
be a waste of resources.
Thirdly, as to ensuring that women’s equal rights
are fundamental to peace accords and all political
settlements, it has been frustrating to see that the full
recognition of all rights is still not consistently
included in peace talks and accords, and there appears
to be little sense of urgency to improve that. In too
many cases, as was the case in the Sudan in 2005, even
when women have been included in peace talks, their
rights have been neglected in the accords.
Today’s open debate is focused on the matter of
women’s security. When Afghan women are asked for
their definition of security, we use the expression
“amnyat wamasuniat”, by which we mean a
comprehensive feeling of safety in daily public and
social life. The success of peace agreements must be
gauged not just by the fact of their having been signed,
but by real, measurable security improvements for
women and for all members of the community.
Peace is a process, not an event. We look to
Member States, including members of the Security
Council, to ensure that women are consistently

8

appointed as mediators and negotiators and to ensure
that our rights are fundamental to peace processes and
outcomes. We have seen the difference women make
when they are involved in conflict prevention and
resolution, highlighted most recently in the awarding
of this year’s Nobel Peace Prize to women from
Liberia and Yemen for that work.
In conclusion, I would like emphasize that
women, especially in conflict-affected situations,
should not be considered victims; rather, we should be
duly recognized as powerful agents of change.
The President: I thank Ms. Nemat for her
statement.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Madam President, for holding this important open
debate on women, peace and security. I would like to
thank Michelle Bachelet, Lazarous Kapambwe and
Orzala Ashraf Nemat for their briefings this morning.
I would also particularly like to thank the
Secretary-General for the personal interest that he has
shown in this very important agenda item. Though we
support the comprehensive draft presidential statement
that will be adopted in this debate, I regret that because
of the opposition of some, we were unable to
unreservedly welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2011/598*).
The
United
Kingdom
does,
wholeheartedly, welcome that report.
Women have a central role in building stability in
countries at risk of conflict. Despite our collective
efforts, they remain underrepresented in peace
processes, in work to detect early signs of conflict, and
in mediation between warring parties. Some progress
has been made, but it is not until the participation of
women is included throughout the conflict cycle that a
durable and sustainable peace can be assured.
The Council, of course, may not be the best
model. With five female Permanent and Deputy
Permanent Representatives leaving the Council at the
end of this year, there may be only two female
Permanent and Deputy Permanent Representatives
around this table, both from the United States.
I have three points to make in today’s debate. The
first concerns support for the role of UN-Women and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on

11-56959

S/PV.6642

Sexual Violence in Conflict; the second addresses the
need to do more on conflict prevention and early
warning; and the third stresses the work that the United
Kingdom has taken forward through our national action
plan on women, peace and security.
Since taking up her position as Under-SecretaryGeneral and Executive Director of UN-Women,
Michelle Bachelet has passionately and effectively
promoted the women, peace and security agenda.
Supported by Special Representatives Radhika
Coomaraswamy and Margot Wallström, UN-Women
plays a vital role coordinating wider international
efforts to implement the full suite of United Nations
resolutions on women, peace and security. We
commend in particular, the efforts to improve
systematic reporting of progress through the
development of indicators and a strategic framework,
including the strategic framework of United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. In July, the
United Kingdom pledged $16 million over a two-year
period to UN-Women to support this important work.
We have a responsibility to use all the means
available to the United Nations to prevent conflict or
relapse into conflict. United Nations Member States
must be prepared to invest early to support countries
emerging from conflict and react rapidly should a crisis
arise. We must also continue to encourage the
development and deployment, at the invitation of
Governments, of United Nations mediation specialists
and special envoys. The United Kingdom welcomes the
Secretary-General’s call to increase the number of
senior female mediators.
I would like now to say a word on national action
plans. The United Kingdom believes that national
action plans provide an important opportunity for
Member States to make their own commitments to
reducing the impact of conflict on women and girls and
to promoting their inclusion in conflict resolution.
Over the past year, the United Kingdom has supported
global efforts to implement resolution 1325 (2000). In
Afghanistan, the United Kingdom has funded a full
range of measures undertaken by the Criminal Justice
Task Force to minimize gender-related barriers to
working in a high-profile law enforcement
environment. We also supported the efforts of the
Government of Nepal to develop its own national
action plan to generate, among many other things,
work to provide support for women and girls who have
been the victims of sexual violence. We encourage

11-56959

more countries to develop national action plans in
order to strengthen the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and associated resolutions.
The Arab Spring has shown that threats to
security, and to women and girls in particular, are
changing constantly. In our work on women and peace
and security, we must be flexible enough to respond to
new threats and challenges as they emerge. There are
sweeping and positive social and economic trends at
work. The Council needs to show that we are
responsive to those trends. On this as on other issues,
we should demonstrate that we are on the right side of
history. In particular, we must ensure that governing
structures that emerge in the aftermath of conflict do
not undermine women’s roles and participation in
society, and that the same opportunities are available to
men and women.
The United Kingdom believes that women’s
inclusion in political settlements and peace processes,
the protection of women and girls in situations of
armed violence, and women’s access to security and
justice are essential building blocks for more peaceful
and stable societies.
In a year when the Nobel Peace Prize was
awarded to three impressive women, we share the hope
of the Norwegian Nobel Committee that together we
can realize the great potential for democracy and peace
that women represent.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his remarks and for his report
(S/2011/598*). I also warmly welcome to the Council
Ambassador Lazarous Kapambwe, President of the
Economic and Social Council, and Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, Executive Director of UN-Women, and thank
them for their briefings. Let me also thank the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security for her intervention.
The women and peace and security agenda has
been a catalyst for greater civil society engagement
with the Council. This has enriched our work, giving
us access to new perspectives and information. In all
societies, there are real obstacles to women’s political
participation. Even in countries that have championed
women’s rights for decades, insidious barriers to true
equality persist. Today we gather to consider how to
advance further towards women’s full engagement in
conflict resolution and mediation.

9

S/PV.6642

The issue of women’s participation in peace talks
and other conflict-related negotiations certainly
contains more than an element of justice. It is also an
issue of effectiveness, which has a direct impact on the
success of conflict resolution and mediation efforts.
Women can bring to the table unique perspectives on
issues such as impunity, accountability, and justice. If
these perspectives are addressed in negotiations, the
chance of achieving a sustainable peace will be much
greater.
Brazil is encouraged by the progress made in
taking forward the indicators on women and peace and
security. We underline the importance of their close
adherence to the letter of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Indicators, however, are not an end in
themselves. They help us to gain a better understanding
of the situations and to assess progress made towards
our goals. In that context, we welcome and support the
strategic framework that the Secretary-General has
presented to guide the United Nations implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000).
Last month, during the general debate and at an
event on women’s political participation, President
Dilma Rousseff made it clear that the empowerment of
women is high on Brazil’s agenda. We have enacted
advanced legislation on the protection of women,
established specialized police stations for women’s
issues, and put women at the centre of our Bolsa
Familia cash transfer programme. These are valuable
experiences that we are ready to share with other
countries, including those emerging from conflict.
Brazil is deeply engaged in cooperation activities
with a number of countries emerging from conflict. In
Brazil, the participation of women in the decisionmaking processes that deal with those issues has been
steadily increasing, in keeping with the broad trend
observed in Brazilian politics more generally, both in
the executive and legislative branches. Today, nearly a
third of the ministers in President Dilma’s Cabinet are
women, including many of those charged with core
Government responsibilities. Women have also moved
to the forefront of Brazilian diplomacy, occupying
more and higher-level postings in our foreign service.
I would like to conclude by stressing a crucial
point. The Council’s support to empowering women in
conflict and post-conflict situations is very important.
However, it cannot stand on its own. The effective and
sustainable political participation of women depends

10

on social inclusion and economic opportunity. The
work of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and UN-Women in this regard requires
our full support if we are to achieve the goals of the
women and peace and security agenda.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation would
like to express its sincere appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral, Under-Secretary-General Michelle Bachelet,
Ambassador Lazarous Kapambwe in his capacity as
President of the Economic and Social Council, and
Ms. Nemat, speaking on behalf of the NGO Working
Group On Women, Peace and Security, for their
statements. We also appreciate the presence of the
Deputy Secretary-General in this debate.
South Africa welcomes the convening of this
important meeting. The adoption of the historic
resolution 1325 (2000) 11 years ago was a significant
milestone in the recognition of the role that women can
play in the maintenance of international peace and
security, particularly in decision-making processes
relating to conflict prevention and resolution. In light
of that achievement, South Africa is encouraged by the
various frameworks that have been created to ensure
the implementation of that resolution, in particular the
creation of UN-Women under the leadership of
Ms. Michele Bachelet.
Those positive developments are pivotal for
advancing the agenda of women, peace and security. It
will allow for this important issue to be consistently
placed at the top of the agenda of the United Nations
system, and lead to increased coordination in policy
programming for women and girls within the United
Nations system.
Indeed, inroads have been made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2011/598*). However, let us be clear that gaps
remain in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), as well as glaring disparities pertaining to the
role of women in preventive diplomacy, formal peace
processes and mediation. We therefore welcome the
institutional and policy frameworks elaborated in the
Secretary-General’s report, in particular his sevenpoint action plan for gender-responsive peacebuilding,
which seeks to establish standard operating procedures
for gender issues in the United Nations, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding architecture.

11-56959

S/PV.6642

We
further
welcome
the
practical
recommendations and the strategic results framework
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report, which
constitute a concrete proposal to include women in
conflict prevention and mediation. In particular, we
wish to highlight the importance of nominating women
to lead negotiation processes and increasing the
number of women in the foreign services and security
establishments.
Equally, the proposal to increase the number of
women police and troops in United Nations missions is
highly desirable in addressing the specific needs of
women in conflict and post-conflict countries.
In that regard, South Africa is among the States
with the highest representation of women across all
spheres of Government. Women are also at the helm of
ministries in the fields of international relations,
cooperation and defence. In the area of peacekeeping,
we have deployed gender mainstreaming officers in
positions of command in peacekeeping missions to
ensure that issues related to women are addressed. In
addition, we are one of the top three troop-contributing
countries with the largest contingent of women in
peacekeeping missions.
In the recent past, South African women held the
position of Deputy Police Commissioner in the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. We
believe that the presence of women in peacekeeping
missions positively benefits local women and girls,
including other vulnerable groups in countries in, and
emerging from, conflict.
Based on its past experience, South Africa is
conscious of the centrality of women as peacemakers
and facilitators in political processes and peacebuilding
initiatives, particularly at the grass-roots level. Women
at all levels of society have a role to play in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding as agents of change. In
that regard, South African Women in Dialogue has
been actively engaged with women’s organizations in
countries such as Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Sudan in sharing experiences and
lessons learned with women in States emerging from
conflict.
South Africa continues to contribute to
popularizing the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) through structures such as the Southern African
Development Community, the African Union and the
Pan-African Women’s Organization. To that end, South

11-56959

Africa recently held the Progressive Women’s
Movement of South Africa Summit on Women, Peace
and Security in May.
Indeed, in congratulating the three outstanding
women who were jointly awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize this year, President Johnson-Sirleaf of Liberia,
her compatriot Ms. Leymah Gbowee and Ms. Tawakkul
Karman of Yemen, President Jacob Zuma underscored
the important contribution that women continue to play
in their ongoing struggle for women’s rights, dignity,
peace and development all over the world. The vast
majority of women are not involved in creating wars,
but they remain the primary victims of war and
conflict. Long after the guns have ceased blazing, their
children and families continue to suffer the devastating
effects of the aftermath of conflict. Women are the
ones left to pick up the pieces and to rebuild families
and their communities.
Women also suffer disproportionately from
poverty. An important dimension in advancing peace
and preventing conflict is to ensure greater and more
equitable economic justice and development. Despite
advances in positioning women to assume leadership
roles in conflict prevention and mediation, those
advances will be meaningless if the root causes of
conflict, which are by and large developmental in
nature, are not sufficiently addressed.
In conclusion, as members of the Security
Council, we should encourage the incorporation of a
gender perspective of preventative diplomacy
initiatives in our mandate renewals. That could be
achieved, first, through the effective utilization of
women as mediators, including through the good
offices of the Secretary-General; secondly, by
increasing
the
number
of
women
Special
Representatives, thirdly, by making the utmost use of
the gender expertise resident in UN-Women; and
fourthly, by incorporating the gender perspective in the
work of Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa.
Finally, South Africa welcomes the adoption of
the draft presidential statement before us.
Mrs. Chowdhary (India): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for organizing this
open debate on the important theme of “Women’s
participation and role in conflict prevention and
mediation” as part of our ongoing deliberations on
women and peace and security.

11

S/PV.6642

We have before us the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/598*), and have been briefed by SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, Executive Director of
UN-Women Ms. Michelle Bachelet, President of the
Economic and Social Council Ambassador Lazarous
Kapambwe, and non-governmental organization
representative Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat. I would like
to thank them for their comprehensive briefings.
It also needs to be recognized that the issue of
women and peace and security has several crosscutting and multidimensional implications. Therefore,
the need for discussing such issues in the universal
forum,
the
General
Assembly,
cannot
be
overemphasized.
Gender equality and the empowerment of women
remain the key focus area of social development and
distributive justice globally. Empowering women
politically, economically, educationally and legally has
been a major objective of the Government of India. We
are proud of the fact that India gave women equal
voting rights more than 60 years ago, at the time of our
independence. In 1992, we amended our Constitution
and reserved 33 per cent of the seats for women in
local- and district-level governance institutions and
bodies. That was subsequently raised to 50 per cent in
2009. Currently, we have more than 1.5 million elected
women representatives in local bodies. That is the
biggest mobilization of women worldwide in politics at
the local Government and the rural and district levels.
The five-year plans formulated by the
Government of India for economic development
recognize the important role of women as agents of
sustained socio-economic growth and change by
incorporating proposals on gender empowerment.
Women’s empowerment is essential to promote overall
sustainable development. That is also true in conflict
situations. We believe that the participation of women
in all stages of the peace process — conflict
prevention, peace negotiations, peacekeeping and
post-conflict reconstruction — is essential for lasting
peace and security.
Key aspects of post-conflict reconstruction, such
as economic recovery, social cohesion and political
legitimacy, all require the active engagement of
women. Resolution 1325 (2000) was a seminal piece of
international legislation in our efforts on women and
peace and security. The United Nations, Member States
and civil society have made steady and noticeable

12

efforts in implementing the resolution. However, the
results remain mixed, with important gaps remaining in
fully realizing its provisions.
The United Nations system has come up with a
comprehensive set of indicators to assess progress in
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We have
certainly taken note of those indicators. We believe that
such indicators and benchmarks need to be further
discussed and conceptually developed as part of
broader intergovernmental consultations before their
eventual adoption. One must also be cognizant of the
difficulty in obtaining credible and verifiable data, in
particular from conflict situations.
The United Nations is being asked to do more
with regard to women and peace and security,
including through the mainstreaming of the gender
perspective in the United Nations system and United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We commend the work
of the Secretary-General in mainstreaming the gender
perspective in the United Nations recruitment process.
The number of women at the senior decision-making
level and the participation of women in mission
planning, peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding
efforts have increased. Nonetheless, the numbers still
remain very low.
As the Secretary-General’s report itself points
out, the United Nations presence in conflict and postconflict situations — field missions and country
teams — must achieve greater coherence and
coordination in addressing women and peace and
security issues, including through the timely provision
of targeted gender expertise.
The appointments of a Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and a number of women special envoys are also
positive developments. It is important that special
representatives work in a coordinated manner among
themselves and with other United Nations bodies. That
is not only to ensure optimal utilization of resources
and avoidance of duplication but also to promote
greater coherence.
We welcome the efforts of UN-Women to
significantly boost United Nations action on the
empowerment of women and gender equality, including
in the area of women and peace and security. Its efforts
need to be supported by all in the United Nations
system and by the Member States. The Council, for its

11-56959

S/PV.6642

part, must make available the resources that are
required to implement those mandates.
We agree with all those who support increased
deployment of female military and police personnel in
United Nations peacekeeping operations and the
provision to all military and police personnel of
appropriate training to effectively discharge their
responsibilities. India was the first country to deploy
an all-female peacekeeping unit, 100 troops in Liberia
in 2007. We have offered to contribute more such units.
India is the largest contributor of troops in United
Nations history. We are very proud of the exemplary
record of our peacekeepers, both men and women, in
the protection of women, children and the needy in
conflict situations.
The promotion and protection of the human rights
of women and girls in armed conflict continue to pose
a pressing challenge. The Council has in previous
resolutions recognized the specific vulnerability of
women during conflicts and that they bear a
disproportionate brunt of armed conflict, even though
they are in most cases not directly engaged in combat.
There should be zero tolerance for gender-based
violence, and incidents of gender-based violence must
be unequivocally condemned. All cases of genderbased violence in an armed conflict, whether
perpetrated by parties to the conflict, peacekeeping
personnel or humanitarian actors, must be promptly
investigated and the perpetrators prosecuted.
The international community must take all
necessary steps to ensure the security of women and
children. We also see civil society and local
communities as valued partners in this endeavour, and
we look forward to working with them to take this
agenda forward.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm India’s
commitment to positively contributing to United
Nations efforts in protecting vulnerable sectors,
including women and children, in conflict and
post-conflict situations. I also call upon the
international community to enhance cooperation by
providing resources and sharing experience and
expertise to build capacity in this area.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): Madam
President, my delegation welcomes your presiding over
our work as the Security Council holds its annual
thematic debate on women and peace and security. We
commend your initiative in organizing it.

11-56959

We thank the Secretary-General, UnderSecretary-General Bachelet, Ambassador Lazarous
Kapambwe of the Economic and Social Council, and
Ms. Nemat for their briefings. We welcome the
presence of Ms. Chowdhary, of the Parliament of India.
As members know, two years ago Gabon
underwent a political transition that was outstandingly
led by two women, one the President of the Senate and
the other the President of the Constitutional Court.
When Ali Bongo Ondimba, President of the Gabonese
Republic, addressed the sixty-sixth session of the
General Assembly, he recalled the high priority Gabon
gives to the effective participation of women in
mediation and conflict prevention (see A/66/PV.16).
A few weeks ago, we welcomed the awarding of
the Nobel Peace Prize to three women: Mrs. Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf, President of Liberia, Ms. Leymah
Gbowee, Liberian activist, and Ms. Tawakkul Karman,
Yemeni activist. This year, those three women clearly
embody the very issue we are discussing.
The Security Council reached a consensus more
than a decade ago in recognizing, through the adoption
on 31 October 2000 of resolution 1325 (2000), the
decisive role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding. In its
presidential statement S/PRST/2001/31, the Council
made commitments on this issue. In doing so, it
established that without the effective participation of
women in peace processes, our efforts to maintain
international peace and security would always be
incomplete and would yield diminished results.
In the matter under discussion, three areas seem
to us essential for coherent and fruitful action. First, we
must strengthen our normative framework at the
international, regional and national levels. Secondly,
we must work to strengthen capacities, especially
through peacekeeping missions and in the post-conflict
peacebuilding and reconstruction phase. Finally, we
must establish a stronger link between the protection of
women and children and the prevention of armed
conflict by focusing on the root causes of those
conflicts.
We note that much progress has been made in
developing a normative framework to strengthen the
action of the international community. Resolution 1325
(2000) is the foundation of that structure. That
foundation has expanded and now forms a body with
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and

13

S/PV.6642

1960 (2010). Together, those resolutions offer the
Council and the international community as a whole a
vast body of values and principles that can guide our
action in matters of participation, protection, capacitybuilding and the fight against impunity, but also in the
rehabilitation and reintegration of women in society in
the context of peacebuilding.
We welcome the fact that a majority of Security
Council resolutions focus particular attention on the
question of women’s effective participation. That
fortunate trend should be pursued so that it becomes an
essential part of the work of the Council and of the
United Nations.
In light of the persistent realities in conflict
situations, especially the continuing violence against
women, we need a renewed commitment on the part of
all actors, first and foremost States, but also regional
governmental
institutions
and
civil
society
organizations. We must be more vigilant about putting
into practice the relevant recommendations in the
Council resolutions. We must also be more mindful of
the Secretary-General’s recommendations aimed at
greater integration of women in prevention, mediation
and peacebuilding in post-conflict situations.
The obstacles to women taking a broader role are
often cultural in nature. We believe that this aspect can
be addressed in the Secretary-General’s report devoted
to the high-level meeting scheduled for 2015. We also
encourage UN-Women to work more on overcoming
cultural obstacles that can hinder peacebuilding.
Greater action by UN-Women, particularly in Africa,
can be decisive. From that point of view, a crucial task
is finalizing work on the indicators likely to allow us to
assess progress but also, above all, measure the
impediments to our action. We would like to welcome
here the efforts made by the Secretary-General to
increase the number of women who hold positions of
senior responsibility in coordinating the Organization’s
efforts to promote peace and security, both at the
Secretariat and in peacekeeping missions.
An important aspect of our debate is the link
between preventive diplomacy and the Council’s
initiatives to promote the role of women in peace
processes. More than 10 years of continued efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) have revealed the
limits of a reactive approach. Gabon supports a more
comprehensive approach aimed at incorporating
conflict prevention as a fundamental part of an

14

effective strategy to protect women and young girls
from the agony of conflict and war. Through such a
strategy, women would have leading roles, which of
course entails women playing a part in the policy
sphere in peacetime so that they can be fully involved
in the different stages of mediation and political
negotiation in times of crisis. In this regard, regional
and subregional organizations, namely African
organizations, should also adopt such a strategy. The
African Union’s incorporation of gender parity in the
highest positions of its hierarchy is a strong indication
of a move in that direction.
I would like to conclude by stressing that
promoting more effective political participation by
women at the level of the African continent to make
them effective agents in prevention and peacebuilding
efforts requires a greater contribution from all regional,
multilateral and even bilateral players. Setting up
programmes devoted to capacity-building for women
and young girls, including those aimed at their socioeconomic empowerment, are crucial, especially in the
reconstruction and peacebuilding phase. We also
believe that the various entities of the United Nations
system and regional and international financial
institutions, including the World Bank, must also play a
dominant role in this area.
We would like to express our full support for the
draft presidential statement that will be adopted at the
end of our debate.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, first of all, to thank the Secretary-General
for his report of 29 September (S/2011/598*) and his
briefing this morning to the Council. We would also
thank Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Mr. Lazarous Kapambwe
and Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat for their briefings, which
provided a serious and complete framework for our
debate.
Colombia appreciates the important role that is
given in this report to promoting cooperation
mechanisms, constructive dialogue and effective
support for efforts being made in different countries, as
well as the contributions from the General Assembly
aimed at strengthening the national capacities of States
in preventing and addressing all forms of violence
against women.
We thank Ms. Michelle Bachelet, UnderSecretary-General for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, for her briefing and for the

11-56959

S/PV.6642

contributions of UN-Women, which help to strengthen
coordination and cooperation in the implementation of
mandates relevant to women, peace and security. I
assure Ms. Bachelet of our support as she fulfils her
important mandate.
We also recognize the importance of the concept
note (S/2011/654, annex) prepared by the delegation of
Nigeria, where proper emphasis is placed on the
participation and role of women in conflict prevention
and mediation.
We agree with the Secretary-General that
UN-Women constitutes the cornerstone for articulating
the mandates of the United Nations system in
promoting gender equality and the empowerment of
women. In this context, we emphasize the role that
broad and inclusive intergovernmental consultations
have in evaluating the gender architecture and the
advancement of women, as well as the agreements
between States on models and practices adopted in that
area. All of that is an essential element for progress in
improving national capacity to generate greater
participation of women in conflict prevention and
mediation.
The appointment of Ms. Margot Wallström as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict has contributed to
monitoring the implementation of respective
resolutions within their scope of competence as
established by the Security Council.
We also emphasize the importance of the
reference in the Secretary-General’s report to relief and
recovery, as well as the actions being taken with regard
to gender mainstreaming in the post-conflict phase,
including job creation, education policies, life skills
training, opportunities and support for children, access
to basic services in health, education and legal support,
and the provision of basic public services, such as
water and sanitation. We emphasize that this represents
an enormous challenge for States.
I would like to highlight the fact that the report of
the Secretary-General notes progress made in
Colombia in connection with the four aspects of
resolution
1325
(2000),
namely,
prevention,
participation, protection and relief and recovery. I think
that it is also important to highlight other important
actions that are being pursued in these areas in my
country on the basis of our conviction that the
phenomenon of violence against women includes

11-56959

domestic violence, violence committed in the context
of the community and violence caused by illegal armed
groups.
In terms of prevention, Colombia’s armed forces
have incorporated into their training programmes
courses in the prevention of gender-based violence,
sexual violence, sexual and reproductive health, sexual
and reproductive rights and gender equality.
With regard to participation, I should also like to
mention initiatives such as the creation of women’s
community councils, indigenous women’s regional
laboratories and community radio programming
boards. These are tools designed to promote the
involvement of women in public policies, support
leaders to advance the implementation of such policies,
sustain a dialogue with this sector and with women’s
social organizations, and promote participatory
processes at regional, departmental and municipal
levels.
There has been legislation in place in this area
since 1992, recently updated by a law in 2011 that
provides for and promotes the participation of women
in the exercise of legislative policy work in the
Congress, as well as in the executive and judicial
branches. There are now 37 women in the Colombian
parliament. The highest positions in the country’s
public prosecutors’ and comptrollers’ offices are held
by women. In the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, the
Minister and two deputy ministers are women, from
whom I receive orders — I mean, instructions — every
day.
All of that reflects the efforts being made by the
Government of Colombia to adopt policies designed to
include women at all stages of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding while eliminating discrimination against
women and promoting their economic, political and
social empowerment, as well as their more active
participation in development, both in decision-making
and in enjoying the benefits that development brings.
Our priority is the incorporation of gender
perspectives into our major national policies, including
development plans, strategies for poverty eradication
and the promotion of employment and entrepreneurial
culture, among others. We place particular emphasis on
action related to protecting women against all forms of
violence, as well as for protecting those in particularly
vulnerable situations, such as indigenous women,

15

S/PV.6642

migrant women, trafficked women and girls, and
women in rural areas, among others.
As a member of the Commission on the Status of
Women and of the Group of Friends of 1325, Colombia
reaffirms its support for full implementation of that
resolution. We stress the importance of coordinated and
consistent support of the United Nations system for
national initiatives aimed at building the capacity to
address the security needs, recovery and development
of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict.
Finally, we would like to reiterate that approaches
to human rights that focus exclusively on monitoring
mechanisms do not contribute to achieving sustainable
solutions, unlike mechanisms for cooperation,
constructive dialogue and effective support for
countries, which do indeed genuinely contribute to
effective solutions.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to commend you, Madam President, for convening
this meeting. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and Under-Secretary-General Michelle
Bachelet for their briefings. I also thank Ambassador
Lazarous Kapambwe and Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat for
their remarks.
The commemoration of the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000) last year resulted in a number
of renewed commitments and achievements on the part
of Member States in implementing that resolution and
others on women and peace and security. This year has
also seen numerous actions within the United Nations
and by Member States in joint efforts to implement the
resolution and advance women’s participation in peace
and security, with particular emphasis on preventive
diplomacy, mediation efforts, conflict prevention and
peacebuilding.
We welcome the report before us (S/2011/598*).
The analysis of indicators it contains should provide
valuable benchmarks for further planning and act as a
road map. We also welcome the creation of the
strategic results framework as an important tool for
advancing implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and all other relevant resolutions on women and peace
and security. Its main objectives include increasing
consistency in decision-making processes among
different United Nations bodies within their respective
mandates and in capacity-building and cooperation
with Member States, regional organizations and other
partners, such as civil society.

16

Since the creation of UN-Women, greater
coordination and coherence in policy and programming
for women and girls are evident. We therefore consider
that briefings of the Under-Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UN-Women should continue so
as to facilitate a concerted and coordinated United
Nations approach.
Conflict and post-conflict situations often bring
violence and deprivation of rights. Addressing conflictrelated or sexual and gender-based violence, and
combating various abuses of women and girls’ rights,
is an integral part of the women and peace and security
agenda. In that context, we emphasize the importance
of bringing those responsible for crimes against women
and girls to justice. A range of existing legal and
reconciliation mechanisms should be used at the
national or international level, while support for
national institutions and institutional reforms must be
an integral part of this process.
Ensuring that women are represented and
participate in decision-making forums, institutions and
mechanisms concerned with preventing and resolving
conflict and with peacebuilding; that they are included
in peace agreement negotiations and implementation;
and that enabling conditions for women peacemakers
and peacekeepers are created requires clear guidelines
and support on the part of the United Nations and
national authorities. Member States and regional and
subregional organizations should invest more in
strengthening the capacity of women’s organizations.
Such organizations should be provided with support for
their conflict-prevention and resolution efforts and
consulted more on local women’s peace initiatives.
We believe that countries should work on
adopting national action plans or strategies in order to
integrate issues of woman and peace and security, and
gender issues, into their national policies and create a
broader basis for implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). In that regard, it is also important to increase
State institutions and services’ knowledge and capacity
in order to implement the resolution and collaborate
effectively with international organizations and civil
society. Here, I recall that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
adopted both a national action plan for the resolution’s
implementation and a gender action plan. Those two
documents are crucial to streamlining activities related
to the woman and peace and security agenda in
relevant sectors and to accelerating the resolution’s
implementation in our country.

11-56959

S/PV.6642

We firmly believe that women should be involved
in the policymaking and post-conflict planning and
programming processes. It is also important to increase
the number of gender experts on the roster.
Furthermore, the various implementation gaps should
be addressed more systematically, including through
improved coordination and accountability for results.
Clarity, comparability and consistency are necessary in
order to monitor the impact of various efforts on
women’s empowerment and their rights.
The role of the United Nations is to support
Member States in this multifaceted process. It is
important to create useful guidelines adapted to
specific country situations, and to support the
development of activities related to women and peace
and security in the context of existing international
obligations, rooted in national legislation.
The use of indicators can contribute to the
efficient and effective monitoring and reporting of
results and data collection and to identifying gaps or
obstacles during this process in a coordinated manner.
This is particularly important when we consider that
successful implementation depends on the ability to
clearly and distinctly measure the progress of our joint
endeavours in the area of women and peace and
security.
Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina firmly believes
that there can be no lasting peace and security without
the full participation of women in every aspect and at
every stage of peacekeeping and peacebuilding, as well
as in conflict-prevention activities. We therefore
remain committed to expanding our support for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), other
relevant resolutions, and future efforts of the Security
Council on this issue.
Mr. Berger (Germany): I thank you, Madam
President, for having organized today’s debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General, Ms. Bachelet, Mr. Kapambwe and
Ms. Nemat for their insightful remarks.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
made by Head of the Delegation of the European
Union.
As a member of the Group of Friends of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), Germany has always
attached great importance to all aspects of the issue of
women and peace and security, and particularly to that
of turning words into action, 10 years after the

11-56959

adoption of that groundbreaking resolution. We
therefore applaud the timely decision of the Nobel
Prize Committee to honour three courageous and
inspirational women who are exemplary models of how
women can make a difference.
Germany heartily welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s comprehensive report (S/2011/598*) and the
analysis and recommendations it contains, including
the strategic framework and the first set of indicators
set out.
The draft presidential statement to be adopted
today once again clearly recognizes women’s
significant role in prevention, conflict resolution and
post-conflict rebuilding. Including women in peace
initiatives is not a benevolent act; we see it as a key
requirement for any lasting, sustainable peace.
Women’s participation will strengthen our capacity to
resolve conflict and to build security and justice
systems that protect the human rights of all. However,
gaps still exist between stated commitments and the
situation on the ground. Women remain severely
underrepresented in peace negotiations and are often
marginalized in efforts to build sustainable peace.
What can be done to close this gap? First, at the
United Nations level, we commend UN-Women for its
work in leading mainstreaming efforts to include,
wherever possible, a gender perspective in United
Nations activities, and in measuring progress made in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) against the
indicators. It is crucial to constantly strive to place
more women in leading positions, including within the
United Nations, and to give women a voice during
every stage of a peace process. There is a clear link
between women’s participation in the early stages of
preventive diplomacy, peacemaking or peacebuilding
and their presence in implementation mechanisms.
Secondly, at the level of the European Union and
NATO, both within the European Common Foreign and
Security Policy and NATO, the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) in relation to conflict resolution
has progressed. Forces are better informed on gender
issues, and we are beginning to see the benefits of a
new awareness and understanding where it matters —
in the communities where soldiers are deployed.
Female military medical staff serving in field hospitals
lower the barriers to local women seeking treatment
and female soldiers gaining better access to local
women.

17

S/PV.6642

Thirdly, with regard to the national level, last
year the German Government presented its third report
to Parliament on its implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). It contains, inter alia, projects on gender
training, including for United Nations peacekeepers,
the prevention of sexual violence, and enabling
women’s participation in peace processes and their
unhindered access to justice. A special focus is on
support
for
women’s
organizations
and
non-governmental organizations in promoting women’s
empowerment.
In addition, the German Government has set up
action plans on gender in development aid programmes
and on civilian crisis prevention. Germany implements
the indicators adopted by the European Union in 2010.
Fourthly and last, the Security Council could do
more to systematically integrate women, peace and
security issues into its daily work, including when
mandating or renewing United Nations missions.
Envoys and special representatives should address
those issues, where relevant, in their briefings to the
Council.
I would like to conclude by expressing
Germany’s support for the draft presidential statement
to be adopted today.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
you, Madam President, for having organized this
debate and for your able leadership during your
presidency. I should also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Deputy Secretary-General for their
participation today, and Executive Director Bachelet
and President of the Economic and Social Council,
Ambassador Kapambwe for their informative briefings.
I welcome to the Council Orzala Ashraf Nemat from
the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security, and thank her for her helpful remarks on the
progress made and challenges faced by women in
conflict
situations. The
United
States
also
wholeheartedly welcomes the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2011/598*).
The awarding of this year’s Nobel Peace Prize to
Liberian President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, Yemeni
activist Tawakkul Karman and Liberian peace activist
Leymah Roberta Gbowee is recognition of the role that
women can play in helping to resolve conflicts. All
three women are excellent examples of the difference
that women can make when given the opportunity to
make decisions about the future of their countries.

18

They have had significant impact on their societies,
and we congratulate them.
Over the past several years, the United Nations
and its Member States have taken important steps to
increase women’s participation in issues related to
peace and security. We established UN-Women and the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Through the
Council’s work, we have defined what we expect of
parties to conflict with respect to the protection of
women, and we have established a framework to track
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Many
States, including my country, are developing national
action plans to guide their engagement on issues of
women, peace and security.
But all this is just a beginning. We must ensure
that norms and institutional frameworks are turned into
action. What counts now is implementation and
delivering results.
The
Secretary-General’s
report
provides
examples of both real progress and the challenges
ahead of us. We welcome the initiative undertaken by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs to include gender
components, advisers and focal points on this issue in
all field missions. We are pleased that a gender and
mediation specialist has been appointed to the United
Nations Standby Team of Mediation Experts to ensure
that women’s concerns are addressed in conflict
prevention and resolution, and not just towards the end
of a conflict, as is often the case. And we are
encouraged that a growing number of reports to the
Security Council, as well as mission mandate renewal
resolutions, address issues related to women in conflict
and post-conflict situations.
However, as the Secretary-General notes, “mere
reference to women and peace and security resolutions
is not enough” (S/2011/598*, para. 74 (a)). We must
give United Nations entities strong support to
implement and deliver results for gender equality.
More can be done to ensure that the personnel of
United Nations missions are adequately prepared to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) and support it in
their efforts. Both predeployment training and missionwide strategies on the protection of civilians, including
the needs of vulnerable groups such as women and
girls, need to be improved.

11-56959

S/PV.6642

Gaps also remain in ensuring that those serving in
United Nations missions are held accountable for their
performance, particularly in the case sexual
exploitation and abuse. As the Secretary-General
acknowledges, the United Nations still lacks a system
that enables complaints of sexual exploitation and
abuse to be reported safely. The United Nations needs
to lead by example by actively enforcing the zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations peacekeepers. Conflict-related sexual
violence must be addressed from the very start in peace
processes, and more women should be included as
mediators and members of negotiating teams.
The United States is developing a national action
plan to accelerate the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) across our Government and with partners
in civil society. The plan will be centred on the four
pillars of resolution 1325 (2000): participation,
prevention, protection, and relief and recovery.
In the participation pillar, the United States has
supported the inclusion of Afghan women in the High
Peace Council and in follow-on shuras and
negotiations in the reintegration and reconciliation
process at the local level. We have also awarded
$16.9 million in direct grants to Afghan womenfocused non-governmental organizations.
In the protection pillar, the United States has
contributed roughly $2 million to the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. We have provided
numerous courses to foreign militaries on human
rights, the prevention of gender-based violence and
sexual exploitation, and the protection of civilians.
In the prevention pillar, the United States has
developed multiple programmes that seek to address
the root causes of conflict, including a $26-million
annual reconciliation programme that supports
innovative programming in conflict-affected countries,
and includes gender analysis.
In the relief and recovery pillar, the United States
has provided significant funding to improve water and
sanitation in situations in which women’s safety and
security are at risk. Our ultimate objective is to fully
incorporate women and girls into our diplomatic,
security and development efforts — not simply as
beneficiaries, but as agents of peace, reconciliation,
development, growth and stability.

11-56959

As we move forward on our national action plan,
we are cognizant that, as Secretary Clinton said at a
Council debate on this issue last year,
“ultimately, we measure our progress by the
improvement in the daily lives of people around
the world. That must be our cause, and
empowering women to contribute all their talents
to this cause is our calling” (S.PV.6411, p. 15).
All of us now face the critical challenge of
turning our commitments on women, peace and
security into results. We believe that, through our work
here in the Council and our national efforts, we can
meet this challenge together.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Madam President, for having organized this
important and timely debate. Allow me also to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing, and
Ms. Bachelet, Ambassador Kapambwe and Ms. Nemat
for their presentations.
More than a decade has passed since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000). Throughout that period, the
United Nations system, regional organizations,
Member States and civil society have made significant
efforts to adapt the resolution to local settings through
a wide spectrum of measures and initiatives. Progress
has been made in terms of discourse and evolving
practice on the participation of women in conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding, and
awareness has increased of the threat that sexual
violence constitutes to peace and security.
Despite important national, regional and
international efforts, however, the conditions that
women and girls still face in situations of armed
conflict continue to be abhorrent. The benefits of
resolution 1325 (2000) have yet to reach most women
in conflict and in fragile settings. In that regard, allow
me to make the following comments.
First, we view the prevention of conflict as a
crucial element of resolution 1325 (2000). That
includes the prevention of all forms of conflict-related
violence against women and girls. Sexual violence
remains the least-condemned war crime in peace
agreements and beyond. The elimination of impunity is
perhaps the single most effective preventive tool to
fight that crime. In that regard, reforming the security
sector and ensuring respect for the rule of law in a
gender-responsive manner is of crucial importance.

19

S/PV.6642

Conflict and post-conflict societies should be assisted
in those areas as early as possible.
The preventive aspect of resolution 1325 (2000)
also includes women’s full and equal involvement in
conflict prevention efforts. We concur with the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/598*) that more
attention needs to be paid to women’s roles in the field.
We support his recommendation for the Council to use
its deliberations on preventive diplomacy and
mediation to consider means of enhancing the role of
women in conflict prevention.
Secondly, the meaningful participation of women
in
decision-making
forums,
institutions
and
mechanisms related to conflict resolution and
peacebuilding is essential, not only for peace but also
for sustainable development and long-term security.
Such participation should be treated as a requirement
for building a solid and genuine democracy, which
cannot be fully achieved unless the inequalities
affecting half of the population are adequately
addressed.
In that sense, the political participation of women
and addressing their specific needs are not solely social
issues, but also good governance issues. In particular,
women’s engagement in peace negotiations is essential
to ensure that their rights and needs are taken into
account in peace agreements and institutional
arrangements. Peace accord provisions could have farreaching consequences on women’s engagement in
post-conflict governance and on their access to justice,
reparations, resources and economic security.
International, regional and national actors should
therefore spare no efforts to engage women and to
ensure the inclusion of gender expertise in peace
efforts. It is also essential that regular consultations
between special envoys and mediators and women’s
civil society groups become standard operating
procedure.
Partnerships with male community leaders and
opinion-shapers could also play an important role in
raising awareness of the benefits of women’s
participation and could help to implement genderrelated programming at the local level.
Thirdly, we would like to stress the importance of
investing in youth, girls and boys alike, as an essential
driving force behind meaningful peacebuilding efforts.
Arab youth have lately become the symbol of an

20

uprising in the name of freedom, dignity and
participation. In their legitimate struggle for a better
life, Arab youth groups have exhibited immense
creativity. The ideals of young people are their most
valuable resource for influencing the development of
their societies and the shape of their future. This has
been embodied by Ms. Tawakkul Karman, the first
Arab woman to become a Nobel Prize laureate, along
with two great women leaders from Liberia.
Finally, it is our collective and individual
responsibility as Member States to adopt a determined
and consistent approach that will lead to positive and
concrete results in the lives of women in conflict and
post-conflict situations. The framework and the tools
are at hand; let us back them with the necessary
political will.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Thank you,
Madam President, for convening this open debate on an
issue to which Portugal attaches great importance. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Ms. Michelle
Bachelet,
Ambassador
Lazarous
Kapambwe and Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat for their very
useful statements.
The theme of this year’s open debate, “Women’s
participation and role in conflict prevention and
mediation”, was a core element of resolution 1325
(2000), which the Council adopted 11 years ago.
However, as underlined in the excellent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/598*), which we very much
welcome, that objective still eludes us to a large extent.
Today’s debate is therefore very timely.
Portugal naturally shares the views that will be
expressed in the statement to be delivered later by the
observer of the European Union.
Women are indispensable actors in change and
development. As we speak, the Arab Spring is a stage
for the active participation of women in political
processes. Tunisian, Egyptian and Libyan women
today have higher expectations than in the past —
legitimate expectations — regarding their role in the
shaping of their countries’ futures. Women who have
striven to make their voices heard and who have played
an important role in promoting political transitions are
now looking forward to full and equal participation in
the political sphere and to contribute actively to the
stability, progress and cohesion of their societies.

11-56959

S/PV.6642

Women indeed have a crucial role to play in
rebuilding war-torn societies and in preserving social
cohesion. They did it in Europe, during and after the
First and Second World Wars. They did it in South
America and in Africa, in countries divided by civilian
strife. They still do it on a daily basis in several
countries tormented by conflict. What is essential is to
guarantee that women are included in peace processes
and to ensure that their perspectives and direct
knowledge of specific situations and concerns are
taken into account as important contributions to the
reshaping of torn societies in post-conflict situations
and to peacebuilding efforts.
The decision of the Norwegian Nobel Committee
to award the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize to three women in
recognition of “their non-violent struggle for the safety
of women and for women’s rights to full participation
in peacebuilding work” is a much-deserved recognition
of women’s significant contribution to peacebuilding
and democracy. It will undoubtedly send a powerful
message to women around the world to engage in
efforts to determine the future of their countries.
While acknowledging that important progress has
been accomplished in implementing resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and
peace and security, we need to recognize that
significant challenges still remain. Women are still
underrepresented at several levels in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts, just as they are inadequately
represented in formal peace negotiations. The
exclusion of women from peace talks and
peacebuilding efforts often means that insufficient
attention is paid to addressing gender disparities and
women’s concerns in the post-conflict phase, thus
reinforcing a circle of inequality and marginalization.
The Council will later adopt a draft presidential
statement encouraging efforts to strengthen the
capacities of women’s organizations to engage in
conflict prevention and mediation. Portugal fully
supports these specific efforts to increase the effective
participation of women mediators in peace processes,
as well as efforts to prepare women to effectively
intervene in the resolution of conflicts and contribute
to peace and stability.
In that regard, we welcome the efforts of
UN-Women to provide technical support to women’s
organizations. We recognize that much has been done
at the local and regional levels to successfully

11-56959

strengthen women’s civil society groups. We also
welcome every effort by Member States to promote
women’s political participation and to eliminate
discriminatory or constitutional barriers against
women. Further action is also needed on other
obstacles that prevent women from participating fully
in politics, such as poverty, sexual violence, the lack of
access to education, negative societal attitudes and
cultural and psychological barriers.
The Council has a key role to play in monitoring
women’s participation in political processes. I take this
opportunity to highlight once again the importance of
inviting Ms. Michelle Bachelet to brief the Council on
women’s political participation in conflict situations on
its agenda as a complement to the briefings that the
Council receives from other parts of the Secretariat.
We warmly congratulate her on the very important
work she is carrying out and on her leadership and
commitment. Here, we wish to reiterate our full
support for her endeavours.
In conclusion, Portugal has been striving to
support not only the promotion and protection of the
human rights of women, but also their political
participation in situations on the agenda of the Council,
such as those in Libya, Somalia, South Sudan and
Afghanistan, among others. In the pursuit of peace, this
Council cannot afford to exclude the skills and talents
of half the world’s population. In this context, my
country reaffirms its commitment to ensuring women’s
effective participation in peace and security and to
translate this commitment into enhanced action.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China appreciates the efforts of Nigeria to convene
today’s open debate. I wish to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his statement. I also listened carefully
to the statements by Madam Bachelet, Executive
Director of UN-Women, Ambassador Kapambwe,
Permanent Representative of Zambia and President of
the Economic and Social Council, and Ms. Nemat of
the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security.
Women are vulnerable in conflict situations and
therefore require special attention. Women can make
unique contributions to the maintenance of
international peace and security, and their potentials
must be further tapped. The Security Council’s
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was important
progress in the efforts of the international community

21

S/PV.6642

to protect women’s rights and interests. However, there
remains a lot to do in comprehensively implementing
that resolution. I wish to emphasize four points.
First, to avoid and reduce the harm suffered by
women in armed conflict, it is first necessary to
prevent war and reduce conflicts. The Security Council
bears the primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security. To safeguard women’s
rights and interests, the Council should conduct active
preventive diplomacy and promote the use of means
such as dialogue, consultations and negotiations for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. Council resolutions,
especially its mandate for civilian protection, should be
strictly implemented so as to avoid more casualties
among women and children.
Secondly, ensuring the participation of women in
conflict resolution and prevention and in rehabilitation
and reconstruction is an important part of the efforts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000). China supports a
bigger role for women in good offices and dispute
mediation. We hope the Secretary-General will appoint
more female special representatives and special
envoys, and we hope to see greater participation by
women in United Nations good offices and mediation
concerning major international and regional hotspots.
Thirdly, in conflict resolution and post-conflict
reconstruction, the national ownership of the
government and people concerned must be respected.
The international community can provide constructive
help, but it must adhere to the United Nations Charter
and the principle of non-interference in internal affairs.
In safeguarding the rights and interests of women and
enhancing their role in peace and security, specific
national conditions and historical and cultural
differences must be fully taken into account. A uniform
approach is not desirable.
Fourthly, in advancing the agenda of women,
peace and security, the relevant United Nations organs
should collaborate while working in their respective
spheres of competence. The Council should, in
accordance with its Charter mandate, focus its attention
on situations that threaten international peace and
security. At the same time, the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) also requires organs such as the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Human Rights Council to fully play their roles.
China appreciates the leading role of UN-Women and

22

looks forward to its greater contribution to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the Under-Secretary-General and
head of UN-Women, Ms. Bachelet, the President of the
Economic and Social Council, Ambassador Kapambwe,
and the representative of civil society, Ms. Nemat, for
their work on the issue of women, peace and security
and for the information they have provided on the state
of affairs in this area.
The history of resolution 1325 (2000), more than
ten years of it, has clearly confirmed in practice the
key role and significance of this instrument for
advancing the role of women in conflict prevention and
resolution and in post-conflict reconstruction and also
in protecting women during conflicts. In that regard we
express how pleased we are that this year the issue of
women’s participation in preventive diplomacy is given
priority attention in the Council’s presidential
statement.
As we have said on many occasions, in various
forums and events, women must not be seen just as
victims in armed conflicts. That in itself would be a
form of discrimination. An important precondition for
eliminating discrimination against women in such
situations is their full participation in all related
aspects of preventive diplomacy. Women can and must
make a more significant contribution to conflict
prevention and resolution.
In terms of the Security Council’s Charter-based
functions, its attention should be given only to those
situations that represent a threat to international peace
and security. Issues of violence against women should
be considered in the Council only as they relate to
themes of maintaining peace and security and in strict
relation to those situations that are on the Council’s
agenda. We are convinced that that will guarantee the
effective work of the Council to implement resolution
1325 (2000).
We also suggest that artificially linking gender
issues in all their ramifications exclusively to the
Security Council contradicts its mandate and leads to
imbalances in terms of system-wide coordination. Let
us not forget also that this issue is dealt with not only
by the Security Council but also by the General
Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission, the Human
Rights Council and the Committee on the Status of

11-56959

S/PV.6642

Women. It is important that they not duplicate each
other’s mandates.
Nor are we convinced that it would be proper to
establish a specialized mechanism under the Security
Council to oversee the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Clearly, what is needed is increasing the
effectiveness of existing mechanisms within the system
by improving their coordination and accountability
under the leadership of UN-Women. We welcome the
efforts, led by Ms. Bachelet, of that body to
consolidate the work of various structures, offices and
special procedures that are dealing with women’s
issues and peace and security. But it is still too early to
assess the work of UN-Women, which began its work
only ten months ago.
We have carefully studied the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/598*) prepared for this
meeting. We suggest that it would be proper to ensure
that future reports reflect the multifaceted nature of
violence against women, as is required by resolution
1325 (2000) itself. In particular, we call on the
Secretary-General to give more attention to such
important problems as killing and wounding of women
and children, particularly as a result of indiscriminate
or excessive use of force. Often such crimes go
unpunished or are justified as being unavoidable or
being so-called collateral damage. This contradicts
provisions of the Geneva Convention, inter alia. The
recent events in Libya are an example of this.
If required, we are ready to come back to this
theme and provide details on what we actually mean by
this. In this context, with regard to the first part of the
report, with the indicators of the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), we wish to
stress that there are still open questions about the
suitability and relevance of individual indicators and
their scope and use. We also suggest that work on those
indicators should be done in a more transparent and
open way, with the involvement of all Member States,
since, ultimately, they are of interest not just to the 15
States on the Council.
This applies also to the annex to the report. The
Council requested a strategic framework on the work
of United Nations offices in implementing the
resolution over the next ten years. We also suggest that
the guarantee of effective work on the ground lies in
taking into account the State-specific natures and
needs.

11-56959

In conclusion, I should like once again to
reiterate our conviction that guaranteeing women’s
protection and rights during armed conflict can be
ensured only through the joint efforts of all interested
parties. For us, resolution 1325 (2000) continues to
serve as the frame of reference in that regard.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to welcome the holding of this debate
and to thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, Ambassador Lazarus Kapambwe and
Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat for their briefings and their
participation in this meeting. I should also like to
associate myself with the statement to be delivered on
behalf of the European Union.
It seems to us more important than ever that the
Security Council address the issue of women’s role and
participation in conflict prevention and mediation. The
Arab Spring has served to forcefully remind us of that.
Women have been significant actors in the transitions
that have occurred in Tunisia, Egypt and Libya. In
Syria and Yemen women are today continuing to fight
with exceptional courage to defend their freedom, to
ensure that the most fundamental human rights are
respected and to make their calls for democracy heard.
In this connection, I wish to welcome this year’s
awarding of the Noble Peace Prize to three exceptional
women who are doing outstanding work in the service
of peace and human rights.
Women must continue to be represented and
actively consulted in the ongoing reform processes.
They must have a place at the side of their male
counterparts in order to successfully carry out the
transition to democracy and establish regimes that are
fairer and more respectful of the freedoms of their
peoples. This is about the success of the ongoing
political transitions and, consequently, about the
stability of the countries themselves and, in turn, about
the security of the region.
The effective implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, is a priority
for France, which actively worked for its adoption, just
as we have worked to strengthen awareness of this
issue at the European Union, especially during our
2008 presidency of the Union. Last year, France
adopted a national plan of action on the
implementation of the resolution. In particular, it aims
at prioritizing, at the international level, the protection
of women against all forms of violence and promoting

23

S/PV.6642

respect for their basic rights, as well as their equal
participation in decision-making processes in the
context
of peacebuilding, reconstruction
and
development.
France has undertaken commitments in the
context of its plan of action to strengthen women’s
direct participation in reconstruction efforts and the
decision making process, namely, by focusing priority
on access to leadership positions. In particular, France
is implementing several cooperation programmes, in
partnership with UN-Women, aimed at strengthening
women’s participation in the decision-making process,
improving their access to, and participation in, the
justice sector. We are doing that by relying on civil
society organizations and, in particular, women’s
groups, which I would like here to commend. Those
programmes are being carried out in Africa and the
Arab world, as well as in Afghanistan. Moreover,
France is developing programmes intended to bolster
the participation of women in peacekeeping operations.
Our plan of action also includes initiatives to improve
awareness of the need for respect for the rights of
women in the context of training programmes, which is
another important element in the implementation of the
resolution on women, peace and security.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his recent report (S/2011/598*). We agree with the bulk
of its analyses. We would also like to commend the
work done by UN-Women under the leadership of
Ms. Bachelet. The strategic framework and follow-up
indicators referred to in the report are useful tools, both
for Member States and for the United Nations, in
following up the implementation of the resolution on
women and peace and security. Not only do they make
it possible to assess results, but also to identify
shortcomings in women’s participation in conflict
prevention and resolution. They also make it possible
to refocus the efforts of the international community to
ensure better protection for women in armed conflict.
We have seen progress in this regard in the past
10 years. To complement the resolution, the Council
has put in place a framework that makes possible a
more comprehensive approach to the protection of
women and their participation in the resolution of
conflicts. At the same time, the United Nations
Secretariat and its agencies, funds and programmes, as
well as other bodies of the Organization, now
undertake more coordinated efforts. Ms. Bachelet’s
role has undoubtedly made a contribution in that

24

regard. I also wish to commend the work and
coordinating efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
as well as his Special Representative on Children and
Armed conflict for her respective contributions.
Allow me to conclude by referring to the matter
of justice, which is a major issue in the implementation
of the resolution on women and peace and security.
How can women express themselves and participate in
public life if they must live alongside their former
tortures, or live in fear and under oppression? How can
they have access to justice if the road to justice entails
humiliation, threats and reprisals? Access to justice and
combating impunity are essential elements in ensuring
women’s full participation. In particular, there is a duty
on the part of the international community to make use
of all the instruments available to it — establishing
commissions of inquiry, making referrals to the
International Criminal Court and putting in place
targeted sanctions, in the case of serious violations and
systematic assaults on the rights of women. Only then
will the efforts of the international community take on
genuine credibility when it comes to protecting women
and promoting their participation in conflict resolution.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Nigeria.
I would like to convey the appreciation of my
delegation to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
taking time out of his busy schedule to attend this
meeting to brief the Council on the important issue of
women and peace and security. His report
(S/2011/598*) and his comments here today provide
the appropriate foundation on which to anchor our
debate. I would also like to thank Ambassador Lazarus
Kapambwe, President of the Economic and Social
Council, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Executive-Director of
UN-Women, and Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat, of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
for their very instructive briefings.
Although Ms. Bachelet aptly highlighted the
modest progress made by Member States and the
United Nations in advancing the agenda of resolution
1325 (2000), we must heed her warning that we are
very far from sufficiently and systematically
integrating women into the process of conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. We believe that this is
an auspicious moment in the history of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The draft

11-56959

S/PV.6642

presidential statement that is to be adopted today could
not have come at a better time, coming as it does in the
aftermath of the recognition by the Nobel Committee
of the role and participation of the three eminent
women in conflict resolution and peace processes in
their respective communities. While congratulating
President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, Ms. Leymah Gbowee
and Ms. Tawakkul Karman for their groundbreaking
achievement, we share the hope of the Nobel
Committee that this recognition of the important place
of women in the peace process, which the draft
presidential statement echoes loudly, is a watershed
moment and paradigm shift in the global effort to
implement resolution 1325 (2000).
We note with satisfaction that the draft
presidential statement accords with the theme of this
open debate, namely, “The role and participation of
women in conflict prevention and mediation”. Through
the draft presidential statement, the Council recognizes
that women can, and do, play crucial roles in the
prevention of conflict. Nevertheless, it also notes that
more needs to be done to create the enabling conditions
for the participation of women in all stages of the
peace process.
Such efforts at creating the right conditions for
ensuring women’s full participation should include
increasing the participation and representation of
women in preventive diplomacy initiatives. It should
also include strengthening the capacities of the relevant
Government institutions and women’s organizations
involved with conflict and post-conflict issues, the
adequate representation of women in the negotiation
and implementation of peace agreements, support for
local women’s peace initiatives, the promotion and
protection of the human rights of women, higher levels
of representation in decision-making roles, and
ensuring proper coherence and coordination among the
United Nations entities responsible for implementing
the women, peace and security agenda in the entire
United Nations system.
On the subject of United Nations coherence and
effectiveness in particular, we recognize the important
and central role of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), working in close partnership and
collaboration with the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
for Children and Armed Conflict, respectively.

11-56959

The gaps and challenges hindering the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) are indeed
substantial. National, regional and international actors
must rededicate themselves to addressing them. We
believe that developing and implementing national
action plans constitutes a viable strategy for fulfilling
the obligations under resolution 1325 (2000).
As a signatory to the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Dakar Declaration,
Nigeria has committed itself to accelerating the
national and regional implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). The Declaration calls for a regional
action plan within ECOWAS to support national action
plans. ECOWAS will coordinate and collaborate with
the United Nations Office in West Africa and with
UN-Women in this process.
Nigeria is also committed to fulfilling its
obligations under the African Charter of Human and
Peoples’ Rights on the rights of women in Africa. As
Ms. Bachelet has often said, the obstacles to women’s
political participation, which I believe have a direct
bearing on their capacity to play an active role in
preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention, are
indeed enormous. Violence, poverty, lack of access to
education and health care, and limited economic
opportunities all combine to undermine the role of
women and girls in conflict prevention, peace
negotiations and peacebuilding. It is therefore
necessary that we develop and take measures to
address these inherent obstacles.
Promoting women’s equality and empowerment
is, in our view, one of the best ways to address the root
causes of conflict and therefore prevent such conflict. I
envisage a presidential statement along those lines in
the near future.
We recognize the relevance and relationship
between the Council’s preventive diplomacy initiatives
and its women, peace and security agenda. As women
are usually some of the first and worst hit in any
conflict, preventing conflicts from breaking out serves
to ensure the peace and security of women and girls.
Even as we all remain true to the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000), which focuses on armed
conflict and post-conflict situations, it has become
imperative to devote equal attention to conflictprevention strategies, including the use of preventive
diplomacy.

25

S/PV.6642

It is gratifying to know that the Council has the
opportunity every year to review the progress made in
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We look
forward to the inclusion in next year’s report of the
Secretary-General of, among other things, specific
actions and achievements as well as the challenges
faced in the implementation of the presidential
statement that we will be adopting later today.
We also look forward to the high-level review to
be held in 2015 on the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), confident
that this and future presidential statements and
initiatives of the Council will play pivotal roles in
national, regional and global strategies on the women,
peace and security agenda.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The Council has before it the text of a draft
statement by the President on behalf of the Council on
the subject of today’s meeting. I wish to thank Council
members for their valuable contributions to this
statement. In accordance with the understanding
reached among the members of the Council, I shall
take it that the members of the Security Council agree
to the statement, which will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2011/20.
It is so decided.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I give the floor to the representative of Finland.
Mr. Laajava (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country,
Finland.
Let me start by thanking the Nigerian presidency
for having organized this debate and the SecretaryGeneral, Under-Secretary-General Bachelet and the
President of the Economic and Social Council,
Ambassador Kapambwe, for their valuable remarks. I
wish to convey special thanks for the insights of Orzala
Ashraf Nemat on behalf of civil society.

26

Fully recognizing the contribution of women and
increasing their effective participation before, during
and after conflict is a priority for the Nordic
Governments, and we thank you, Madam President, for
the choice of the theme of this year’s debate.
Last year, we celebrated the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000). The emphasis was on
commitments for action and systematic follow-up. We
thank the Secretary-General for his excellent report
(S/2011/598*), which includes concrete data based on
the indicators the Council agreed to last year and a
very good strategic framework to guide the United
Nations in the way ahead.
Exactly a week ago, the Security Council
resolution on Yemen (resolution 2014 (2011)) called
upon all concerned parties to improve women’s
participation in conflict resolution and encouraged
them to facilitate the equal and full participation of
women at decision-making levels. Yesterday’s
resolution on Libya (resolution 2016 (2011))
emphasized the importance of the full and equal
participation of women and the respect for the human
rights of all. We welcome these very strong calls.
During this eventful year, women have taken to
the streets and squares across North Africa and the
Middle East and demanded change, equality, freedom
and justice alongside men. We call on the Security
Council to ensure that women’s voices are heard and
reflected in planning, actions and results. Provisions on
women’s full participation and on the protection and
promotion of women’s human rights should be
included in all relevant country-specific resolutions,
and they should be systematically followed up when
the special envoys and Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General report back to the Council.
The conflict-prevention and mitigation efforts of
women through civil society and governmental
channels deserve our increased financial, political and
technical support. Civil society participation serves a
double aim: it fosters inclusive dialogue and
development. It also builds the capacity of women to
engage in more formal processes. Increasing the
number of women in Government structures, for
example in the security and justice sectors, makes such
institutions more democratic, gender-responsive and
accountable. This contributes to conflict prevention.
Women must be fully involved from the very
beginning of peace processes so as to enhance the

11-56959

S/PV.6642

quality and sustainability of peace agreements.
Mediation and negotiation teams should have
specialized gender expertise and carry out inclusive
consultations. Further efforts are urgently needed to
nominate and appoint more women mediators and to
address the obstacles women face. Increasing the
number of women in international organizations and in
national diplomatic services is one tool for enlarging
the pool of qualified women. At the same time,
guidance and expertise is needed for mediators to
integrate a gender perspective in ceasefire and in peace
agreements. The Nordic countries welcome the work of
UN-Women and fully support its joint strategy with the
Department of Political Affairs on gender and
mediation as an effective tool.
In post-conflict planning and budgeting, there
should be targeted actions and sector-specific gender
experts for all relevant areas, such as security sector
reform and economic recovery. The SecretaryGeneral’s seven-point action plan on peacebuilding
(see S/2010/466) provides detailed recommendations
on that. We welcome the work done so far. However,
much remains to be done, and we encourage the United
Nations to implement all of the recommendations
without delay. As donors, we commit to do our part
both by supporting women’s participation in
post-conflict donor conferences and by directing
funding for initiatives that contribute to gender
equality.
A year ago we made commitments to advance the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I would like
to report briefly on three areas in which the Nordic
countries
have
concretely
implemented
their
commitments.
The first area is national action plans. All Nordic
countries have established national actions plans based
on a holistic view of peace, security, development and
human rights. Several line ministries, governmental
agencies and civil society organizations work together
to ensure timely and effective implementation and
promotion of resolution 1325 (2000). The Nordic
national action plans are results-oriented, and their
implementation is guided by a set of indicators to
measure real progress.
The Nordic countries have engaged in twinning
and cooperation with partner countries, including
Afghanistan, Kenya, Liberia, Nepal and the
Philippines. We provide technical and financial support

11-56959

for the development of their new structures. But we
also learn from them and hope that in this way our
activities will be more responsive to the needs and
priorities of countries with recent experience of
conflict or fragility. Together we foster political will
for women’s rights in every part of the world.
The Nordic countries have greatly benefited from
the advice and partnership of civil society. We support
the work of local and regional non-governmental
organizations from Afghanistan to the Great Lakes
region and from Nepal to the Sudan.
Secondly, we are pleased to report a clear
increase in the number of women among the military,
police and civilian peacekeepers deployed. We also
committed to train our personnel on gender equality
and human rights. The mixed police teams deployed in
Haiti, Liberia and Afghanistan have all received
training on resolution 1325 (2000). Some have been
specifically trained to address sexual and gender-based
violence. We have developed a human rights manual
for all crisis management personnel and supported
gender-sensitive security sector reform in Palestine and
the Balkans.
Thirdly, we have increased our efforts to fight
impunity, with due attention to the rights of victims.
Justice, including meaningful reparations for victims,
is essential in restoring the confidence of the people in
their Government. There should never be amnesty for
the most serious crimes, including sexual violence,
which can constitute war crimes and crimes against
humanity.
We remain staunch supporters of the International
Criminal Court and have been at the forefront of the
work linking its complementarity principle with
development activities that strengthen rule of law at the
national level. We have also led the discussions around
the review of the Court’s strategy for victims, and we
support its Trust Fund for Victims.
I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to share some of the Nordic countries’
views and recommendations. We stand ready to
continue to work with the Council and with the United
Nations towards full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
The President: I
representative of Austria.

give

the

floor

to

the

27

S/PV.6642

Mr. Riecken (Austria): Last year’s debate, on the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of landmark Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), under the presidency
of Uganda (see S/PV.6411), significantly contributed to
focusing Member States’ commitment and gaining
momentum for enhanced implementation of the
resolution at national, regional and international levels.
However, as the President’s concept note (S/2011/654)
rightly points out, many gaps and challenges remain on
the road to translating words into action and ensuring
the full participation of women in all stages of conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
Therefore, we would like to thank Nigeria for
providing the opportunity to consider concrete steps
and for its efforts that resulted in the Council’s
presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/20). Let me also
thank the Secretary-General and Under-SecretaryGeneral Bachelet both for their briefings today and
their commitment to the women, peace and security
agenda. We also thank the President of the Economic
and Social Council and the civil society representative
for their very interesting statements.
Austria aligns herself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union.
The topic of our debate is a very timely one.
Today we should acknowledge the important
contribution made by women in the Arab world to
bring about political transformation, and the decisive
role they have played and continue to play in the quest
for democracy, transparent political systems, the rule
of law and the promotion and protection of human
rights. It is difficult to imagine the achievements of the
Arab Spring in Tunisia, Egypt and Libya without the
active participation of women and young people, and it
is difficult to imagine a successful and inclusive
democratic transformation process without their active
participation.
The effective representation and full involvement
of women in peace processes, in transitional
governments and in political life is a prerequisite for
addressing their specific needs and concerns and for
ensuring that their rights are adequately reflected in
State structures, peace agreements, law enforcement
processes, et cetera. One half of the population cannot
claim to represent the other half. Women need to
represent themselves.
Of course, efforts at the national level must go
hand in hand with efforts at the international level. The

28

United Nations and its Member States need to further
increase the number of women in peacekeeping
operations and political missions in order to ensure
gender expertise in the planning of missions and in all
mediation efforts, and to enhance the appointment of
women to senior leadership positions. The SecretaryGeneral’s seven-point action plan on women’s
participation in peacebuilding (see S/2010/466)
contains important commitments in that regard, and we
encourage the United Nations system to take them
forward.
In order to be able to guide and track the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) by the
United Nations system over the next 10 years, Austria
very much welcomes the strategic framework
contained in the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/598*). The formulation of concrete medium
and long-term targets is an important step. Austria is
convinced that the comprehensive set of indicators that
received the Council’s support at the open debate one
year ago is not only essential for monitoring the
strategic framework, but should also be used to track
efforts at the national level.
We fully support the recommendations in the
Secretary-General’s report, including the call for more
frequent briefings of the Council by Executive Director
Bachelet, as well as by relevant Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General. Of course,
the inclusion of women, peace and security aspects in
country-specific reports to the Council, including
reporting on attacks on women journalists, women
human rights defenders and women in public office, is
equally important to providing the Council with the
necessary information to act upon.
The presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/22)
adopted at last year’s debate (see S/PV.6411) explicitly
invited Member States to report to the Security Council
on progress made in their efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). In that regard, I would briefly
like to update the Council on some of the commitments
made by Austrian Foreign Minister Michael
Spindelegger last October.
Austria has almost finished the revision of its
national action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), which will be approved by the
Council of Ministers by the end of this year. As for the
first national action plan of 2007, civil society has been
closely involved in these efforts. The revised national

11-56959

S/PV.6642

action plan will be guided by the set of indicators that
were presented by the Secretary-General and supported
by the Security Council last year.
Mission gender advisors have been trained and
deployment to the Balkans has begun. Austria has also
followed up on its commitment to provide more
adequate training for our peace workers in the field.
Standard training elements on gender have been
finalized and their implementation in education and
pre-deployment training for our soldiers and civilian
personnel will be completed in 2012.
Austria has also made significant progress on its
commitment to incorporate the provisions of the statute
of the International Criminal Court that classifies
crimes against women as crimes against humanity, war
crimes or genocide, as part of our national criminal
code.
Austria has continued its support to UN-Women
and is currently exploring opportunities for cooperation
with partner countries to support the development of a
national action plan.
Mr. Rivard (Canada): On behalf of the
Government of Canada, I thank the Nigerian
presidency for today’s open debate. I also wish to
express my gratitude for the statements made by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ms. Bachelet,
Mr. Kapambwe and Ms. Nemat.
Canada welcomes the recent report by the
Secretary-General on women, peace and security, as
well as the 2011 General Assembly resolution 65/283,
on strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, as a positive step towards improving
cooperation and coordination.
One year ago this month, Canada announced its
action plan, which seeks to enhance the participation of
women in peace processes. We encourage the
meaningful participation of women in all elements of
peacekeeping. We also promote efforts to protect the
human rights and physical safety of women and girls,
including against rape as a weapon of war and all
forms of sexual violence in conflict.
There remains much work to be done with respect
to mediation and conflict prevention to implement the
Security Council resolution on women and peace and
security. During his recent visit to Tripoli, Canadian
Minister of Foreign Affairs John Baird met with

11-56959

Libyan women’s groups to discuss the important role
that women’s leadership will play in the new Libya and
its democratic institutions. The Minister urged the new
Government of Libya to ensure the participation of
women in decision-making during Libya’s transition.
Libya is an example of an environment in which
barriers to women’s access to peace processes and to
reconstruction efforts will need to be addressed by all
those involved.
(spoke in French)
With regard to follow up to this debate, we
encourage the Security Council to continue to provide
the political leadership and take targeted actions to
ensure the meaningful participation of women in all
conflict prevention, mediation and resolution
processes. In order to inform the work of the Council,
we recommend that the Council receive regular
briefings on those matters by the Secretary-General
and other relevant officials, including the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Canada applauds the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to develop a framework
including specific early warning indicators on sexual
violence in conflict.
At a time when resources are scarce, we support
the call to use mediation increasingly as a costeffective form of conflict prevention and resolution.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): Allow me to
express my sincere appreciation to you, Madam
President, for the convening of this open debate. My
appreciation also goes to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Executive Director
of UN-Women; Mr. Lazarous Kapambwe, President of
the Economic and Social Council; and Ms. Orzala
Ashraf Nemat, of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security.
The tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
last year provided us with a valuable opportunity to
look back upon our achievements. Substantial progress
has been made, but wide gaps as well as challenges
remain. Women and girls are still the most seriously
affected in conflicts. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2011/598*), which equips us with a
tool for reviewing the current situation with regard to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). We also note
with appreciation the Secretary-General’s proposal for
a strategic framework as guidance for United Nations

29

S/PV.6642

implementation of the resolution. The measures and
targets set out in that framework should be closely
monitored and regularly reviewed. With regard to the
four priority areas and the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), my delegation would like to highlight the
following points.
First, eliminating impunity is critical to
preventing gender-based crimes. We commend the
Council’s continued efforts to fight impunity and
uphold accountability for serious crimes against
women and girls. The fight against impunity for crimes
against women and girls has been strengthened through
the work of international tribunals, including the
International Criminal Court. In that regard, we believe
that the ratification of the Rome Statute should be
further encouraged. However, without parallel efforts
at the national level, that will fall short of making
tangible changes on the ground. States need to further
strengthen their justice systems to prosecute genderbased crimes and improve systems for the protection of
victims and witnesses.
Secondly, women’s participation at all stages of
the peace process needs to be enhanced. The exclusion
of women and the lack of gender expertise in
negotiations may lead to irreversible setbacks for
women’s rights, leaving crucial issues such women’s
engagement in post-conflict governance neglected in
peace accords. Efforts to increase women’s
participation in decision-making bodies need to be
sustained. In that regard, my Government expresses its
full support to the timely initiative by the United States
Government on the draft resolution on women and
political participation at the Third Committee of the
General Assembly.
Thirdly, we need to pay greater attention to the
vulnerability of displaced women and girls, given their
particular risk of sexual and gender-based violence. My
delegation welcomes the target set out in the strategic
results framework on the special measures to increase
the security of female refugees and persons internally
displaced by armed conflict, as well as to ensure
multisectoral prevention and response mechanisms for
sexual and gender-based violence in camp and
non-camp settings alike.
My Government believes that the newly
established UN-Women has a central role to play in
coordinating the activities of the United Nations and in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). The Republic of

30

Korea has been committed to supporting UN-Women,
in particular its activities in the field of women and
peace and security. To that end, the Korean
Government has significantly increased its financial
contribution to UN-Women, and, in particular,
contributed to the building back better project on
women’s participation in peacebuilding.
The momentum generated by the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
last year should not be lost. I believe that the strategic
framework, together with the focused commitment
shown by many delegations today, will guide us to
advance our endeavours for women and peace and
security. The Republic of Korea reaffirms its
commitment to implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
in cooperation with the international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): It is a pleasure
to see you, Madam President, preside over this
meeting. I would like to thank you for convening it. We
welcome the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/598*), which for the first time measures the
progress of implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
against specific indicators. We also further welcome its
recommendations as an important step towards moving
the women, peace and security agenda further from
rhetoric to action.
As outlined in the concept note (S/2011/654,
annex) circulated for this debate, the participation of
women in decision-making forums related to conflict
prevention and resolution, peacebuilding and postconflict recovery is a central goal of the women, peace
and security agenda. Research has shown that the
exclusion of women and the lack of gender expertise in
peace negotiations lead to irreversible setbacks for
women’s rights. Peace accords often neglect to ensure
the engagement of women in post-conflict governance
and their access to economic opportunities, justice and
reparations.
It is unfortunate that, 11 years after the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the contribution of women
to conflict management is still severely undervalued
and underutilized. The Council must increase its efforts
to incorporate a gender perspective in relevant countryspecific resolutions, with a view to increasing women’s
participation in peace negotiations and mediation and
in meeting the specific concerns of women during

11-56959

S/PV.6642

post-conflict reconstruction. The Council must also,
hand in hand with the General Assembly, address the
lack of women as lead peace mediators by encouraging
the Secretary-General to appoint women to such
positions and to ensure that adequate gender expertise
is provided for all United Nations-led peace processes.
We therefore welcome the adoption of today’s
presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/20), which will
help to further strengthen the perception of women as
stakeholders, as opposed to victims or aid recipients.
Liechtenstein honours its commitments to
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), as pledged at the
commitment conference “A call to action” on
25 September 2010. We continue to support
international efforts to end impunity for the most
serious crimes, including those committed against
women during armed conflict. That commitment
includes continued financial support to the Trust Fund
for Victims established by the International Criminal
Court (ICC), which adopts a gender-based perspective
across all programming and specifically targets victims
of all forms of sexual and gender violence. Most
important, the Trust Fund provides direct assistance to
victims, and thus has an immediate impact on the
ground. The Rome Statute of the ICC has significantly
advanced international law by including sexual
violence in the definition of crimes, in particular as a
crime against humanity. The ICC therefore represents
an important mechanism in the fight against sexual
violence, which should be better integrated in the
Security Council work on the issue.
Research by the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security reveals that the Council does not
consistently apply the principles of the women, peace
and security agenda in its country-specific work. In an
attempt to make that complex agenda more accessible,
and thereby contribute to a better mainstreaming, we
have developed an iPhone application on women and
peace and security, in close partnership with
Switzerland, Peacewomen and the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security, now available in
an updated version that includes monthly action points.
Those action points contain concrete recommendations
that provide guidance on how the Council can
systematically meet its obligations to women in armed
conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.

11-56959

Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): On behalf of the
Republic of Maldives, let me thank the Nigerian
presidency for convening this important debate on
women and peace and security on the eleventh
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on women and peace and security
(S/2011/598*). I welcome the remarks this morning by
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Executive Director of
UN-Women; His Excellency Mr. Lazarous Kapambwe,
President of the Economic and Social Council; and
Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, on this important issue.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we
have seen the emergence of a host of other resolutions
focused on ending sexual violence in conflict zones,
calling for greater accountability and the participation
of women. During periods of conflict, women and
children are the first to be affected and are often
targeted, especially with sexual violence. With that in
mind, the Maldives emphasizes the need to monitor the
situation and actions of international security forces in
zones of conflict, such as Afghanistan, Darfur and
Haiti. The Maldives is especially concerned by
allegations of sexual violence by United Nations
peacekeepers in Haiti and Côte d’Ivoire.
Maldives has expressed support for Libya’s
National Transitional Council. With its current
transition from conflict to creating a stable
Government, we urge the National Transitional Council
to stay mindful of the specific needs of women and its
obligations towards them. That includes everything
from disarmament and reconciliation to women’s
participation and representation. The path towards
democracy is never easy, and women are often the first
to be forgotten.
Today, we know that the empowerment of women
leads to more stable nations with greater social
harmony, economic prosperity and political tolerance.
In order to promote international security, the Maldives
suggests that we move beyond the framework that
limits that discussion to conflict zones. The
empowerment of women and democratic development,
which leads to moderation and peace, enjoy a
symbiotic relationship whereby any sincere efforts
towards one leads to the other.
In the Maldives, through the democratic
movement we began the process of empowering our

31

S/PV.6642

population and reaffirming the rights of women. As the
movement took hold, the former Administration was
compelled to make concrete efforts to address national
concerns, and allowed for a national survey on the
abuse of women to be conducted. The results showed
that one in three women in Maldives, irrespective of
class or geography, is abused over the course of their
lifetime. In addition to that, women are becoming
increasingly more isolated through the adoption of
conservative Islamic interpretations and their
participation in the social, economic and political life
of the country is diminishing.
It was democracy that turned the tide of abuse in
the Maldives. Government-led efforts to address issues
related to women resulted in the establishment of call
centres and protective services. Civil society
participation and its advocacy in such efforts have also
been instrumental. In addition, the current Government
has taken steps towards training policemen and
policewomen to respond effectively to domestic
violence and abuse, while encouraging a greater
participation of women in political life.
The President of the Maldives went so far as to
endorse all the female candidates for our recent local
elections, regardless of party affiliation. We are also
proud to note that three of the 12 Cabinet ministers are
women. A Maldivian woman was also elected to the
United Nations Subcommittee on Prevention of
Torture. For the first time, the Secretary-General of the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation is a
woman, who happens to hail from the Maldives.
By involving women in social, economic and
political life, we are able to create stable nations that
foster moderation, countering Islamic conservatism. A
universal truth about radicalism is the exclusion and
isolation of women. If we are to change the dynamics
of security in the world and to ensure greater global
stability, the only way forward is through ensuring the
participation and active engagement of women without
restrictive social norms.
The Maldives sincerely hopes that members of
the Security Council consider that new paradigm and
its implications for global security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. King (Australia): Australia welcomes the
focus of this open debate on women’s participation and

32

role in conflict prevention and mediation. We thank
you very much, Madam President, for convening it.
Although the number of conflicts worldwide has
fallen since the 1990s, the proportion of civilian
casualties has increased dramatically. The toll in terms
of human suffering, economic loss and wasted
development opportunities has been enormous.
Women and girls are much more vulnerable to the
impacts of violent conflict than men, due to the
breakdown of social and legal systems when violence
occurs and because of inherent gender inequalities.
Women frequently bear the brunt of the devastating
consequences of armed violence, including sexual
violence. But women are not just victims. They are
often the key to preventing conflict and violence from
emerging, to resolving conflict and to rebuilding
societies once guns fall silent.
The Council has consistently recognized the
significance of women in preventing, managing and
resolving conflict, including as recently as through two
important recent resolutions, resolution 2014 (2011) on
Yemen and resolution 2009 (2011) on Libya. We
welcome that fact. The reality, though, is that women
are still largely excluded from the processes that can
lead to conflict or make peace. Women represent less
than 8 per cent of peace process participants and fewer
than 3 per cent of signatories to recent peace
agreements. Even when women are included in
negotiations, they are rarely present from the start.
That means that many defining decisions are made
long before women get to the table.
Women have much to contribute to peace. As the
Secretary-General has rightly observed, women are
crucial partners in shoring up the three pillars of lasting
peace — economic recovery, social cohesion and
political legitimacy. It is not possible to create a
legitimate and durable post-conflict political system
that does not include the full and equal participation of
women in decision-making. The role of women in
economic development must be recognized in order to
grow a post-conflict economy. Women, after all, are
most likely to be providing direct support to children
and extended kinship networks. Bringing the voice of
women to the forefront of conflict prevention and
mediation work will therefore help build more resilient
communities and a more sustainable peace. That is key
to the Security Council’s work.

11-56959

S/PV.6642

Of course, when we talk about conflict prevention
we are talking not just about involving women in
preventive diplomacy. We also speak of the much
broader agenda of ensuring that drivers of conflict do
not have the chance to surface. Democratic institutions,
the rule of law and economic development are
foundations of peaceful societies. We cannot expect
such societies to flourish without embracing the role
that women play in shaping them.
Recent years have seen several institutional
developments to better integrate these matters into the
work of the Security Council and the United Nations.
The establishment of UN-Women was a landmark
development. We welcome its initial work to take
forward the implementation of all the resolutions on
women and peace and security. But more can be done.
We encourage the Security Council to receive regular
briefings from Michelle Bachelet, Under-SecretaryGeneral and Executive Director of UN-Women, and
Margot Wallström, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
welcome the reference in today’s presidential statement
(S/PRST/2011/20) to briefings by Ms. Bachelet. We
hope that both she and Ms. Wallström can brief the
Security Council at their initiative and when they
regard elements of the women and peace and security
agenda as being relevant to country-specific Security
Council deliberations.
We also encourage the United Nations to include
relevant elements of the women and peace and security
agenda in all country- and mandate-specific reports to
be considered by the Security Council. It is essential to
ensure that the Council takes decisions that are
informed by the work and wishes of a community’s
women.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/598*)
highlights, concerted efforts are needed at all levels, in
particular among those responsible for technical and
financial support to national peace processes.
In our own Asia-Pacific region we have seen
great improvements in women’s capacity to engage in
peace processes that affect them. That is also a key
focus of our own aid programme in the region. In
Indonesia and Nepal, we have supported women
mediators, negotiators and advisers to identify and
implement strategies for improving women’s
participation in peace processes. That important work
continues to document best practices related to women

11-56959

and peacemaking in the Asia-Pacific region. The
United Nations Development Programme network of
peace advocates, N-PEACE, is also undertaking
important work in Timor-Leste, Sri Lanka, Indonesia
and Nepal. Earlier this month, N-PEACE launched an
interactive internet portal to connect peace advocates
within and across countries with experts in the field.
That facilitates the sharing of strategies to promote
gender equality and women’s empowerment in conflict
and post-conflict situations.
At the grass-roots level, we have witnessed the
mobilization by women in the Pacific to ensure their
voice is heard. For example, FemLINKPacific leads a
community and media policy network on women,
peace and security in Fiji, Solomon Islands, Tonga and
Bougainville in Papua New Guinea. Through the
production of a wide range of media initiatives, they
are empowering women across the Pacific to engage
with decision makers at all levels on issues that affect
them.
Women are particularly vulnerable to the effects
of conflict but can be powerful in ending it and are
central to rebuilding a society after conflict. They
should be given the opportunity to shape their own
future, as we have heard numerous times today. Peace
negotiations not only shape the post-conflict political
landscape directly, through agreements on justice,
power-sharing and constitutional issues, but also
indirectly, by lending legitimacy to those represented at
the peace table. A properly integrated role for women
enhances the prospects of a durable and lasting peace.
Clearly this debate has underscored remaining gaps
and challenges. We now have a collective
responsibility to translate this debate into further
action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks. Allow me also to
thank Mr. Lazarous Kapambwe, President of the
Economic and Social Council, for his statement, and
also Under-Secretary-General Michelle Bachelet for
her briefing and her leadership on the pressing issues
before us.
Today the Council takes up a debate that is very
important to the Jewish State and the Jewish people.
Our sages often remind us of the story of Miriam, who
was Moses’ sister and Judaism’s first female prophet.

33

S/PV.6642

As the Jewish people wandered through the desert for
40 years, Miriam sustained them with a well that
supplied fresh and plentiful water. Upon her death, the
well dried up and disappeared. The message of her
story is very clear. Empowered women are the life
source for thriving communities. Prosperity comes
when society ensures that women are allowed to lead;
it evaporates when their rights are restricted.
Those principles have been an integral part of the
State of Israel since its inception. Gender equality is
enshrined in our 1948 Declaration of Independence. It
has been implemented through law and public policy,
starting with a landmark and comprehensive piece of
legislation in 1951, known as the Women’s Equal
Rights Law. More than 40 years ago, Golda Meir
became Israel’s Prime Minister — making my country
just the third in the world to elect a woman to its
highest office.
This year, the Israeli parliament enacted a new
law as part of our implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), requiring that all Government investigative
committees include an appropriate representation of
women. By law, women must be included on Israeli
negotiating teams. Maybe that will move a few things
forward.
In a region where women are too often excluded
from public life, Israeli women stand out as leaders in
law, politics, mediation and conflict prevention and
resolution. The opposition in the Israeli parliament is
headed by a woman, Tzipi Livni. She also led the
Israeli negotiating team with the Palestinians as the
former Foreign Minister, and my former boss. Another
woman, Shelly Yachimovich, was recently elected to
lead the Israeli Labour party.
In Israel, we take pride in the fact that
approximately half of our internationally renowned
judiciary is made up of women, including our Supreme
Court, which is lead by Justice Dorit Beinish. Women
also occupy senior positions in our defence
establishment. This year Major General Orna Barbivai
made history when she was elevated to the secondhighest rank in the Israel Defense Forces.
As part of our commitment to implementing
resolution 1325 (2000), Israel’s Government holds
workshops to promote dialogue between Israeli and
Palestinian women at the Mount Carmel International
Training Center in Haifa. More than 650 Israeli and
Palestinian women have participated in more than 20

34

workshops over the past eight years. Such seminars
provide women with the tools and understanding
needed to promote peace and non-violence. A wide
range of similar projects are now under way in Israel.
We must recognize the clear connection between
advancing peace and advancing equal rights for
women. Across many corners of the Middle East today,
women are prohibited from driving, voting, receiving
inheritances, getting an education and travelling alone
in public. The subjugation of women in our region
cannot be ignored; it is a major obstacle to creating
real understanding between cultures and to building
sustainable peace.
Peace begins at home. Children learn the values
of tolerance and understanding, first and foremost,
from those who raise them — usually from their
mothers. We must recognize that when women are
subjugated and denied access to education, these
important values are damaged and lost. Empowered
women hold together healthy families, build strong
societies and serve as the most important bridges to
other cultures.
Peace in the Middle East and around the world
depends on empowering women and ensuring their
equal rights. Women can and should lead the way to
peace, but they must be given opportunities to sit in the
driver’s seat. The international community has a duty
to remove the obstacles from their path, so that we all
can build the foundation for a brighter future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Director of UN-Women and the
President of the Economic and Social Council for their
insightful
briefings. We
also
welcome
the
representative of civil society, and thank her for her
statement.
Japan welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/598*), which demonstrates his clear
commitment on this issue. We are encouraged that
UN-Women, under the strong leadership of
Ms. Bachelet, has been resolutely promoting the
agenda of women and peace and security as one of its
priorities.
Japan applauds the recent decision to award the
Nobel Peace Prize to President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf
and Ms. Leymah Gbowee of Liberia, and

11-56959

S/PV.6642

Ms. Tawakkul Karman of Yemen, who are champions
of women’s participation in peacebuilding processes. It
is groundbreaking that the announcement of the Prize
clearly mentions resolution 1325 (2000).
As a member of the group of Friends of
Mediation, Japan has consistently advocated the
importance of mediation and conflict prevention. We
welcome the fact that the General Assembly’s very first
resolution on mediation, which was adopted this June,
underlined the importance of the participation of
women and the provision of gender expertise in
mediation (see General Assembly resolution 65/283).
In order to prevent the recurrence of conflict and
sustain long-standing peace, the needs of women and
girls must be fully addressed in post-conflict
peacebuilding. To that end, it is essential that women’s
full and effective participation be ensured from the
very beginning of conflict prevention and mediation
processes. Japan expects UN-Women, in cooperation
with other partners including the Department of
Political Affairs, to coordinate and strengthen the
efforts of the United Nations system in this area and
provide guidance to regional organizations and
Member States in their efforts in mediation.
The important role of regional organizations,
such as the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, in conflict prevention has
been widely recognized. In that regard, it is
encouraging, as shown by the Organization of
American States ministerial meeting for the
advancement of women to be held next week in
El Salvador, that regional organizations have taken
steps towards the consistent inclusion of women and
women’s rights in their conflict prevention efforts.
The promotion of women’s participation in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding is key to the
protection and empowerment of women. The
strengthening of gender expertise and perspectives in
peacekeeping activities and increasing the number of
female peacekeepers remain a challenge. In that regard,
Japan deployed a female military liaison officer to the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste this
year. We also provide gender training to Japanese
personnel before they are deployed to peacekeeping
operations. This year, through the United Nations
Development Programme, Japan is supporting a project
to promote the employment of female police officers

11-56959

and their training in Afghanistan, which so far has
resulted in the employment of more than 1,200 Afghan
women in local police forces.
There remain large implementation gaps with
regard to resolution 1325 (2000) in all areas, including
prevention, participation, protection and recovery and
relief. The indicators and strategic framework in the
reports of the Secretary-General contribute to
identifying the gaps and addressing those limitations in
a more systematic manner. Japan, for its part, will
continue to do its utmost to close the implementation
gaps before the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), in cooperation with our partners and, in
particular, with women’s organizations and civil
society.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the presidency of the Security
Council for having organized this important meeting.
My delegation welcomes in particular the opportunity
to participate in this debate after last year having
celebrated the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) entitled “Women and peace and security”, a
historic resolution of which Tunisia, as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council in
2000, was one of the authors. I was personally
involved in negotiating that resolution.
My country continues to attach particular
importance to the issue and would like to underscore
its commitment to promoting the rights of women,
particularly women in conflict situations, as well as to
promoting the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in all its aspects.
Tunisia’s interest in the issue follows from its
long-standing commitment to the promotion of gender
equality and women’s empowerment. That is a
strategic choice that was taken at the time of
independence in 1956 and which has become an
integral part of my country’s national development
policy. The advanced status that Tunisian women enjoy
today is one of the most striking results of that choice.
My country is convinced that peace, development and
democracy cannot be carried out without the full
participation of women in public life and in the
decision-making process.

35

S/PV.6642

The 14 January 2011 revolution in Tunisia, in
which Tunisian women of all ages and all categories
actively participated, illustrates the commitment of
Tunisian women to establishing a democracy where
public freedoms, justice and equality are the custodians
of social peace and development. On 23 October, the
day of the historic elections to our National Assembly,
Tunisian women were at the forefront of voters, thus
affirming their right to active citizenship.
This debate on the issue of women and peace and
security is a good opportunity to evaluate the progress
made by the United Nations and Member States in this
area and to assess what remains to be done.
It is clear that resolution 1325 (2000) has defined
a framework of standards guiding United Nations
efforts on policies for integrating gender issues into the
whole of the work of the Organization. It is also
important to recognize that there is now great
awareness of the many types of violence inflicted on
women in conflict, and that significant attempts have
been made to address them. Since the primary victims
of armed conflict are women, along with children and
the elderly, it is important that they take on a key role
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding and, even more
urgently, in the process of prevention, to which it is
never too late to devote special attention.
That is why women’s perspectives are
increasingly taken into account in planning and
implementing peace processes and in peacekeeping
operations. The appointments of the Under-SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict are
important signs that should be built on, particularly
since it must be acknowledged that despite progress,
shameful crimes against women continue to occur
during armed conflict, especially in Africa and
occupied Palestine, where women are still coping with
terrible situations every day.
National ownership of resolution 1325 (2000) is
the best way to ensure its effective implementation,
given that primary responsibility for combating rape as
a weapon of war falls to Member States, whose duty it
is to urgently take measures to deal with this
phenomenon, measures that educate as well as enforce.
Tunisia has already launched a national action plan for
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In

36

particular, it promotes training women in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding so that we can deploy qualified
personnel in United Nations operations on the ground.
The plan is also designed to improve
pre-deployment training, with particular emphasis on
special measures aimed at protecting women against all
forms of violence against them. In September 2010
Tunisia organized a regional seminar on this subject,
enabling participants from the western Mediterranean
countries in the framework of the 5+5 process to
exchange national experiences with regard to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Tunisia intends to continue implementing that
resolution as apart of its comprehensive approach to
gender equality and the empowerment of women, and
will make itself available to the United Nations
concerning any aspect of implementing resolution 1325
(2000) and other international instruments dealing with
the welfare of women and their participation in
decision-making processes, as well as promoting a
culture of respect for women.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I would first like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on organizing this
open debate of the Security Council, and to commend
your commitment to promoting gender equality and the
empowerment of women. I thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Director of UN-Women, the
President of the Economic and Social Council and the
representative of the Working Group on Women and
Peace and Security for the comprehensive scope of
their briefings. And I join previous speakers in
recognizing the pivotal role of UN-Women in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the European Union, and wishes to make
some additional remarks in its national capacity.
Women’s participation in conflict prevention and
preventive diplomacy is crucial to achieving peace, as
the Security Council highlights in its decision to mark
the eleventh anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security. We welcome the
presidential statement the Council adopted today
(S/PRST/2011/20).

11-56959

S/PV.6642

Italy believes that if we want to see tangible
progress in this area, more needs to be done at the
national, regional and international levels.
First, women and women’s rights must be
consistently included in peace talks. Women are
formidable negotiators, mediators and peacebuilders,
but all too often they are denied access to negotiations
at the highest levels because of a lack of political will
and commitment. A transparent and inclusive peace
process involving representatives of every segment of
society, including women, is the most likely to
succeed.
Secondly, women’s rights must be an integral part
of peace agreements. One measure of the success of a
peace settlement is the extent to which obligations
under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women and other
international human rights conventions are fulfilled.
Thirdly, it is not enough to simply advocate the
participation of women in peace processes. We need to
provide concrete support so that women can build the
skills needed for meaningful involvement. And
education is crucial. At the same time, social barriers
blocking women’s access to peace processes must be
addressed. Since men are also a part of the equation,
civic education and human rights programmes for both
men and women at the community level can help lift
such barriers and hammer home the importance of
gender inclusiveness. We must also support civil
society organizations, particularly women’s groups,
which are vital to creating better links among women
and between State and community.

implementing the framework. The framework will
ensure a more comprehensive approach and more
results-oriented action on the part of the United
Nations system. Regional organizations should also
consider adopting similar tools. At the national level,
action plans remain a key instrument for ensuring
implementation of the resolution.
In December 2010, Italy adopted a three-year
action plan for resolution 1325 (2000). It provides a
strategic framework for improving implementation of
the provisions of the resolution, under which a national
focal point at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs monitors
all relevant activities. The plan focuses on such key
goals as increasing the number of women in the
national police and armed forces, strengthening the
inclusion of women in peace operations and their
decision-making bodies, protecting the human rights of
women and children during and after conflicts,
strengthening women’s participation in peace
processes, and engaging with civil society
organizations in order to promote implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
Since then, Italy has had regular contacts with
civil society organizations to benefit from their
experience in the field. The national focal point is
promoting awareness activities by disseminating the
plan throughout all sectors of government and society.
At the international level, Italy has introduced the issue
of women and peace and security as a priority to be
raised during the Universal Periodic Review of the
Human Rights Council, when the human rights
situations of Member States under consideration are
being addressed, in addition to bringing up the issue in
bilateral contacts with the countries concerned.

Lastly, it is high time that we fully mainstreamed
resolution 1325 (2000) into the work of the Security
Council. The Council should ensure that its resolutions,
including mission mandates and renewals, consistently
integrate and substantively advance the women and
peace and security agenda. The Council should also
benefit from more regular and frequent briefings by the
Executive Director of UN-Women and by the relevant
special representatives of the Secretary-General.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.

Regarding efforts to achieve more consistent and
serious progress in the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) at the global level, Italy welcomes the
strategic framework and its concrete targets for guiding
United Nations implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) developed by the Secretary-General, as well as
the use of a set of indicators to monitor progress in

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg congratulates the Nigerian presidency of
the Council for having organized this open debate on
women and peace and security, which gives us an
opportunity to take stock of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions. We
commend you, Madam President, on your concept note

11-56959

Eleven years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we are all being called on to renew our
commitment to ensuring that women can assert their
right to determine the peaceful futures of their
communities. Let us not miss the opportunity.

37

S/PV.6642

(S/2011/654, annex) focusing on the role of women in
conflict prevention and mediation.
Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union.
We thank the Secretary-General and UnderSecretary-General Michelle Bachelet for their briefings
on the efforts undertaken by the United Nations system
over the past year to implement the women and peace
and security agenda. We particularly welcome the
invitations extended to the President of the Economic
and Social Council and to the representative of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security to
participate in this meeting. Their perspective and
expertise are particularly relevant to today’s debate.
The awarding of the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize to
Liberian President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, to her
compatriot, Ms. Leymah Gbowee, and to Ms. Tawakkul
Karman of Yemen is highly symbolic recognition of
women’s crucial role in the establishment and
preservation of peace. We pay tribute to all the
Tunisian, Egyptian and Libyan women who have so
decisively contributed to shaping the Arab Spring.
Although women’s participation in Tunisia’s
recent elections has not lived up to all expectations, we
are confident that Tunisian women will be able to
assume, at all levels and in all political and economic
institutions, their responsibilities in the work of
building their country, and that they will thereby set an
example for other countries in the region and around
the world. We urge Libyan leaders to grant women
their full and proper place in the construction of the
new Libya. We express our solidarity with the women
of Yemen and Syria, who continue to fight against
oppression and for their rights to freedom and
democracy.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s conclusions
in his recent report (S/2011/598*) that the indicators
proposed last year (S/2010/498), which were endorsed
by the Council in its presidential statement of
26 October 2010 (S/PRST/2010/22), had made a major
contribution to consistency and coherence in
international efforts. We appreciate the SecretaryGeneral’s candid assessment of the challenges that lie
ahead
and
support
his
observations
and
recommendations.
We must focus our efforts even more on
implementing the normative framework created over

38

the past 11 years. The strategic results framework is the
right tool to accurately measure progress or the
absence of it. We encourage the Secretary-General to
continue to collect data based on the set of indicators
presented in his 2010 report. At the same time, we
encourage the entire United Nations system and all
Member States to help the Secretary-General to
implement his zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse perpetrated by the Blue
Helmets. Beyond the suffering of women and girls,
which we have a moral obligation to prevent, the
credibility of the Organization and of our efforts in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding in general is at stake.
Allow me, in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, to
highlight the role that Guinean women must play in the
establishment of democracy in Guinea, and specifically
in national reconciliation efforts in their country, which
was wounded by decades of authoritarian rule and
military dictatorship. The Peacebuilding Commission
is striving to assist Guinea to fully integrate women
into all political processes and into economic and
social life.
In that context, I encourage the Secretary-General
to push the entire United Nations system to pursue,
with even stronger determination, the implementation
of his seven-point action plan on the role of women in
peacebuilding. In his report on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) under consideration, the
Secretary-General outlines a few areas of progress, but
he also acknowledges that progress is slow in an area
of particular interest for today’s debate — the
participation of women in mediation efforts — and in
the area of women’s economic integration. At this
stage, we do not have sufficient data to measure
progress towards the goal of allocating 15 per cent of
all United Nations-managed funds in support of
peacebuilding to gender equality and women’s
empowerment.
Luxembourg continues to place great importance
on the plight of women in crisis situations and on
mainstreaming the gender dimension into the work of
international and regional organizations in that respect.
Last December, Luxembourg decided to fund a major
project of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
that is aimed at strengthening women’s leadership and
participation in political life and in peacebuilding
activities in countries emerging from conflict. With our
support, concrete results are being achieved in three

11-56959

S/PV.6642

countries — Timor-Leste, Haiti and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — through partnerships forged
between national and local authorities and United
Nations missions and agencies. We are determined to
maintain and to reinforce that national commitment. By
strengthening the role of women in conflict prevention
and mediation, we will help to improve society as a
whole.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Last
year, when we were assembled here in the Chamber to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), I mentioned that I had travelled to Burundi to
meet with women’s peace organizations whose
peaceful demonstrations had a significant impact in
limiting violence during the elections (see S/PV.6411).
I am very happy that those women’s actions for peace
were honoured with the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize. Like
my colleague from Luxembourg, who spoke before me,
I would like to take this opportunity to thank and
congratulate the three Nobel Prize recipients and all the
women for peace whom they represent.
The events of the Arab Spring have highlighted
the leading role of women and emphasized the urgency
of including them in efforts to form their Governments
and shape policies. That is why we would like to thank
the Nigerian presidency for choosing women’s
participation as the theme of this debate. This key
aspect of resolution 1325 (2000) remains a core
objective of Swiss foreign policy, in particular of our
national action plan, which contains specific measures
to mainstream the gender dimension into its mediation
programme. For example, we strive to ensure the
balanced participation of women and men in our
Government’s annual peace mediation training courses,
in which United Nations staff regularly participate.
Furthermore, our mediators take gender-specific
aspects into account in their work. Finally, although
still a challenge, we actively promote the role of
women as mediators.
I am honoured to make the following comments
on behalf of the Human Security Network, namely,
Australia, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Slovenia, Switzerland and Thailand, as
well South Africa as an observer. The Human Security
Network is an informal group of States that advocates a
holistic approach to security based on the individual,

11-56959

which complements the more traditional understanding
of national and international security.
The tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
brought significant progress in the normative and
institutional areas. As a result, the Security Council
now has an adequate set of instruments for time-bound
and measurable actions in order to move forward with
the agenda set forth in resolution 1325 (2000).
UN-Women was created and has now issued its first
strategic plan, with an initial set of indicators on
resolution 1325 (2000) having been put in place. We
believe that these are useful tools and we are hopeful
that the established targets can be achieved with
concerted action.
However, we conclude in a rather sober
assessment that those achievements are still not
matched by the necessary political will. The Human
Security Network encourages the Security Council to
continue its efforts to meet its women, peace and
security obligations, in particular by means of issuing
concrete instructions in resolutions mandating or
renewing United Nations peacekeeping missions — a
practice that the Secretary-General mentions
approvingly
and
encourages
in
his
report
(S/2011/598*); regular encounters with women
stakeholders during missions; and frequent exchanges
with UN-Women and the Special Representative to the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflicts.
I now return to speaking in my national capacity.
We would like to draw the attention of the members of
the Security Council to the monthly action points of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
and the Women, Peace and Security Handbook
published by Peacewomen, both supported by
Switzerland and Liechtenstein. These two instruments
are now also available as an iPhone application. They
are, in our view, excellent tools for supporting the
gender-mainstreaming policy in the context of the
Security Council, and we encourage members to make
use of them.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General again
shows that the increased participation of women in
peace promotion remains a challenge. Capacitybuilding exercises for women mediators are ongoing in
different parts of the world to provide a cadre of wellprepared women to be involved in future peace talks. I
note, for example, the training activities undertaken by
Swisspeace in West Africa, with the cooperation of the

39

S/PV.6642

United Nations Office for West Africa and UN-Women,
and in Kyrgyzstan with UN-Women.
However, our experience shows that it is not
enough to train women as mediators. The Security
Council and Member States need to put strategies in
place to facilitate the active involvement of women and
women’s rights in peace processes, including by
including women mediators and by ensuring that
women’s rights are integrated into peace agreements.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Limeres (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation commends you, Madam, for your initiative
to convene this open debate. We also thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon; Under-Secretary-General
Michelle Bachelet; Ambassador Lazarous Kapambwe,
President of the Economic and Social Council; and Ms.
Orzala Ashraf Nemat of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security for their statements.
Our country welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/598*), which comprehensively reflects
the important role that women play in preventive
diplomacy,
peace
negotiation
processes,
and
post-conflict reconstruction. The merit of resolution
1325 (2000) is specifically that the Security Council
recognizes therein the key role that women can play as
protagonists in peace processes. The international
community must pool its efforts to ensure that this
protagonist role remains possible. We are convinced
that lasting peace can be attained only if women
participate in all phases of peace processes. We
therefore welcome the idea of compiling lists of
women candidates to mediate conflicts.
We also believe that the establishment of
UN-Women was a key step in the consolidation of the
women and peace and security agenda, embodied, inter
alia, in technical assistance that the entity is providing
to countries of all regions in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions. We
wish in particular to express our appreciation for the
cooperation of UN-Women in the ongoing drafting of
Argentina’s national action plan, which has been
created on the basis of a series priority areas of our
domestic and international policy, including the
defence of multilateralism, contributions to peace
processes, the promotion and protection of human
rights, gender equality, and the protection of civilians
in conflict. Another priority is increasing the political

40

participation of women and including the gender
perspective in all matters related to peace and security
at the national, regional and international levels.
Our plan is the result of a participatory and
comprehensive exercise led by the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, and involves other State and civil society
agencies. In addition to incorporating the traditional
contributions of the Ministries of Security and
Defence, the plan includes input from stakeholders
with experience in training and assistance to women
victims of gender violence and human trafficking, who
we believe are able to contribute to the reconstruction
of societies affected by armed conflict, thereby
underscoring the gender approach in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process and
preventing the re-victimization of women. Moreover,
we believe it necessary to include cooperation in the
field of health, in particular sexual and reproductive
health, and in the integration of women into the labour
market and the educational system.
I cannot conclude without expressing my
appreciation for the report’s mention of Argentina’s
efforts to increase the number of Argentine women
deployed in its armed and security forces, as well as to
peacekeeping missions. The report also notes our
initiatives to develop and improve training in the
specific protection rights and needs of women and
girls. We will pursue such efforts in the conviction that,
11 years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
much remains to be done if we are to achieve its full
and effective implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I am speaking on behalf of
the European Union and its member States. The
candidate countries Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; the countries
of the Stabilisation and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align themselves with
this declaration.
In recent years, women have played a visible and
decisive role in movements aimed at rebuilding and
reshaping societies. Therefore, we also find the theme
of today’s debate more than pertinent and welcome the

11-56959

S/PV.6642

opportunity to discuss concrete means to ensure
women’s full participation in peace processes, which is
a core element of resolution 1325 (2000). We thank the
Secretary-General, the Under-Secretary General, the
President of the Economic and Social Council and
Ms Orzala Ashraf Nemat for their statements.
Last year, the Security Council noted with
concern that women’s participation in conflict
resolution remains too low. Of the nine peace
agreements signed in 2010, only two had provisions
ensuring women’s rights. Today’s theme points to
another important issue — the need to ensure women’s
participation in all stages of peace processes, and from
early on. Women, peace and security issues need to be
systematically integrated into preventive diplomacy,
early warning, human rights and security monitoring.
This has a direct impact on the inclusion of women’s
rights and perspectives in the later stages of the peace
process.
Women’s absence from formal peace negotiations
is in turn often followed by their absence from bodies
laying the foundations for a new, post-conflict society.
These include political decision-making bodies,
ceasefire and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration
commissions,
constitutional
and
legislative reform commissions, as well as truth and
reconciliation bodies. This needs to be accompanied by
sufficient gender expertise among the actors involved
in peace processes. We therefore welcome the recent
Department of Political Affairs and UN-Women joint
gender and mediation strategy to equip mediators and
their teams with expertise to address gender issues. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s intention to continue
to increase the number of gender experts in the United
Nations rosters for surge capacity for crises, standby
experts for humanitarian response and mediation, and
specialists on conflict prevention and post-conflict
planning. In this regard, we emphasize the seven-point
action plan of the Secretary-General presented in 2010.
We are encouraged by the increased participation
of women in United Nations field missions and
welcome further efforts to increase the number of
women in senior leadership positions both at
Headquarters and in the field. Civil society, including
women’s organizations, plays an important role in
sustaining the momentum for recovery and
transformation, and enhancing women’s participation.
This is also reflected in the findings of the World

11-56959

Bank’s annual World Development Report of 2011,
focused on conflict, security and development.
Our meeting a year ago (see S/PV.6411) was
aimed at providing a strong impulse for the continued
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It also
provided a space for concrete commitments to close
what you, Madam President, have called a “troubling
gap” between global and regional commitments and
actual practice. During the past year, we have also
gained useful mechanisms to monitor, measure and
evaluate our progress. We would also like to commend
the work of UN-Women, which plays a crucial role in
mobilizing the support of the United Nations system
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We welcome the strategic framework — which
includes concrete targets to guide the implementation
by the United Nations of resolution 1325 (2000) —
developed by the Secretary-General in response to the
Council’s request, and the use of the set of indicators to
monitor progress in implementing the framework. It
provides an important means of ensuring the
coherence, coordination and accountability of United
Nations action.
In this regard, we also appreciate the useful
briefings provided to the Council by Under-SecretaryGeneral Bachelet, as well as the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict. We
support the call to accommodate more frequent
briefings to the Council on women, peace and security,
including upon the request of the Under-SecretaryGeneral and the Special Representatives. We also
encourage UN-Women’s efforts to continue its
cooperation with the Special Representatives. We note
positively the call to consider means of enhancing
women’s prevention role in the Council’s deliberations
on preventive diplomacy and mediation.
Last year, the EU presented its commitments for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I would
like to give a brief overview of our activities to follow
these up.
In 2008, the European Union adopted a
Comprehensive Approach for the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008). Further to this, we established 17 indicators to
evaluate gaps in our action and to improve
accountability in this regard. The first report based on
the indicators was published in May 2011, and the

41

S/PV.6642

results are encouraging. The EU is active on this issue
in more than 70 countries. Its support amounts to about
€200 million a year for the development and
implementation of national action plans, support for
non-governmental organizations, and training for
governmental agencies.
We are strongly committed to enhancing the
consideration of gender aspects in the early planning of
our missions and operations, during their conduct and
in the lessons-learned processes. In November 2010,
the European Union adopted its first report on the
lessons learned and best practices in connection with
mainstreaming human rights and gender into the
military and civilian missions under the Common
Security and Defence Policy (CSDP). All these
missions and operations now include human rights or
gender expertise. For instance, the two CSDP missions
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo include
experts on the prevention of sexual violence, while the
EU Integrated Rule of Law Mission for Iraq offers
courses for female police, judicial and penitentiary
officers and has trained more than 340 women since
2005.
The EU has also established a mediation support
team to ensure the representation of women in
mediation processes and the availability of gender
expertise in mediation teams which the Union supports.
The support provided by the European Union to the
United Nations Mediation Support Unit will
specifically target the participation of women in peace
processes.
To adequately train those deployed, we developed
standard training elements on human rights, gender and
child protection in the context of Common Security
and Defence Policy missions in 2010 and are now
finalizing the first gender-training module. The EU
remains committed to supporting and sharing the
outcomes of its ongoing work with the relevant United
Nations agencies and bodies, as well as States
Members of the United Nations, in order to enhance
women’s participation in peace processes.
The President: I
representative of Angola.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I have the honour
to address the Security Council on behalf of the States
members of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), namely, Botswana, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Lesotho, Malawi,

42

Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Seychelles, South
Africa, Swaziland, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Zambia, Zimbabwe and my own country, Angola.
Allow me at the outset to commend you, Madam
President, for including this very important topic in
your agenda and highlighting it through this debate.
We thank the Under-Secretary-General and
Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), Ms. Bachelet; the representative of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security;
the representative of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations; and Ambassador Kapambwe, President of
the Economic and Social Council, for their briefings to
the Council this morning. We also take this opportunity
to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/598*).
SADC is encouraged by the progress achieved so
far in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We feel that important groundwork has been laid for a
long-term effort by the United Nations system towards
the full implementation of that resolution. We welcome
the increased political commitment to gender equality
and women’s empowerment in peace processes. It is
important that we maintain the momentum to sustain
the gains made to date. It is also necessary that we all
make concerted efforts to fully realize the objectives of
resolution 1325 (2000).
Achieving gender equality and empowering
women are two of the key principles that propelled the
founding of SADC, as reflected in the SADC Treaty.
The SADC Protocol on Gender and Development of
2008 put measures in place to ensure that women
obtain equal representation and participation in all key
decision-making positions by 2015.
SADC is concerned about the widespread and
systematic sexual violence to which women and girls
continue to be subjected in conflict situations, and it
condemns the use of sexual and gender-based violence
against women and children. It is our collective view
that all parties to armed conflict should respect the
regional mechanisms and international laws applicable
to the rights and protection of women and children.
SADC has developed a strategy to address sexual
violence against women and girls, particularly in
conflict and post-conflict situations, as well as a
framework for mainstreaming gender within the SADC

11-56959

S/PV.6642

peace and security architecture. SADC member States
have made progress in mainstreaming gender
initiatives, especially with regard to the training of
trainers on gender-mainstreaming. In addition to that,
SADC has initiated an advocacy strategy on informal
cross-border trade, which provides a clear policy on
areas of legislative action necessary for creating a
favourable and enabling environment for women in
trade, especially informal cross-border trade. We are
now witnessing positive results, especially in the
creation of new business opportunities, expanded
markets, new business connections and capacitybuilding for business women.
SADC remains committed to efforts to promote
the empowerment and advancement of women.
However, despite some great steps towards that goal,
women remain largely underrepresented in key
decision-making structures and in peacemaking and
peacebuilding processes. The region believes that,
when given the opportunity, women will become active
agents of change and play a critical role in the recovery
and reintegration of families after conflict. Women are
also instrumental in bringing about reconciliation and
democracy in post-conflict societies. The recent award
of the Nobel Peace Prize is a good example of that.
I would like to take this opportunity to stress that
SADC attaches great importance to the creation of the
new United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, UN-Women. We express our
complete availability to work towards the success of
that new entity. SADC believes that UN-Women can
play a vital role in helping developing countries
acquire the skills required to enhance meaningful
participation in decision-making and peacebuilding
processes. Support of women’s education in that
respect will be an important prerequisite to achieving
that objective.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate SADC’s
solid commitment to the full and effective
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). The international community as a whole has an
obligation to women the world over, to ensure that
their rights are protected and that their place in all
aspects of the peace process is assured. It is their equal
participation and their full involvement that will
contribute to the effective maintenance and promotion
of sustainable peace and security.

11-56959

While progress has been registered in the
implementation of the resolution, greater coordinated
efforts are required to achieve the goal of its full
implementation. In that connection, SADC welcomes
the Council’s adoption this morning of the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2011/20).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to convey my delegation’s sincere congratulations
for the convening of this important debate on women,
peace and security, which represents, Madam
President, the crowning moment of your remarkable
presidency of the Council for the month of October. I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement, as well as Mr. Lazarous Kapambwe,
President of the Economic and Social Council,
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Executive Director of
UN-Women, and Ms. Orzala Ashraf Nemat,
representative of civil society, for their important
contributions.
My delegation has a special interest in the topic,
because resolution 1325 (2000) represented an
enormous step forward in the protection of women and
highlighted the importance of their role in all aspects
of United Nations peacekeeping. Nonetheless, while it
has remained far from being a cure-all, resolution 1325
(2000) has contributed, along with resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009), to improving the
normative framework for preventing gender-based
violence and for protecting women against that
scourge.
It should, however, be pointed out that, despite
those praiseworthy efforts, persistent shortcomings
have exposed thousands of women and girls to various
types of barbaric abuse and atrocities. In fact, rape
continues to be used as a weapon of war in certain
conflict areas, and the ongoing existence of sexual and
gender-based violence, even at the end of a conflict,
represents an almost permanent threat to the security
and health of that vulnerable group of the population.
That is why the international community must firmly
commit to vigorously combating impunity in order to
guarantee the effective prevention of all forms of
violence against women.
While welcoming the zero tolerance policy on
sexual violence of the Secretary-General, we must, in
addition, insist on the need to bolster the role of

43

S/PV.6642

women in conflict-prevention and resolution.
Nevertheless, the poor results in that area have
undoubtedly been due to the continuing low
participation of women in the drafting of
implementation strategies. I consider it crucial,
therefore, to foster women’s participation by reserving
a key role for them in conflict-prevention policies, as
well as policies on peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
social and economic recovery. In that context, there
must be a special focus on women’s empowerment,
which will require significant investment in education,
training and maternal health.
In view of our considerable awareness of that
dynamic process, my country has allocated a
significant part of its budget to education and health,
and on 14 May 2010, it adopted a law to establish full
parity in all partially or fully elected bodies. In that
manner, Senegal intends to ensure the effective
participation of women in decision-making processes.
To follow up on that law, a national gender-parity
monitoring body was set up and will be officially
inaugurated on 16 November.
Senegal has already adopted its national action
plan to implement resolution 1325 (2000).
Furthermore, it has sought to make a positive
contribution to drafting the action plan of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Dakar Declaration by focusing on
the four following areas: first, effective participation of
women in the peace process; secondly, protection of
women and girls; thirdly, prevention of gender-based
violence through preventive diplomacy and early
warning systems, and fourthly, reconstruction and
victim assistance.

44

It is certain that those significant national and
regional level initiatives are welcome. However, they
will achieve the desired success only if linked with an
international dynamic inspired by the Security Council
and based on coordinated efforts on the part of
UN-Women and all of the other relevant bodies. There
is also a need to improve women’s involvement in
peacekeeping operations by following up on the
laudable efforts already carried out in that domain.
The effective prevention of sexual violence also
requires stringent measures to vigorously combat the
root causes of conflict exacerbation. Since there is an
established link between what is known as low-level
conflicts and wide-scale violence against women, I
would like to launch an appeal for coordinated and
focused action against the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. In that regard, my delegation
cherishes the hope that the diplomatic conference of
2012 will enable the adoption of a robust arms trade
treaty.
Allow me to conclude by expressing my
country’s conviction that the efforts to be undertaken
by 2015 will enable the Security Council to take stock
at that time of the positive implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I
intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m. prompt.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

11-56959
