S/PV.8284

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8284

th meeting
Wednesday, 13 June 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen
Ms. French

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa and the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (S/2018/521)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-18194 (E)
*1818194*

S/PV.8284

Central African region

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

including by leading or deploying more missions to
redouble our efforts in conflict prevention and crisis
management. Allow me to set out some of the new
developments in the subregion.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (S/2018/521)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. François Louncény Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
and His Excellency Mr. Ahmad Allam-Mi, SecretaryGeneral of the Economic Community of Central
African States, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Allam-Mi is joining this meeting via video
tele-conference from Manhasset, New York.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/521 which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa
and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa.I now give the floor to Mr. Fall.
Mr. Fall (spoke in French): The situation in Central
Africa has remained difficult since the publication
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/521)
that is before the members of the Security Council,
with a number of serious threats to political, security
and socioeconomic stability, including in countries
affected by long-standing armed conflicts, such as the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. All 11 member States of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) are
either in the middle or at the beginning of an electoral
cycle and, as a result, are experiencing tensions related
to electoral processes. People everywhere continue to
demand better socioeconomic conditions.
Demands for the engagement of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), good
offices and preventive diplomacy have remained strong.
I have intensified my engagement with countries in the
subregion and our support to subregional organizations,
2/17

13/06/2018

The new Constitution adopted by the National
Assembly of Chad was promulgatedon 4 May, and a
new Government was sworn in on 10 May. President
Idriss Deby Itno presided over a ceremony on 24 May
to establish a new national framework for political
dialogue, which includes 15 members of the majority
and 15 members of the opposition. In coordination
with our partners, UNOCA stands ready to support
the national framework for political dialogue as it
takes up the challenge of promoting inclusive dialogue
and creating the conditions for credible and peaceful
parliamentary elections in November.
The newly established electoral body in Gabon has
begun preparations for the upcoming parliamentary
elections. During my meeting with the head of Gabon’s
central elections body on 18 May, I reiterated the
readiness of the United Nations to support the electoral
process. In order to improve the representation of women
and youth in elected positions and decision-making
bodies, UNOCA and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) supported the Gabonese network
of women senators in organizing a training workshop
in Libreville, from 5 to 7 June, which targeted women
and youth political leaders.
Burundi’s
President
Pierre
Nkurunziza
promulgated a new Constitution on 7 June, following
the Constitutional Court’s validation of the results of
the referendum held on 17 May. Several stakeholders
and partners expressed concern that reform could
reverse the gains of the Arusha Agreement in terms
of peace, stability, democracy and inclusive political
participation. It is important that the Council continue
to lend its support to the mediation process led by the
East African Community. I reiterate Special Envoy
Michel Kafando’s call to the Government and the
opposition to resume and conclude the talks as soon as
possible and start preparing the ground for inclusive
and credible elections in 2020.
The escalation of violence and tension in the northwest and south-west regions of Cameroon, which are
also still affected by Boko Haram’s activities and the
impact of the crisis in the Central African Republic, is a
source of major concern. More than 20,000 Cameroonian
refugees have already been registered across the border
18-18194

13/06/2018

Central African region

S/PV. 8284

in Nigeria and are in need of assistance. On 25 May,
seven English-speaking activists were sentenced to up
to 15 years in prison on terrorism and other charges.
The United Nations has consistently called for an
inclusive dialogue with all stakeholders as the best way
to find a solution to the crisis, respond to the grievances
of the English-speaking population and guarantee
the territorial integrity of the country and regional
stability. I congratulate the national commission for
the promotion of bilingualism and multiculturalism for
its efforts, and encourage it to continue its work and
duly note the public’s recommendations. Diffusing
tensions will also contribute to the proper holding of
the presidential, legislative and municipal elections
scheduled for this year. In that regard, the United
Nations will continue to call on all actors to refrain
from further acts of violence.

participate more actively in the African Initiative, both
politically and financially. I also strongly encourage
the Central African authorities and neighbouring
countries to accelerate the process of establishing joint
commissions, which could address issues such as border
control and transhumance. I will continue to focus my
efforts on mobilizing support for the African Initiative.

A series of trials took place in the Republic of Congo
involving political leaders arrested following the 2016
presidential election, resulting in long prison sentences
for several of them, including 20 years for General
Jean-Marie Michel Mokoko, former Chief of Staff of
the army and a former presidential candidate. While
progress has been made in advancing the peace process
in the Pool region, the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process is progressing more slowly
than expected. The United Nations will continue to
support that process with other partners.

The scourge of terrorism and violent extremism
continues to affect populations of the subregion and
to lead to the diversion of Government resources from
much-needed development programmes to costly
security operations. Boko Haram and the Lord’s
Resistance Army have not stopped their deadly attacks
on civilians, committing egregious human rights abuses
and causing countless victims. UNOCA is engaging
subregional organizations, including the ECCAS
secretariat, the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the
Multinational Joint Task Force and other stakeholders,
to fight Boko Haram and address related issues and,
more broadly, violent extremism in the subregion,
including to facilitate the implementation of the
regional strategy against Boko Haram. I also continue
liaising closely with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel,
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for coordinated support to
regional efforts to address the Lake Chad basin crisis.

Tensions continued to erupt in Sao Tome and
Principe following a decision by the majority-controlled
National Assembly on 4 May to remove judges from the
Supreme Court of Justice because of differences over
the Supreme Court’s decision to return the country’s
brewery, Rosema, to an Angolan investor. The National
Assembly approved a resolution on 23 May on the
appointment of new Supreme Court judges, which was
subsequently adopted on 30 May. On the following day,
the opposition parties asked the Constitutional Court to
review the constitutionality of the law.
The crisis in the Central African Republic
continues to have a negative impact on the situation in
the subregion, particularly in neighbouring countries,
causing a large number of refugees. However, I am
encouraged by the findings of the second phase of
consultations with armed groups, conducted by the
panel of facilitators of the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation. I hope that the results of those
consultations will lead to tangible improvements in the
security situation. I urge the countries of the region to

On 11 June, President Teodoro Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo of Equatorial Guinea invited all legally
registered and unregistered parties, civil society and the
diaspora to participate in a national political dialogue
scheduled for July. I congratulate the President on his
initiative and look forward with great interest to the
results of that dialogue, which could further open up
political space in the country.
(spoke in English)

On 8 and 9 May, the Lake Chad basin governors’
forum for regional cooperation on stabilization,
peacebuilding and sustainable development held
its inaugural meeting in Maiduguri, Nigeria. The
governors established the forum as a platform for
regional cooperation on stabilization, peacebuilding
and sustainable development in the area affected
by Boko Haram. The forum, which is supported by
UNOCA, the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the Sahel and UNDP,
will convene at least once a year.
Violent extremism, ongoing cross-border insecurity
and criminal activities are compounded by the flow of

18-181943/17

S/PV.8284

Central African region

small arms and light weapons throughout the subregion.
In response to that challenge, the first conference
of States parties to the Central African Convention
for the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons,
Their Ammunition and All Parts and Components
That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and
Assembly — the Kinshasa Convention — is taking
place right now in Yaoundé, with the participation
of UNOCA. The Convention was developed through
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa (UNSAC), with
UNOCA support.
In its capacity as secretariat of UNSAC, UNOCA
supported the holding of the forty-sixth ministerial
meeting of the Committee, held in Brazzaville from
29 May to 1 June. The forum provides a unique
decision-making platform for discussing the overall
political, security and socioeconomic situation in the
subregion. The heads and representatives of United
Nations peace operations in the subregion — including
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Office
of the Special Envoy of the Great Lakes Region and
UNOWAS — also attended the meeting, in recognition
of the need for promoting cooperation and coherence
among United Nations entities on the ground. UNSAC
recommended that ECCAS expedite the implementation
of the regional strategy on counter-terrorism and the
non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons in
Central Africa, which was adopted at the forty-first
meeting of UNSAC, held in 2015.
I welcome the endorsement, on 24 May, of the
regional action plan for the implementation in Central
Africa of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, following a two-day workshop
organized by ECCAS and UNOCA in Brazzaville.
Resource mobilization will be critical to ensuring the
successful implementation of the plan. I am convinced
that the participation of women and youth will be
crucial to ensuring a successful ECCAS and Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) joint
summit, which is expected to take place in July, under
the theme “Peace, security, radicalization and violent
extremism within the ECCAS-ECOWAS space.” I call
upon ECCAS and ECOWAS member States to ensure
that women and youth are involved in developing and
implementing strategies to prevent violent extremism
4/17

13/06/2018

and terrorism, in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. UNOCA and UNOWAS will continue to
support ECCAS and ECOWAS in a coordinated manner.
Consistent with its mandate, UNOCA has remained
actively engaged in support of Central African Member
States and subregional organizations, in particular
ECCAS. At their joint meeting on 11 and 12 May,
ECCAS and UNOCA adopted a biennial programme
for the period 2018-2019 that includes additional joint
visits to the subregion and joint analysis to promote
enhanced coordination in conflict prevention and
management and peacebuilding. I welcome the decision
of ECCAS member States to accelerate the reform of
the institution. I call upon ECCAS member States to
remain committed to completing that important process.
The reform is a good opportunity for the subregional
organization to improve its functioning, including that
of its funding mechanism, to ensure the implementation
of key projects on peace, security, peacebuilding and
governance. The United Nations, including through
UNOCA, stands ready to provide assistance to ECCAS
and Member States in that critical endeavour.
Since its mandate was last renewed, in 2015,
UNOCA has proved its effectiveness as a tool for
advancing the Secretary-General’s prevention agenda
in Central Africa. The activities of the Office have also
been crucial to strengthening the capacity of ECCAS
in enhancing United Nations coordination in the
subregion. We look forward to the Security Council’s
support for UNOCA’s mandate-renewal for another
three years, as recommended by the Secretary-General
in his report.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Fall
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Allam-Mi.
Mr. Allam-Mi (spoke in French): I am honoured
to participate via video-teleconference in today’s
important meeting to consider the fourteenth report of
the Secretary-General on Central Africa (S/2018/521).
Allow me to thank the Russian presidency of the
Security Council for inviting me to speak.
I should like to recall that the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) is one
of the eight regional economic communities that make
up the pillars of African integration. Founded in 1983,
ECCAS is a geographical space covering 6.6 million
square kilometres, where more than 160 million people
18-18194

13/06/2018

Central African region

live. Its goal is to promote and strengthen harmonious
cooperation and balanced development across all
socioeconomic areas in its 11 member States. Its
members are Angola, Burundi, Cameroon, the Central
African Republic, Chad, Congo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea,
Rwanda and São Tomé and Príncipe. That is a major
goal with many challenges, which we sincerely hope to
overcome with the support of our international partners,
in particular the United Nations. Our main priorities
are infrastructure, the environment and peace and
security-related issues, which did not feature as part of
the goals of ECCAS at the time of its establishment.
ECCAS was forced to address issues relating to peace
and security as it emerged from a period of inertia
between 1992 and 1998 because of the violent wars in
seven of its 10 member States during that time. ECCAS
goals were strengthened in February 1999 with the
aim of preventing and resolving conflict through the
establishment of the Council for Peace and Security
in Central Africa and with the support of the United
Nations, within the framework of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Issues in
Central Africa.
In addition to Council for Peace and Security
protocols, other legal instruments and normative
frameworks were established to provide ECCAS with
a robust, diversified and operational peace and security
architecture. The Central African Convention for the
Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their
Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can
Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly
is the most recent of those instruments. It was adopted
on 30 April 2010 in Kinshasa and entered into force
in March 2017. The peace and security architecture of
ECCAS works, of course, in line with the African Union
Peace and Security Architecture; the results could be
improved upon, but they are already encouraging.
Thanks to this architecture, ECCAS has been able
to take concrete steps on the ground. It deployed its
first peace missions in the Central African Republic,
the first and second Missions for the Consolidation of
Peace in the Central African Republic, between 2008
and 2013, with 2,600 staff in 2013, at the height of the
crisis, before the African Union and the United Nations
took over with the deployment of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic and then the United Nations Multidimensional

S/PV. 8284

Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA).
Given the continuing threat to the security of the
subregion posed by the situation in the country, ECCAS
remains seized of the situation in the Central African
Republic and continues to express its solidarity with that
Member State. In that regard, it participates fully in the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic, which requires multifaceted
support from the international community.
With regard to maritime safety and security, the
Central African subregion now hosts, in Yaoundé,
the Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime
Security in the Gulf of Guinea, which is entrusted
with implementing the strategy developed by the
States of the Gulf of Guinea, through their regional
institutions: ECCAS, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, with, of course, ongoing support from the
United Nations.
The most recent meeting of the high leadership
of the three organizations was held on 5 April 2018
to decide on the budget and fine-tune the process for
organizing a meeting with contributing third parties,
with the technical support of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS).
In the area of combating terrorism in all of its
manifestations, and in harmony with the global strategy
adopted by the United Nations, ECCAS undertook
major initiatives, including the development, with
the support of UNOCA, of a subregional strategy on
combating terrorism. It was endorsed at the ministerial
level and will very soon be submitted to the Heads of
State and Government for their approval.
Along those same lines, the long-awaited joint
ECCAS-ECOWAS summit on the issue of violent
extremism is scheduled to take place on 30 July, with
the technical support of UNOCA and UNOWAS.
A cooperation framework between ECCAS and
ECOWAS is being finalized and should be signed by
the heads of both bodies before the summit. I should
like to point out here that a document on a strategy to
combat transboundary organized crime and mercenary
activities is also being developed by ECCAS, in line
with the request from the Security Council.

18-181945/17

S/PV.8284

Central African region

In the institutional area, ECCAS began an in-depth
reform, on the basis of a decision by the Heads of State
and Government on 25 May 2015. The process should
lead to new foundational texts, in particular a revised
treaty and other texts. The process is going well; the plan
is for draft texts to be provided to us by a study group
in July. The adoption and signing of the texts by the
Heads of State and Government is likely to take place
during a special summit that we are planning to hold
at the end of 2018 or early 2019. Within the framework
of this reform, it is planned to transform the General
Secretariat into a commission and to create a standing
peace and security council at ECCAS headquarters.
On the overall political, security and humanitarian
situation in Central Africa today, we cannot but
acknowledge that despite the many efforts and real
advances made in recent years, Central Africa remains
a region of crises and armed conflicts, open or latent.
It is also particularly affected by the political crises in
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
by the political, security and humanitarian crisis in the
Central African Republic, as well as by the activities of
terrorist groups in the Lake Chad basin.
In this regard, I would like to welcome the highquality report that the Secretary-General presented on
the situation in Central Africa. I also am very pleased to
see that the contribution made by the ECCAS General
Secretariat was largely taken into account in the
drafting of the report. Indeed, the excellent cooperation
that exists between UNOCA and the ECCAS General
Secretariat, as well as my excellent relationship with the
Representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, my brother Fall, whose presence I welcome at
this meeting, have made it possible to carry out jointly
activities and missions on the ground.
We have a framework of cooperation that includes
plans for periodic common activities. The last such plan
was finalized during a common retreat we organized in
May. I will not to go into detail on the fourteenth report
of the Secretary-General, but I should like to note that
certain developments must be taken into account.
In Burundi, President Nkurunziza announced
that he would not run for President in 2020. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the International
Criminal Court acquitted the former Vice-President,
Jean-Pierre Bemba, and in the Central African Republic,
there is, on the one hand, reason to be encouraged by
the involvement of former heads of Central African
6/17

13/06/2018

States in supporting the African initiative, but, on
the other hand, reason to be concerned because of the
renewed violence in Bangui and within the country.
This is worrying and something that we must act upon,
given the seriousness of the situation. In this regard, I
reiterate ECCAS’s condemnation of all acts of violence,
in particular those perpetrated against MINUSCA.
Lastly, the political, security and humanitarian
situation in the subregion will be at the very heart of
the consultative meeting of the Heads of State and
Government of ECCAS, which President Ali Bongo
Ondimba, President of the Republic of Gabon and
the current Chairman of ECCAS, will convene on the
margins of the African Union summit planned for 1 and
2 July in Nouakchott.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Allam-Mi for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I wish to thank our
briefers today — Ambassador Fall for his report and
for his team’s work in this challenging region, and
Ambassador Allam-Mi for his comments. I welcome
him to the Security Council; it is good to see him today,
because regional organizations like his are essential,
and we are pleased that he has been able to demonstrate
today the cooperation between the regional group and
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA).
The United Kingdom remains concerned by the
security and political situation in Central Africa.
Many of those concerns are reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2018/521), including the threats from
terrorist groups, such as Boko Haram and other groups
in the Lake Chad basin and the Lord’s Resistance Army
in the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We note with horror the use of
women and girls as suicide bombers by Boko Haram.
As we have discussed on many previous occasions
in the Security Council, both military and non-military
action is required so as to address such threats. We must
understand their root causes and the political, economic
and humanitarian needs of the population. It is essential
that we adopt a coherent and whole-of-United Nations
approach in order both to tackle the existing problems
and to prevent further deterioration in the region.
18-18194

13/06/2018

Central African region

Ten million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance in the Lake Chad basin this year. The United
Kingdom has committed £300 million to tackling
the crisis over the next five years. We call on other
international donors to help to make up the funding
shortfalls for humanitarian operations across the region.
We are also concerned about the situation in
Cameroon and the number of casualties that have
resulted among both civilians and the Cameroon
security forces. Citizens have the right to peaceful
protest. It is the Government’s responsibility to protect
demonstrators, while also protecting the safety and
security of all citizens. We call for all parties to reject
violence, pursue dialogue and urgently take action to
reduce tensions. Failure to do so will only cause the
already concerning situation to deteriorate further.
In that regard, we welcome the New Year
announcement by President Biya to pursue dialogue,
decentralization and restraint. We strongly encourage
the Government to take further steps to give effect
to that announcement. We commend the support of
UNOCA as part of broader international efforts to
find a lasting solution to the current crisis. We would
encourage the intensification of those efforts. We ask
that we be kept regularly informed on progress.
We recognize the efforts of UNOCA in other areas
in the region, including the mobilization of support for
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic with regional partners.
We encourage such support to continue. UNOCA also
has a crucial role in supporting States in the subregion
to hold timely, transparent and inclusive elections and
the efforts of the Economic Commission for Africa to
lay the groundwork for the structural prevention of
election-related violence.
We are concerned about the threat of piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea, and we appreciate UNOCA reporting on
that matter. Further and more detailed reporting on the
problem and the work being done to combat it should be
carried out given the heightened and significant threat
to international shipping and regional prosperity.
In addition to regional Governments, regional
organizations, including the African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community, the Gulf of Guinea Commission and
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, are essential to
addressing the challenges to peace and security,

S/PV. 8284

promoting democratic governance and enhancing
regional cooperation. Interregional cooperation,
particularly on issues such as the Sahel, are also crucial.
We welcome the announcement that ECCAS and the
Economic Community of West African States will hold
a joint summit in July. We encourage UNOCA and the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel to
continue to support that interregional approach.
UNOCA has demonstrated that it can be a valuable
partner to regional Governments and organizations. In
order to make the best use of the resources available,
UNOCA should focus on building the capacity of
regional entities to deliver crisis-prevention work, such
as preventative diplomacy, early-warning mechanisms
and mediation, and to support United Nations agencies
in priority thematic areas, including gender.
The United Kingdom appreciates the efforts of
UNOCA in the region. We encourage UNOCA to
improve its communication of that good work. That
would ensure that those outside the United Nations
system can better understand UNOCA’s ongoing work
and support it wherever possible.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatoral Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): Allow me, first of all, to thank
Mr. François Fall, my brother, and the entire team of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) for the detailed and informative briefing
on the situation in that region, for which we express
our full support. We also welcome Mr. Ahmad AllamMi, Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States, and thank him for his briefing.
We would like to begin our statement by condemning
in the strongest terms the 10 June attack perpetrated
against a patrol of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, which resulted in the death of one member of
the peacekeeping contingent of Burundi and left another
injured. We convey our condolences in that regard.
We take note of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/521). We believe that since 2011, the date on
which it assumed the functions of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa,
UNOCA has faced many challenges that undermine
peace, security and political stability in our subregion.
As I have said earlier, we support the good offices of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Central Africa in his decisive role in the prevention and

18-181947/17

S/PV.8284

Central African region

mitigation of election-related crises and the promotion
of inclusive political dialogue and reform processes in
several countries of our region.
Today, the international community again faces a
new outbreak of Ebola virus in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where there have already been more
than 20 deaths. That situation poses new challenges
and requires prompt coordination at a time when the
international community is focused on the electoral
process in the country. We hope that the outbreak can
be controlled very soon.
The political and security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic poses challenges to the subregion,
which, we believe, should be resolved through direct
national dialogue supported by the international
community and regional and subregional organizations
with measures to strengthen State authority and to
alleviate poverty, that is to say, political solutions
together with economic measures. At the same time,
synergies must be combined to combat negative trends,
such as the Lord’s Resistance Army. The international
community must condemn any neglect of the situation
and not allow that group of mercenaries to become
more active and operational. In that regard, the African
Union continues to call for international assistance to
support the forces that are still fighting that armed
group, which has taken refuge on the borders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic.
My country’s Government also continues to be
concerned about the terrorist activities of Boko Haram.
That group of religious fundamentalists has now
become a threat not only to the countries of the Lake
Chad Basin but to all West Africa. It is also a threat
to international peace and security. For more than
eight years, after spreading terror in Nigeria, Boko
Haram has increased its activities, in many cases using
children and young women in suicide attacks, affecting
countries of our subregion, such as Cameroon and Chad.
It is also necessary to point out that, while the Islamist
group has been weakened militarily since 2015 thanks
to the joint action of the armies of Nigeria, Cameroon,
Chad and the Niger, today the group has withdrawn to
Lake Chad, However, unfortunately, it is still a strong
destructive force. The international community must
continue to support the efforts of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and the African Union in planning future
operations against that terrorist group.
8/17

13/06/2018

We also urge the neighbouring States and other
States members of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region to ensure regional cooperation
to investigate and to combat the criminal networks
and armed groups involved in the illegal exploitation
and smuggling of natural resources, such as gold,
diamonds, poaching and trafficking in species of wild
fauna and flora. We hope that the region can soon
re-establish itself.
Urgent action by the international community on
implementing measures to deal with the humanitarian
situation in those countries, as well as with Boko
Haram’s activities, is essential to ensuring that they can
continue to receive aid and enable them to cope with
their humanitarian crisis, one of the major consequences
of the problems affecting the area.
My Government has taken note of the statement
by President Pierre Nkunrunziza of Burundi regarding
his decision not to run for office in 2020, despite the
fact that the country’s Constitution would enable him
to run again. Equatorial Guinea would like to take
this opportunity to call on the Burundian authorities
to consolidate their political process, which will be
crucial to the forthcoming elections. We also urge
them to resume inclusive dialogue under the auspices
of the countries of the region and in the spirit of the
Arusha Accords.
While some progress has been made in the region,
in general the situation remains volatile owing to a
resurgence in violence and the continuing activity
and presence of armed groups in the Central African
Republic and its neighbours, which are unfortunately
undermining State authority and whose effects have a
direct impact on neighbouring countries. That was in
fact the case with the failed attempt at a coup in my
country on 28 December 2017, in which a group of
foreign mercenaries infiltrated my country with the aim
of using violence to change our constitutional order.
That and other similar actions, which do nothing but
disturb regional peace, security and stability, have been
firmly rejected by the people of Equatorial Guinea,
who support respect for constitutional order and the
strengthening of their democratic institutions.
This is not the first time that my country has suffered
similar attempts, as we have repeatedly pointed out in
this Chamber. We realize that our regional mechanisms
for preventing conflict should be strengthened.
Otherwise we could see even more serious situations
18-18194

13/06/2018

Central African region

S/PV. 8284

arise that would certainly not help to bring peace to
an already very complex region. One possible measure
for preventing conflict, as Mr. Fall mentioned, is the
conference on the Central African Convention on the
Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons. We know
that trafficking in small arms and light weapons helps
to expand and prolong conflicts in the region, and it is
therefore an issue that should be given major attention.

Central Africa, Equatorial Guinea encourages all the
Governments and political stakeholders involved to
continue to maintain an inclusive internal dialogue
with close regional and subregional cooperation, in the
understanding that overcoming our challenges in the
subregion in particular, and in Africa in general, will
enable us to ultimately achieve the goals of the African
Union’s Agenda 2063.

This situation of instability and insecurity in the
Gulf of Guinea emphasizes the importance of organizing
an international conference on combating mercenaries.
In that connection, the international community should
become increasingly involved in preventing conflicts
in the region by cooperating and supporting the efforts
of the Gulf of Guinea Commission, essentially by
focusing on maritime protection of the Gulf and on
preventing and combating crime on the high seas in
order to help avoid conflict and maintain peace in the
region. Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is definitely one of
my Government’s concerns, and in fact there will be an
Arria Formula meeting on the subject this afternoon.

These and other realities have led my Government
to convene our sixth national political dialogue round
table at the initiative of His Excellency President
Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, to be held in July, and to
which we have invited all of Equatorial Guinea’s
political parties, whether legalized or not, as well as
all Equatorial Guinean stakeholders and political
activists both inside and outside the country. We will
use the round table to discuss important issues such as
economic prospects, human rights, democratization and
the ongoing strengthening of national cohesion as an
element that contributes to proactive national progress.
These issues mark the guidelines that we have been
outlining during our Council membership, defined as
the peaceful settlement of conflict through dialogue.
We want to reiterate our support to UNOCA once again.
It is crucial to the efforts to stabilize our region.

We support the continued strengthening of the
cooperation framework signed in June 2016 between
UNOCA and the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS). We stress the importance
of closely monitoring the tripartite agreement signed
on 23 May 2011 in Khartoum by Chad, the Central
African Republic and the Sudan to enhance security
in their common border areas, and we urge the main
stakeholders — the United Nations, ECCAS, the African
Union and the European Union — to redouble their
efforts to resolve conflicts, consolidate State authority,
protect civilians and arrive at negotiated solutions to
the conflicts in the region while maintaining respect for
the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs
of the countries concerned.
We believe that UNOCA should continue to work
hard to create synergies with the purpose of promoting
bilateral cooperation among neighbouring countries
and strengthening cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in the area of peace and
security, particularly the African Union, ECCAS, the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
and the Gulf of Guinea Commission. We welcome
the announcement of the upcoming summit between
ECCAS and the Economic Community of West African
States. As a country of the subregion covered by those
regional and subregional communities and as a member
of the subregional Council for Peace and Security in

Ms. French (United States): I would like to thank
Special Representative Fall and Secretary-General
Allam-Mi for their briefings today and for all their
work in Central Africa, which is facing a challenging
set of political, economic and social issues.
We would like to take this opportunity to focus on
the situation in Cameroon, which demands the attention
of both the Security Council and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). We are
concerned about the fact that the situation continues to
deteriorate, with increasing levels of violence, including
against civilians, witnessed in the past few weeks.
Recent press reports indicate that as many as 40 people
were killed in the north-west region of the country in
the last week of May. The stakes in Cameroon are too
high for this crisis to continue without being addressed.
Cameroon continues to be an essential security partner
in the fight against Boko Haram and the Islamic State in
West Africa, including as a member of the Multinational
Joint Task Force.
The ongoing crisis in the anglophone regions
threatens to detract from our mutual security
objectives in the region of the Lake Chad basin. If

18-181949/17

S/PV.8284

Central African region

confidence-building steps leading to a meaningful,
broad-based dialogue are not taken now, tensions
could increase further, leading to the potential for
violence related to the forthcoming elections this
autumn, and to the possibility that the legitimacy of the
election results could be called into question. We have
unfortunately seen far too many examples of tensions
spiking in the Central African region during and after
electoral processes, and it is clear that we will have to
remain vigilant in that regard in the coming months
in Cameroon.
While we welcomed President Biya’s public
commitment to dialogue at the beginning of this year,
and while we recognize the initial work of Cameroon’s
commission for bilingualism and multiculturalism,
we are concerned about the fact that there has been
little progress to date towards a peaceful resolution.
Most of the constitutional reforms of 1996 calling for
decentralization, which may have helped to defuse
tensions, have so far not been implemented. It is
essential that all parties take steps immediately to
de-escalate the crisis and protect civilians from harm.
In that regard, we believe that Mr. Fall and UNOCA
have an important role to play in engaging with all
parties in Cameroon in order to encourage constructive
engagement, accountability for the allegations of abuse,
and a de-escalation of tensions. We look forward in the
coming months to further discussions with the Council
about the situation in Cameroon.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting and we are grateful for the briefings given
by Mr. Fall and Mr. Allam-Mi. We welcome the work
they carry out under particularly difficult political and
security conditions.
We wish to emphasize the importance of adopting
regional and subregional approaches to addressing
shared challenges, building sustainable peace and
responding to the root causes of conflicts, and of the
role played by the regional and subregional offices of
the United Nations.
The United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) is an example in that regard, as it
deploys good offices and coordinates and promotes
agreement among relevant stakeholders, thereby
contributing to the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and humanitarian crises affecting over 11 million people,
in addition to supporting various efforts and reforms
10/17

13/06/2018

in the development and strengthening of institutions.
We commend the coordination and partnerships that
UNOCA has established with the African Union,
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), the Gulf of Guinea Commission and the
Economic Community of West African States.
We look forward to the holding of elections in
the five countries of Central Africa. We underscore
the importance of political stability and the broad
participation of citizens, especially women and
young people, in those elections. Promoting inclusive
and accountable institutions is essential to building
sustainable peace. However, we must express our
concern about the ongoing violence and numerous
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law observed in the subregion. UNOCA’s
action should enable the international community to
closely monitor the situation and promote prevention.
We condemn and are particularly concerned about the
ongoing terrorist threat of Boko Haram in the Lake
Chad basin, including attacks on schools and the abuse
and exploitation of women and children, as well as the
actions of the so-called Lord’s Resistance Army in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
We welcome the joint strategy, under the auspices
of ECCAS, aimed at preventing and combating
terrorism, in particular measures to combat the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons and other
activities linking terrorism to organized crime. The
international community must staunchly support these
efforts. We also welcome the reform of the Council for
Peace and Security in Central Africa, and stress its
complementarity with the counter-terrorism actions of
the African Union and its coordination with the Lake
Chad Basin Commission and the United Nations system.
We must recall that the subregion is facing a severe
humanitarian crisis. Some 11 million people depend
heavily on external assistance, and millions are also
displaced by hunger and violence. The international
community must redouble its efforts to address that
vulnerable situation.
In conclusion, I would like to express Peru’s
support for the extension of the mandate of UNOCA and
recognize once again the work it is doing to serve the
people of Central Africa and to maintain international
peace and security.
18-18194

13/06/2018

Central African region

Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. François Louncény Fall and
Mr. Ahmad Allam-Mi for their excellent briefings and
assures them of Côte d’Ivoire’s support.
We welcome the progress made in recent years in
several Central African countries. However, we remain
concerned about the serious multifaceted political
and security challenges, such as armed conflict,
terrorism, poaching, transnational organized crime and
maritime piracy.
In the Central African Republic, the renewed
violence, including clashes between ethnic and religious
communities and repeated attacks against the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, continues to
be a source of concern. The absence of State authority
over a large swath of national territory, mercenary
activities and illicit trafficking in natural resources and
weapons are all challenges that have a negative impact
on the security of the country and the entire region.
The situation demands a coordinated response by the
international community to address these challenges.
My delegation supports the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, conducted under the auspices of the African
Union, whose effective implementation of the road map
should enable significant progress to be made towards
achieving a lasting solution to the crisis in that country.
We also welcome the efforts undertaken by the President
of the Central African Republic, Mr. Touadera, to
promote constructive dialogue and consultation with
a view to ensuring inclusive national reconciliation,
which is essential to achieving lasting peace.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, my
delegation calls for the effective implementation of
the 31 December agreement in order to ensure the
holding of elections on 23 December. We welcome the
progress that has been accomplished in that area. We
further encourage the Congolese Government to do
more to address the remaining challenges, in particular
security issues, and to take the steps necessary to ease
the sociopolitical environment as a precondition for
peaceful elections.
With regard to the situation in Burundi, Côte
d’Ivoire takes note of the results of the referendum on
the constitutional review, held on 17 May. We call on all
parties to resume inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue,
under the auspices of the East African Community

S/PV. 8284

and within the framework of the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, with a view to
definitively overcoming the crisis.
The security situation in the Lake Chad basin is also
a source of concern for my delegation in the light of the
ongoing threat posed by Boko Haram, whose criminal
activities extend to Cameroon, Chad and the Niger. My
country welcomes the upcoming implementation of the
stabilization strategy for the Lake Chad region, which
seeks to identify, prosecute, rehabilitate and reintegrate
persons associated with Boko Haram and the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant, in accordance with
resolution 2349 (2017). My delegation also supports
the strengthening of support for the Multinational Joint
Task Force against Boko Haram, in close collaboration
with the African Union and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, as recommended by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2018/521).
Côte d’Ivoire is also concerned about the actions
of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), which remains
a threat to the safety of civilians, despite the fact that
its operational capabilities have been reduced. Indeed,
the movement regularly carries out kidnappings,
looting, extrajudicial executions and sexual assaults,
in particular in the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My delegation
welcomes the extension of the mandate of the Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the LRA
by the African Union until 22 August. We invite the
international community to support the military
component of the Regional Cooperation Initiative,
which remains a relevant mechanism for cooperation
and coordination in the fight against the LRA.
The difficulties I have just noted show the need for
the establishment of a regional cooperation strategy
in order to provide an appropriate response to the
challenges undermining Central Africa. In that regard,
my country supports the efforts of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) to
promote peace and security, and welcomes the recent
adoption by the Council for Peace and Security in
Central Africa (COPAX) of the strategy to prevent
and combat terrorism in the region, in accordance
with the recommendation of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa. Côte d’Ivoire also encourages the
implementation of the subregional strategy to combat
mercenary activities and transnational organized crime

18-1819411/17

S/PV.8284

Central African region

in Central Africa, as well as the adoption of subregional
regulations on pastoralism, as decided by COPAX.
Мy delegation welcomes the good cooperation that
exists between the subregional organizations ECCAS
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), within the framework of shared experiences
and mutual support in order to face the challenge of
fighting instability. It attaches particular importance to
the joint ECCAS-ECOWAS summit on peace, security,
radicalization and violent extremism, to be held in
July. We hope that the conclusions of the summit will
foster interregional synergies in addressing challenges
related to conflict prevention and peacebuilding, while
strengthening the capacities of subregional institutions.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/521)
provides us with useful insight into the excellent
preventive diplomacy tool of UNOCA. Its activities over
the past three years have led to considerable progress
in the areas of security, peace and stability in Central
Africa, including crisis prevention and mitigation,
the promotion of dialogue and the implementation of
inclusive political reforms, particularly in Chad, Gabon
and Sao Tome and Principe.
Faced with the challenges of consolidating peace
and reviving sustainable development policies in
Central Africa, UNOCA plays a vital role in supporting
the efforts of the States and peoples of the subregion
in their quest for peace, stability and development,
especially through partnership strategies with other
institutions, with a view to achieving unity of action and
pooling working resources. In that context, we should
encourage concrete action, such as the cooperation
framework between ECCAS and UNOCA, signed on
14 June 2016 in New York. Furthermore, my delegation
welcomes the excellent collaboration between UNOCA
and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel in harmonizing the United Nations approach to
peace and security in their respective subregions.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire supports the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa. Its mission of good offices and
preventive diplomacy remains relevant to the quest for
peace, stability and socioeconomic development in the
Central African States.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): My delegation thanks
our briefers, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Fall and the Secretary-General of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS),
12/17

13/06/2018

Mr. Ahmad Allam-Mi, for their informative updates
and contributions to our deliberations today. We would
like to make our observations and recommendations on
some key and salient points.
First, Kazakhstan recognizes the importance of
the work of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA), in line with the SecretaryGeneral’s new agenda for peace, inter alia, in the
field of preventive diplomacy and mediation, as well
as the support it provides to regional and subregional
organizations in achieving durable and long-term
peace. We also note, despite the existing problems in
the region, the efforts and commitments of the countries
of the region to increase subregional integration and
ongoing reforms aimed at strengthening the rule of law
and good governance.
On the other hand, we are particularly concerned
by the tension in the English-speaking regions of
Cameroon. We support the efforts of the authorities of
Cameroon, as well as UNOCA, the African Union and
ECCAS, to address that issue. At the same time, we urge
all parties involved to create all necessary conditions
for the cessation of violence, and we stress the need to
establish genuine and inclusive dialogue, rebuild trust
and use confidence-building measures.
Secondly, with respect to the counter-terrorism
track, we draw attention to the activities of Boko
Haram and other extremist groups and organized crime
networks. It is therefore important that the African
Union, the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the
United Nations continue to work towards formulating
and implementing a well-coordinated regional
strategy to fight the root causes of the crisis, which
is of a transnational nature expanding across borders.
Simultaneously, if is to be effective and streamlined,
the United Nations has to utilize a whole-of-system
approach and deliver as one United Nations, with a
strengthened security-development nexus for more
enduring political and socioeconomic stability.
The regional States are encountering unprecedented
challenges in combating terrorism. We support the
efforts of UNOCA to coordinate the activities of regional
organizations in that regard. We welcome the adoption
of the ECCAS strategy to prevent and fight terrorism
in Central Africa, developed under the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa. In that vein, we call on all international
partners — such as the Multinational Joint Task Force
18-18194

13/06/2018

Central African region

in the Lake Chad area and the African Union Regional
Task Force in the Central African region — to continue
to support regional counter-terrorist forces.
Thirdly, the problem of the increasing number of
internally displaced persons and refugees in the region
deserves special attention. That issue, along with a
reduction in humanitarian access due to the lack of
security for those in need of help, puts a heavy burden
on host communities and countries against the backdrop
of limited funding for humanitarian assistance.
Moreover, outbreaks of epidemics worsen the situation.
In that regard, what is needed is not only the support of
international donors, but also the coordinated efforts
of local Governments to ensure security and create the
conditions for the voluntary return of refugees, with the
full support of the United Nations system.
Lastly, we highly appreciate the coordinating role
of UNOCA as the secretariat of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa and its invaluable contribution to the
maintenance of peace and security in the region. Still,
much work remains to be done to consolidate the gains
achieved. In that regard, we support the extension of
the UNOCA mandate for the next three years.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. François
Louncény Fall, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa, and Mr. Ahmad Allam-Mi,
Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), for their informative
briefings. We stress the important role that both are
playing in the region.
Bolivia commends and acknowledges the work
that the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) has been carrying out in the
areas of preventive diplomacy, elections assistance,
mediation and confidence-building measures, as well
as the support it provides to regional and subregional
organizations in order to contribute to the reduction
of tensions in the region. That work should not be
overlooked, but must continue to be deepened with
the cooperation of regional and subregional partners
under the principle of respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of each of the
States where it implements its mandate.
Such efforts must be made to address the
remaining challenges in the areas of peace and security,

S/PV. 8284

humanitarian assistance and economic development,
the complexity of which implies that they must be
addressed through a joint strategy between UNOCA,
the United Nations country teams and regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union (AU), ECCAS, the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community, the Gulf of Guinea Commission
and the Lake Chad Basin Commission. It is alongside
those organizations that current and emerging threats
must be addressed in order to reduce their potential
impact on the stability of the subregion.
In that regard, we warmly welcome the consultative
meeting of the Heads of State of ECCAS within the
framework of the African Union Summit in Addis
Ababa, at which they agreed to convene a session of the
Assembly of Heads of State of the Council for Peace
and Security in Central Africa (COPAX). Similarly, we
commend the work conducted by the COPAX Council
of Ministers at its fifth ordinary session, at which it
adopted, inter alia, a strategy to prevent and combat
terrorism in Central Africa and another to combat
mercenary activities and transnational crime.
We also commend the ECCAS and the Economic
Community of West African States on their consultation
meeting in Lomé. During that meeting, it was noted
that both organizations would organize a summit on
peace, security, radicalization and violent extremism
in July. We highlight the initiative of President Bongo
Odimba, who, in his capacity as ECCAS Chair,
visited several countries of the region for discussions
on security and regional integration. In that context,
we believe that, although the situation is different in
each country, conflicts in the region must be resolved
through mediation, preventive diplomacy and primarily
through constructive and inclusive political dialogue.
In line with previous remarks, we reiterate
that we must consider the possibility of replicating
the initiative of the Group of Five for the Sahel in
Central Africa in order to address security challenges
and combat terrorism within an institutional and
regional cooperation and coordination framework.
In that context, we highlight the progress made by
the Multinational Joint Task Force and regional and
international partners in their fight against Boko
Haram in the Lake Chad basin. We also underscore the
efforts of the African Union and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, which, with the support of various United
Nations entities, resulted in a conference in N’Djamena
to develop a coordinated regional approach to find,

18-1819413/17

S/PV.8284

Central African region

bring to trial, rehabilitate and reintegrate individuals
affiliated with Boko Haram and Da’esh, in line with
resolution 2349 (2017). We believe that in order to
address those challenges, countries of the region and
the international community as a whole must determine
the root causes of such challenges. One cause is the lack
of control over the use of natural resources, which are
used to finance the illegal activities of groups, such
as the Lord’s Resistance Army — an armed group
that remains a threat to the security of civilians in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
We implore the international community to
consider the humanitarian situation in the subregion.
In the Lake Chad basin region alone, approximately
10 million people are in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance. Hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons and refugees are vulnerable to food
insecurity, diseases, such as Ebola in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the lack of basic services.
In addition, Bolivia notes that another factor that
fosters peacebuilding in the region is the increased
participation of women in the decision-making process.
We encourage UNOCA to continue its efforts in that
regard and in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
Lastly, it is necessary and vital to continue to
redouble efforts to galvanize political, technical and
financial support in order to achieve peace, stability
and development in Central Africa. In that regard,
support for the work of UNOCA must continue. Its next
mandate will focus on preparing for the prevention
of elections-related violence and for other preventive
diplomacy, peace and security and mediation efforts.
We believe it is important to renew its mandate for
another three years.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Fall,
for his briefing on the activities of his Office and his
assessment of key trends with regard to developments
in the political and security situation of the Central
African region. We recognize the important work
carried out by the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) in utilizing good offices,
preventive diplomacy in mediation, as well as the
support it provides to the United Nations and regional
and subregional initiatives related to peace and security
in the region.
14/17

13/06/2018

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
of the Economic Community of Central African States,
Mr. Allam-Mi, for his briefing. We appreciate his work
and contribution.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/521)
mentions, the situation in the Central African region
continues to be extremely worrying and therefore
requires our utmost attention. Terrorism remains a major
concern in the region and is exacerbated by prolonged
conflicts, a governance deficit and the weakening of
central authority and State institutions. Transnational
organized crime that is intimately intertwined with
terrorist and armed group activities, such as those of
Boko Haram and the Lord’s Resistance Army, continue
to affect the stability of the region. At this juncture,
I would like to condemn in the strongest terms the
repeated attacks carried out against peacekeepers
who are working under difficult conditions and facing
enormous challenges in the region. We express our
sympathy in solidarity with the families of the victims
of those attacks and we hope that those who perpetrated
those heinous acts will be held to account.
The deteriorating political, security, socioeconomic
and humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic, which also has an adverse impact on the
wider region, clearly attests to the fragile situation in
the country. It has the potential to reverse the limited
gains made recently and plunge the country into another
cycle of violence and conflict. While we recognize the
various steps taken by the Government to extend State
authority, undertaking institutional reforms and the
gradual operationalization of the defence and security
forces, there is an urgent need to reverse the spiral of
violence in various parts of the country by promoting
peace and reconciliation. Ensuring broader and more
inclusive dialogue, as well as reconciliation among
various communities, is important to addressing the
challenges faced by the country. We therefore believe
that the Government needs greater support to work
within the panel of facilitators of the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation, which remains the only
framework for peace and dialogue in the Central
African Republic.
At the centre of the problem in the Central African
region is the threat posed by Boko Haram and the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). As the report of the
Secretary-General states, Boko Haram remains a
threat in the Lake Chad basin. Although severely
degraded, the Lord’s Resistance Army remains active
18-18194

13/06/2018

Central African region

in the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. While we were all reminded
of the causes of the security vacuum created and the
setbacks in fighting the Lord’s Resistance Army, we are
nonetheless appreciative of the Congolese contingent of
the Regional Task Force and its commitment to fighting
the LRA on its territory. We believe that enhanced
political, diplomatic and operational support is critical
for that operation. Similarly, the efforts of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic should be
commended. We call upon the Security Council to
strengthen its mandate to enable it to respond to the
evolving situation on the ground.
With regard to Boko Haram, despite its weakened
position, the security and humanitarian damage it
continues to inflict on the Lake Chad basin countries
has continued. Enhancing political support and
mobilizing resources for the Multinational Joint Task
Force against Boko Haram is therefore very critical
in order to considerably weaken the capability of the
terrorist group and continue to successfully dislodge it
from its strongholds. All of that makes it very critical
that the peace and security of the Central African
region be followed up closely, perhaps more than has
been the case so far. It is important that the stability of
the countries of the region that have maintained peace
for a long period of time be upheld. We believe that
UNOCA has a major responsibility in this regard, but,
of course, it also needs the support of the international
community to be able to discharge its responsibilities.
At the same time, we continue to call on all
stakeholders to exercise restraint in their activities
and to refrain from further acts that could undermine
the possibilities for mutual cooperation. Nor should
we overlook the recent developments to which the
representative of Equatorial Guinea referred, to the
effect that the activities of mercenaries have not ceased
to be a problem, including in this region.
We believe that the efforts made by the
Government and the people of Cameroon towards a
peaceful settlement of the challenges they face through
an inclusive and meaningful dialogue and national
reconciliation should receive the necessary support.
Similarly, the international community should give
primacy to quiet diplomacy, carefully handling issues
such as this one, and we recommend also the use of
the good offices of the Secretary-General in that regard
and appreciate the initiative that he has already taken.

S/PV. 8284

We seriously believe that while preventive measures
should always be given primacy, it is equally critical to
refrain from dramatizing situations, which might end
up aggravating problems. That is why quiet diplomacy
is always more productive.
Finally, we wish to reiterate that it is our firm
conviction that UNOCA plays a critical role in
supporting the various efforts made by the countries of
the subregion to reduce tensions in a peaceful manner,
through inclusive and authentic dialogue processes. To
that end, we strongly support the renewal of UNOCA’s
mandate. In the light of the many challenges that the
Central African region is facing, it appears only logical
and proper for the international community to do more
to help UNOCA and help address this challenge. We are
asking UNOCA to do more; while doing so we should
also take the steps necessary to enhance its capacity.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I, too, would like
to start by thanking Special Representative Fall and
the Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), Ambassador AllamMi, for their very useful briefings to the Council today.
As we have heard this morning, the Central African
region continues to face a number of challenges. These
include electoral processes and related challenges
to political space. Underdevelopment and the
humanitarian situation in the region are also a source of
concern. Taken together, the situation deserves our and
the region’s continued attention, as it serves as an early
warning sign of even greater challenges down the line.
In such circumstances, the role of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
in conflict prevention, including through its good
offices and support for regional cooperation and
integration, is, of course, of vital importance. Regional
offices are one of the most effective operational tools
that the United Nations has to prevent conflict. They
should be supported, strengthened and multiplied. In
this regard, the Council has an important role to play,
in particular by standing by our envoys. We would like
to express our full support for the efforts of Special
Representative Fall and his team in UNOCA today.
Regional organizations such as ECCAS not
only play a critical role in promoting integration and
development, but also are key to preventing conflict
and promoting peace. We therefore encourage
continued support for building the capacities of regional
organizations in the Central African region. We also

18-1819415/17

S/PV.8284

Central African region

welcome the increased collaboration between ECCAS
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), including the upcoming summit.
We remain deeply concerned by the dire security,
human rights and humanitarian situation in the
Central African Republic and welcome the joint visit
undertaken by ECOWAS and the Secretary-General of
ECCAS. We also welcome the joint United NationsAfrican Union visit to the Central African Republic in
April. It is important that the United Nations continue
to promote and support the African Union and ECCASled African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation and
the Libreville road map.
We are concerned that the situation in the northwest and south-west regions of Cameroon remains
unresolved. The need to address long-standing
grievances is evident. In order to move forward
peacefully, it is important that all parties act responsibly,
refrain from acts of violence and contribute to the
upholding of human rights, as well as to an open and
inclusive dialogue, not least regarding the question of
decentralization. The situation in Cameroon has direct
implications for peace in the broader subregion, and we
must therefore continue to follow the situation closely,
including in the light of the upcoming elections. The
continued engagement of the Special Representative
will be essential, and he has our full support in
these efforts.
Sweden supported the organization of the Lake
Chad governors’ forum on peacebuilding, prevention,
stabilization and regional cooperation, held in
Maiduguri in May. That successful meeting was
preceded by consultations with more than 1,000 women,
men and young people from communities around the
lake, including religious groups. This consultation
and the forum itself clearly highlighted the need for a
holistic, regional approach to address the root causes of
the lack of peace and stability in the region, including
the adverse effects of climate change.
The main outcome of this process was to establish
the governors’ forum as a vehicle for recurrent dialogue
between the governors of the States affected, aimed at
improving coordination and cross-border collaboration.
We hope that these and other efforts to follow up
on resolution 2349 (2017), on the Lake Chad basin
region, will benefit the development of the regional
stabilization strategy.
16/17

13/06/2018

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mr. François Fall, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Central Africa and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), and Mr. Ahmad Allam-Mi, SecretaryGeneral of the Economic Community of Central
African States, for their comprehensive briefings.
Allow me to focus on three aspects: the political,
security and humanitarian situation in the region.
We commend the important work carried out
by UNOCA in terms of good offices, mediation and
preventive diplomacy as well as in support of the
United Nations and regional and subregional initiatives
to achieve peace and security in the region.
Nevertheless, the recent developments in Central
Africa highlight the volatile nature of the political,
security and social situation in the subregion. The root
causes of the aforementioned problems in this area
require an urgent response, especially by promoting
good governance and economic reforms.
Bearing in mind the upcoming elections at various
levels planned in several countries of the region, we
expect that the Governments of those States will work
towards the conduct of timely, inclusive, credible
and peaceful electoral processes and will ensure the
participation of women and young people.
The unstable situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in the Central African Republic as
well as the recent developments in Cameroon are
of particular concern to us. Poland believes that
international and regional support for State-building
and stabilization in those countries are crucial, not
only from their own perspective but also from the
perspective of the entire subregion.
While we appreciate the achievements to date, we
are still concerned that the Lord’s Resistance Army and
Boko Haram pose a serious threat to security across
significant parts of the region. That demonstrates that
international initiatives aimed at combating those
organizations require continued support, particularly
from the Multinational Joint Task Force and the African
Union Regional Task Force.
We condemn all acts of violence committed in
the central African region, including the recruitment
of children into military ranks and sexual and genderbased violence. The conflicts and the unstable situation
in some central African States are the main cause of the
18-18194

13/06/2018

Central African region

humanitarian crisis in the region. A proper response to
the challenges in that regard requires the smooth and
comprehensive coordination of all parties engaged in
maintaining stability and peace on the ground, as well
as a constructive dialogue with the local authorities.
Poland calls for the immediate cessation of all
attacks on humanitarian personnel, especially medical
staff working in crisis hospitals, and for allowing them
full access so as to carry out their mandate and deliver
essential aid to the affected people. We fully support the
actions undertaken by the United Nations, as well as the
European Union. At the same time, Poland recognizes
the key role of regional partners and organizations.

S/PV. 8284

We commend their efforts to address the challenges to
peace and security and to enhance regional cooperation.
In conclusion, we share the reflections contained
in the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
the activities of UNOCA (S/2018/521). We would again
like to express our support for Special Representative
Mr. Fall and for the further extension of the mandate
of UNOCA.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

18-1819417/17
