S/PV.7985

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7985

th meeting
Wednesday, 28 June 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Shutenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Tachco
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-18622 (E)
*1718622*

S/PV.7985

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

28/06/2017

The possibility of non-State actors, including
terrorists, acquiring weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) remains a significant threat to global security,
and the international community must step up its
efforts to ensure that the disastrous scenario of WMD
terrorism is avoided.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Cuba,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Estonia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, India,
Indonesia, Israel, Mexico, Montenegro, Morocco,
Namibia, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, the Republic of
Korea, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkey, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary-General and
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
Mr. Joseph Ballard, senior officer of the Office of
Strategy and Policy, Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

Since its adoption in 2004, resolution 1540
(2004) has played and continues to play a vital role
in international efforts to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and its delivery systems
to non-State actors. Substantial progress has been
made over the past years by Member States in their
efforts to minimize proliferation risks; however, we are
increasingly witnessing new and even more complicated
threats in this area.
In my very brief remarks today, let me highlight
three key issues in our joint efforts to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors.
First, we need to closely examine the emerging
nexus between rapidly advancing technologies and
weapons of mass destruction in the globalized and
connected world, and identify actions to grapple with
its impact on non-proliferation. While globalization
obviously brings new opportunities for economic
growth and development around the world, it also
facilitates the rapid movement of materials, technologies
and the latest discoveries in science and technology, as
well as of personnel with relevant expertise to use and
potentially exploit them with malicious intent.

its

These risks are ever-changing. Terrorist groups
evolve and spread their destructive ideologies in
cyberspace, and illicit networks develop new tactics.
Technology once perceived as the domain of military
experts is now freely available to broader audiences.
Non-State actors, including terrorist organizations,
will exploit any loophole to obtain these technologies.
While there are still significant technical hurdles that
terrorist groups need to overcome to effectively use
weapons of mass destruction, a growing number of
emerging technologies could make that barrier easier
to cross.

Ms. Nakamitsu: Mr. President, I thank you very
much for having convened this important open debate
today.

Several new areas of concern have emerged, such
as the use of unmanned aerial vehicles, 3D printers
and the exploitation of the so-called dark web. The
global reach and anonymity of dark web provides
non-State actors with new marketplaces to acquire
dual-use equipment and materials. Dual use is further

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

I now give the floor to Ms. Nakamitsu.

2/33

17-18622

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

complicating our efforts to address the risks posed by
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. We
must keep in mind that many of the technologies, goods
and raw materials required for developing weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery derive
from legitimate commercial applications that benefit
many people. Striking the right balance between
commercial opportunity, on the one hand, and our
collective security and the need to prevent proliferation,
on the other, is important.
This brings me to my second point, which is the
importance of international cooperation and the need
for continuous and enhanced dialogue with industry as
well. The emergence of countless suppliers, along with
developments in international trade and sophisticated
procurement networks, make concealment easier,
allowing illicit trafficking networks to circumvent
national and international controls. This means that
better international cooperation is essential if we
are to prevent terrorist access and use of weapons of
mass destruction. In the worst-case scenarios where
these weapons are used, seeking accountability will
be critical. The international community must uphold
the norms that have been established in this area
and prosecute those responsible for committing or
supporting such acts.
My third point relates to the importance of
national capacities in our joint endeavour to prevent
proliferation. Recent terrorist attacks have revealed
shortcomings in interactions among security agencies,
even in countries whose policies are otherwise deeply
integrated. Coordination and information-sharing will
be vital to overcoming these shortcomings. All Member
States should further strengthen export controls, work
to prevent any financing of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, and ensure the security of sensitive
goods and materials.
It is clear that, despite the undeniable success of the
past 13 years, we must remain vigilant. Much remains
to be done. The United Nations is obviously fully
committed to working with Member States in this area.
I strongly encourage the Council to use today’s debate
to be proactive and devise effective solutions to ensure
the full and universal implementation of Member States
disarmament and non-proliferation commitments.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ballard.

S/PV.7985

Mr. Ballard: On behalf of the Director-General,
I wish to thank you, Sir, for inviting the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to
address the Security Council today. We firmly believe
that the Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution
1540 (2004) are mutually reinforcing, and meetings
such as this provide valuable opportunities to engage
with each other and reflect on how to further deepen
our cooperation.
This year, the OPCW is commemorating its
twentieth anniversary. As we reflect on the challenges
that we have overcome and that we continue to face, we
are also using the opportunity provided by our twentieth
anniversary to look ahead, and what we can see is that our
environment is changing. The rising threat of non-State
actors, the pace of economic development and the
evolution of science and technology are all shaping the
future of the global disarmament and non-proliferation
regimes, including the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the OPCW. The use by non-State actors of chemical
weapons is no longer a threat but a chilling reality.
As an organization, we recognize that we must be
prepared to respond to these changes, to shift our focus
to preventing the re-emergence of chemical weapons,
and to adjust our resources and programmes when the
need arises. As an international community, we must
work even more closely together to confront our common
challenges. Preventing non-State actors from acquiring
dual-use materials, equipment and technologies is of
critical importance to the maintenance of the global
norm against chemical weapons, as it is to international
peace and security more broadly. To that end, the OPCW
is intensively engaged across a number of programme
areas that all spring from the singular objective of
completely uprooting both the incentive and the means
for producing or using chemical weapons.
As recently reconfirmed through resolution 2325
(2016), domestic implementation of international
counter-proliferation commitments is of critical
importance to the fight against terrorism using
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). The Chemical
Weapons Convention also requires comprehensive
national implementation of its provisions, and the
OPCW dedicates considerable effort and resources to
assist our States parties in fulfilling these obligations.
As the Group of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) knows, this is not
an easy task, and it relates not only to ensuring that
legislation is drafted but also that it is implemented and

17-186223/33

S/PV.7985

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

enforced. We also work with our States parties, through
our Open-Ended Working Group on Terrorism, to
coordinate the sharing of best practices when it comes
to national implementation, particularly in the light of
emerging threats to the Convention. Again, this ties
in with the encouragement to United Nations Member
States, as expressed in resolution 2325 (2016), to review
their implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in light
of new and evolving security risks.
One of the key areas of focus identified through
the recent review of resolution 1540 (2004) was
transboundary movements of dual-use materials and
technologies. The OPCW focuses considerable energy
in this area. A recent memorandum of understanding
between the OPCW and the World Customs Organization
is aimed at reinforcing our efforts and at enhancing the
security of the global supply chain. Similarly, our work
with the global chemical industry is more important
than ever. Collaboration and transparency in ensuring
that toxic chemicals do not fall into the wrong hands are
essential to preserving chemical security and ensuring
the use of chemical science towards peaceful ends.
The OPCW is also working to improve coordination
within the United Nations system on WMD-related
issues. We have an active partnership with the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force. Together with the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the OPCW co-chairs the working group on
preventing and responding to WMD terrorist attacks
with chemical or biological weapons. In January, the
OPCW hosted a table-top exercise with the participation
of 15 different organizations to test an inter-agency
mechanism to respond to a chemical terrorist attack.
That mechanism will enhance the interoperability of
the relevant organizations for an effective, coordinated
response. We believe that the newly established OCPW
Rapid Response and Assistance Mission will provide
an important capability to the mechanism.
The international community must continuously
work to respond to the challenge of WMD terrorism. In
that regard, the OPCW is committed to playing its part,
in close cooperation with the Security Council, through
its 1540 Committee, and with the range of stakeholders
that are so critical to our collective goals.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Ballard for his briefing.
4/33

28/06/2017

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
As Chair of the 1540 Committee, I am grateful
for the opportunity to lead this open debate on the
global effort to prevent the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction to non-State actors. All States have
a responsibility to effectively implement resolution
1540 (2004), which was adopted unanimously on
28 April 2004. The resolution should be at the heart
of our discussion today. As all members are aware,
the main purpose of the resolution is to prevent
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, along with
their delivery systems and related materials for their
development and manufacture, from falling into the
hands of non-State actors, including terrorists. I should
stress that the resolution is unique in that regard, as
it is the only legally binding instrument dealing with
the proliferation of all three types of weapons of mass
destruction.
In the nearly 13 years since its adoption, resolution
1540 (2004) has become one of the key components of
the international regime to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery.
Participants are aware that the range of legislation and
enforcement provisions required is broad. However,
as a background to this debate, allow me to recall
that the resolution includes prohibitions on non-State
actors from developing, acquiring, manufacturing,
possessing, transporting, transferring or using weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery. Those
seven prohibitions must also cover anyone acting as an
accomplice to assist in any way, including by financing
such activities. Similarly, domestic controls are needed
on related materials, including measures in the areas
of accounting, security, physical protection, border and
law enforcement, and export controls.
Substantial efforts have already been made by many
States to promote the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). In that regard, while the responsibility for
implementation lies with individual States, such efforts
can benefit from collaboration, whether bilaterally or
collectively, on a regional basis. That is key to successful
implementation. As stated in the concept note for
this meeting, resolution 1540 (2004) is a platform for
cooperation to prevent non-State actors from gaining
access to weapons of mass destruction. Without
cooperation it would be impossible to address the issue
at a global level. It would also be counterproductive
17-18622

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

to undermine the cooperative spirit that is already
evident in the way the resolution is being implemented
by moving in the direction of a strict mechanism for
Member States.
The Security Council has called upon States
“to take note in its work, where relevant, of
the continually evolving nature of the risks of
proliferation, including the use by non-State actors
of rapid advances in science, technology and
international commerce for proliferation purposes,
in the context of the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) (resolution 2325 (2016), para. 8).
The Council has also called on the 1540 Committee
“to take into account developments on the evolving
nature of risk of proliferation and rapid advances in
science and technology in their implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004)” (ibid., para. 7).
The Council thereby impressed upon States that they
have the ultimate responsibility for those obligations in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004).
In the 13 years since the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004), the developments I referred to have had a major
impact on how cross-border movements and trade are
conducted. While those are positive developments that
bring about humanitarian and economic benefits, they
also present challenges to the effective implementation
of the obligations set out in resolution 1540 (2004).
Keeping those and other developments under review in
relation to preventing the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction to non-State actors requires constant
vigilance and effective international collaboration. I
will be very interested in the experiences and views of
Member States in that regard.
With regard to resolution 2325 (2016), which is an
important prt of implementing resolution 1540 (2004), I
would like to draw attention to paragraph 12 of resolution
2325 (2016). It calls for the full implementation of the
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004) as a result of
the 1540 Committee’s 2016 comprehensive review of
the implementation of the resolution. The paragraph
also clearly notes the need for more attention on
enforcement measures; measures relating to chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons; measures on the
financing of proliferation; measures on accounting for
and securing related materials; and national export and
trans-shipment controls. It will be interesting to hear
how Member States are approaching those aspects of

S/PV.7985

the resolution. I would also be grateful for the views
of the international organizations represented here.
The Council very much appreciates the participation
of those representatives as key partners in our joint
endeavours.
In the interests of time, I have highlighted just a
few points of importance for our debate. However, not
everything has to do with the obligations of States. I
therefore look forward with interest to hearing more
information from all participants in this meeting.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Shutenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Bolivian presidency for holding today’s
open debate on the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMD). I also thank you, Sir, for
the statement delivered in your capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). I am also grateful for the
briefings delivered by Ms. Nakamitsu and Mr. Ballard.
While fully aligning myself with the statement
to be delivered later in this debate on behalf of the
European Union, I would like to make some comments
in my national capacity.
I fully share the view that the uniqueness of
resolution 1540 (2004) lies in its complementarity of the
existing international regimes on the non-proliferation
of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and
their means of delivery. Resolution 1540 (2004) adds
a new dimension to the issue of non-proliferation by
addressing the illegal trafficking in relevant materials
and by prohibiting their acquisition by non-State actors,
including terrorists.
The year 2016 marked a significant stage in
promoting WMD non-proliferation. I wish to reiterate
Ukraine’s support for the outcomes of the recently
concluded comprehensive review process, which
culminated in the unanimous adoption of resolution 2325
(2016). Once properly implemented, the conclusions
and recommendations of the review will reinforce
resolution 1540 (2004). The report of the review (see
S/2016/1038) — while clearly demonstrating both the
varying progress made with regard to implementation
on various types of WMD and the obligations set out
in resolution 1540 (2004) — helps to define specific

17-186225/33

S/PV.7985

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

areas for each party concerned as to where national or
regional efforts should be intensified. Indeed, many
significant challenges remain in terms of keeping the
world’s most dangerous materials from falling into the
wrong hands, both intentionally or as a result of neglect
or oversight.
Ukraine, as a State with a nuclear-weapons
past and as a full-fledged party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons
Convention, as well as all export-control regimes,
is strongly committed to the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and is determined to further
increase the effectiveness of the national response to
combat proliferation through collaboration, capacitybuilding and outreach.
Despite all the measures taken by Member States to
reduce proliferation risks, we are witnessing growing
and even more sophisticated challenges in this area.
These risks arise not only from gaps in national
legislation or insufficient resources, but also from the
rapid development of science and technology, as well
as e-commerce, along with a lack of threat awareness
among academia, industry and civil society.
In the past decade, chemical and biological agents
have quite often been referred to as potential weapons to
be used by terrorists, other non-State actors and rogue
States. Regrettably, there have been several confirmed
cases of the use of chemical weapons, particularly in
Syria, Iraq and Malaysia. Ukraine’s positon in that
regard is very clear: there can be no impunity, and all
the perpetrators must be brought to justice. We stand
united in condemning, in the strongest terms, any use
of any type of WMD, which constitutes a violation
of international law, a war crime and a crime against
humanity.
The erosion to the existing world order, continuous
breaches and unaddressed violations of international
law, along with ongoing conflicts in different parts of
the globe, continue to weaken the chemical, biological,
radiological or nuclear security architecture as a
whole. It is critical to find practical ways to ensure
that the international legal norms related to WMD
non-proliferation do not remain on paper, but that
they are also properly enforced and fully respected.
The international community should act decisively
and in a united fashion with a view to preventing any
attempts and countering every action taken to endanger
6/33

28/06/2017

the relevant international instruments through either
aggressive policies and violations of State sovereignty
and territorial integrity or through blocking important
decisions to be adopted by the United Nations or its
bodies.
With a view to tackling the growing threat of the
proliferation of WMD globally, intensifying effective
interactions among States and building synergies among
all stakeholders, including the relevant international,
regional, subregional, non-governmental organizations
and civil society, are important and urgent tasks. In that
regard, I wish to commend the historic contribution of
Spain, the previous Chair of the 1540 Committee, to
strengthening the role of that resolution for a long-term
perspective, including through the establishment last
year of the Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004).
We fully support the statement to be delivered later
today on behalf of the Group.
As far as the broader context of global
non-proliferation efforts is concerned, I cannot but
mention that Ukraine attaches particular importance
to the Global Partnership initiative as a proper format
for strengthening capabilities to resist today’s threats
and challenges in the area of WMD proliferation,
including its terrorist dimension. In that regard, my
country appreciates the efforts of Italy, President of the
Group of Seven, for its able leadership in this area and
for the promising results of the last Global Partnership
working group meeting, held in Rome in February.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that facilitating the
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) underpins
my country’s position in the field of non-proliferation
and anti-terrorist activities. Ukraine will continue to be
engaged constructively both within the 1540 Committee
and with the broader United Nations membership to
ensure that the outcomes of the comprehensive review
bear fruit. In that regard, I would like to mention that, in
November this year in Kyiv, an international workshop
on promoting the effective implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) in the context of evolving proliferation
risks and challenges will be held in cooperation with the
Office for Disarmament Affairs and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today’s open debate. I would like to thank
the Under-Secretary-General and High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Nakamitsu, Mr. Ballard
17-18622

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

and you, Mr. President, for the very comprehensive and
informative briefings this morning.
Sweden aligns itself with the statements that
will be made later by the observer of the European
Union, by the representative of Spain, on behalf of the
Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004), and by
the representative of Norway on behalf of the Nordic
countries.
Today’s discussion on resolution 1540 (2004) and
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly with regard to non-State actors, is very
timely. As we have seen from recent terrorist attacks,
the aim of the perpetrators is to indiscriminately injure
and kill as many innocent people as possible. Therefore,
we must be alert to the fact that there is a real threat of
non-State actors seeking to procure and use weapons of
mass destruction.
Sweden remains strongly committed to the
strengthening of the multilateral disarmament and
non-proliferation regimes, not least in the field of
nuclear disarmament. Resolution 1540 (2004) is an
important complement to those regimes. The use of
chemical weapons by Da’esh and the enduring ability
of some States with weapons of mass destruction
aspirations to contravene export controls bear witness
to the continuing and growing relevance of resolution
1540 (2004).
As we heard from your own briefing this morning,
Mr. President, progress has been achieved in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004); however,
much work remains to be done to ensure its application
globally. Sweden is committed to supporting that work.
We recently made a special financial contribution
to the Office for Disarmament Affairs for the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In addition,
we are contributing to global efforts in support of the
resolution’s objectives through the nuclear security
cooperation programme of the Swedish Radiation
Safety Authority, and our engagement in the Group
of Seven Global Partnership programme, where we
currently co-chair the biosecurity sub-working group.
However, we should not limit our attention to
items and materials alone; knowledge and information
also represent important factors in the attainment
of weapons of mass destruction. It is important to
highlight the risks associated with intangible transfers
of technology, whereby sensitive know-how might be
transferred through research, industry or social media.

S/PV.7985

This is an issue that we raised repeatedly during last
year’s comprehensive review. As Vice-Chair of the
1540 Committee, we are currently considering ways
of highlighting this issue, including through outreach
events.
Finally, we would like to congratulate Spain once
more for the proactive and committed way in which it
led the comprehensive review last year, and to commend
Bolivia for the continuation of those efforts under its
leadership. It is essential that we continue to take into
consideration the evolving proliferation threats as we
move forward towards the global implementation of
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016).
The threat that the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction poses to international peace and security
continues to grow. It is only through States working
together in full support for the multilateral institutions
we have put in place that this threat can be managed.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me,
first of all, to thank the Bolivian presidency for taking
the initiative to organize this debate on the important
issue of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. I would also like to thank Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu and Mr. Joseph Ballard for their particularly
informative presentations.
Assuredly, our debate is timely, given the current
situation, which reminds us constantly of the sad
realities that are the threat of terrorism and the risk
that non-State actors may acquire nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons. Those threats are all the more
worrying against the backdrop of the rapid developments
in science and technology, globalization and the
constantly changing business and trade environment,
which are new factors that non-State actors can take
advantage of in order to gain access to weapons of mass
destruction.
Unfortunately, that risk is very real today with the
use of chemical weapons in the Middle East, as well
as with regard to issues related to cybersecurity, the
consequences of which could be even more serious
if such attacks were directed against nuclear power
plants, for example. That is why the topic under
discussion today should encourage us to redouble our
efforts and fully implement the obligations set out in
resolution 1540 (2004). Moreover, strengthening the
prevention system to avoid the humanitarian, political,
economic and environmental disaster that could result
from the use of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons

17-186227/33

S/PV.7985

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

by non-State actors, including terrorists, is more urgent
than ever.
In that connection, the Security Council, seriously
concerned about that threat, felt compelled to address
a series of requests and to impose a set of obligations
on Member States through the adoption of resolution
1540 (2004). Today we must accurately take inventory
of all the sources of weapons of mass destruction
throughout the world in order to ensure that they can be
systematically safeguarded or simply destroyed. While
important steps have already been taken, much remains
to be done.
In the light of all those challenges, my country
is of the view that, in today’s interdependent world
where our interests are interlinked, we must strengthen
cooperation in terms of border control, monitoring
of financial flows and Internet networks, and legal
assistance in order to develop an appropriate strategy to
prevent weapons of mass destruction from falling into
the wrong hands. To that end, we will need to generate
synergies among all the stakeholders concerned and
share our experiences.
Moreover, countries should take steps to implement
their obligations arising from resolution 1540 (2004).
Those include, inter alia, first, developing voluntary
five-year national action plans for implementing
resolution 1540 (2004); secondly, establishing national
coordination mechanisms for detecting activities by
non-State actors in order to boost cooperation among
the relevant national actors; thirdly, the implementing
national legislative frameworks on terrorism; and,
fourthly, putting in place physical protection systems for
nuclear, radiological, biological and chemical materials
and their installations to cover the entire life cycle of
said material and to govern their transportation, as
well as to strengthen the capacities of border services,
in particular through the training of agents and the
provision of detection equipment.
In 2016, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2325 (2016), which substantially reinforced
the provisions already in force in resolution 1540
(2014). It should be noted that the measures added to the
recommendations emanating from the comprehensive
review process of resolution 1540 (2004) have enabled
Member States, relevant international and regional
organizations and civil society to redirect their
efforts and strategies towards a more comprehensive,
coordinated and consistent approach in order sustainably
8/33

28/06/2017

address the multiple challenges facing international
peace and security. If properly implemented, those
proposals for concrete, practical and appropriate
measures by Member States could greatly contribute
to strengthening the system in order to prevent any
potential catastrophe that could be caused by the use of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors.
In the case of Africa, an analysis of the data shows
steady progress in the implementation of the measures
established by resolution 1540 (2004), in particular in
terms of the development of appropriate legislation
and the submission of implementation reports. That
development should be welcomed, although we must
bear in mind that such measures need to be improved,
in particular through the adoption of national
legislative frameworks for biological weapons, which
many African countries still lack. There is also a need
for effective domestic controls to monitor sensitive
materials and technologies.
Moreover, the Senegalese delegation would like to
recall the political commitment of the African Union to
support the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by
African States, which was reflected in the organization
of several meetings on the subject. We therefore call for
the continuation of such cooperation initiatives between
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and African countries, the
majority of which have benefited from the Committee’s
support in terms of the implementation of their
obligations under the resolution.
Assistance is also a key aspect of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Progress could be made, in
particular as we seek to improve assistance procedures,
data gathering and an analysis of assistance needs.
We could also further our discussions on the topic of
assistance with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations and, where appropriate, with
non-governmental organizations. That would require
enhancing the capacities of the 1540 Committee and its
Group of Experts to better provide assistance to those
countries that request it.
At the same time, the Security Council could
consider ways to strengthen the warning and prevention
system to combat the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, in particular among non-State
actors, by strengthening coordination among the
system’s components, as well as by monitoring the
implementation of the obligations under resolution
17-18622

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

1540 (2004) and through an analysis of the risks of
proliferation.
We also encourage the training of national focal
points, and therefore call on the Member States with
sufficient resources to contribute them. We reiterate
the need to create a sustainable mechanism to improve
interaction and coordination among those requesting
and those providing assistance in order to avoid
duplication and identify best practices for assistance
in order to replicate them. The primary challenge is
therefore to improve the coordination of existing tools
in order to limit the likelihood for non-State actors to
engage in proliferation.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Senegal’s
willingness and unwavering commitment to make
every effort to combat the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. To that end, my country has taken
steps to fulfil its obligations under resolution 1540
(2004). Among those measures, we underscore the
establishment of national coordination mechanisms
to detect the activities of non-State actors, which
facilitates collaboration between the relevant national
actors, and the implementation of programmes for the
technical and human capacity-building of the National
Commission on Nuclear, Biological and Chemical
Weapons and the Authority for Radiation Protection
and Nuclear Safety.
Senegal will continue to focus its efforts on fulfilling
its commitments in this area, because it is aware that
cooperation and the pooling of efforts, experiences and
expertise are the only way to ensure that we will have a
better understanding of these threats in order to develop
consistent, holistic and comprehensive strategies and
approaches to effectively deal with these challenges.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
our briefers for their presentations today. In the context
of the evolving threats posed by the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, today’s debate reminds
us of the importance of the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). The is committed to assisting
States and international organizations in their efforts
to prevent non-State actors from developing and
acquiring nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and
their delivery systems.
We also align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Spain on behalf of the
Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004).

S/PV.7985

Despite the progress made over the past 13 years,
significant gaps remain in the implementation of the
resolution’s obligations, particularly in the areas of
chemical and biological security and controlling
means of delivery. We must work more smartly as
we move forward. The 2016 report (see S/2016/1038)
on the comprehensive review of the status of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) along with
resolution 2325 (2016), adopted in December 2016,
provide guidance on how to achieve future progress.
Today I am going to touch on a few of those challenges
and discuss ways whereby we might overcome them.
Recently, we have seen the horror of
chemical-weapon attacks by States and non-State
actors in the Middle East, particularly in Syria.
The confirmed use of the deadly nerve agent VX in
Malaysia is even more shocking. Those trends are
unsettling and alarming, which is why the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) must work to hold States more accountable
for preventing the use and spread of chemical weapons
and ensuring effective control over such materials. As
part of our commitment to stopping the use of chemical
weapons, we need to work together to help States in
promoting best practices on chemical security to
detect and prevent the misuse of chemicals. Moreover,
the comprehensive review and resolution 2325 (2016)
called for increased assistance through matchmaking
and dialogue. The exchange of expertise and assistance
is extremely valuable to States, to the Committee and to
the global non-proliferation regime.
While resolution 1540 (2004) is aimed at deterring
non-State actors, its obligations are binding on Member
States. It is therefore troubling that the Syrian regime
has continued to use chemical weapons. We call on all
Member States that oppose the use of chemical weapons
to urge President Al-Assad to cooperate with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and cease using chemicals as weapons. President Trump
made that clear this week. Moreover, Syria’s continued
use of chemical weapons will only increase the risk that
elements of its chemical weapons programme could fall
into the wrong hands.
The 1540 Committee must also continue to work
towards strengthening the global nuclear security
architecture and increase cooperation among
international organizations, such as the International
Atomic Energy Agency and INTERPOL. We must
help States build their capacity to secure nuclear and

17-186229/33

S/PV.7985

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

other radioactive materials, convert research reactors
from highly enriched uranium to low enriched uranium
and address critical gaps to counter the smuggling of
nuclear and other radioactive materials.
The comprehensive review and resolution
2325 (2016) also highlighted the need for States to
establish effective control over materials that could
be used for weapons of mass destruction, including
through the development of national control lists
to monitor production and the movement of such
materials. To prevent the illicit trade in weapons of
mass destruction-related materials, the United States
is providing training and technical assistance and
detection, inspection and interdiction equipment to
border and customs authorities all over the world.
Last year’s report and resolution 2325 (2016) also
recommended that the 1540 Committee give greater
consideration to the evolving nature of the risk of
proliferation and the rapid advances in science and
technology. Such developments could lower the barriers
to the development of weapons of mass destruction,
thereby making the mitigation of those risks even more
complex and challenging. The United States is eager
to work with others to ensure that we strengthen key
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). The 1540
Committee and resolution 2325 (2016) are key tools in
stemming the spread of weapons of mass destruction
and helping to maintain international peace and
security.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank the briefers — Ms. Nakamitsu
and Mr. Ballard — for their valuable presentations.
Likewise, I thank you, Sir, as President of the Council,
for organizing this open debate and for providing us
with a very interesting concept note, as well as the
information that you just provided to us in your capacity
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Uruguay aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Spain on behalf of
the Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004).
Uruguay is a country firmly committed to the
disarmament and non-proliferation regime and calls for
strengthening multilateralism as part of its efforts to
promote universal and complete disarmament. True to
its commitment, Uruguay has adhered to and ratified
existing regional and international treaties for such
purposes. Similarly, we promote and support those
10/33

28/06/2017

forums designed to advance universal and transparent
negotiations in the field of disarmament, such as the
United Nations conference currently taking place at
Headquarter to negotiate a legally binding instrument
to prohibit nuclear weapons, Lleading to their total
elimination.
On many occasions we have addressed the theme
of weapons of mass destruction here in the Chamber.
It goes without saying that, in the framework of
adopting measures on preventing the use or threat of
use of such weapons, it is the obligation of Member
States to scrupulously respect their obligations under
international law and the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations.
Uruguay is concerned about the growing threat
of terrorism and the growing risk that these weapons
will fall into the hands of non-State actors, including
terrorist groups, which would bring about unpredictable
and devastating consequences for humankind. The
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction constitutes
a serious and real threat to world security. The use of
chemical weapons in countries of the Middle East and
Asia demonstrates how real and dangerous this threat
is.
Uruguay has followed with concern the continuing
attacks taking place in Syria, including most recently
in Khan Shaykun last April. In that regard, we support
the work of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-Finding Mission in
Syria and the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism to shed light on those incidents so that
the perpetrators thereof are brought to justice for
committing such grave crimes. The Joint Investigative
Mechanism has already identified the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham/Da’esh and the Syrian Government
as the perpetrators of some of those attacks in Syria.
There are reports that the same has happened in Iraq,
and therefore investigations should also be carried out
in that country to corroborate the facts.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is the main legally binding
instrument that we have that covers the three types of
weapons of mass destruction. The role the resolution in
preventing the acquisition and use of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors along with the work of
the 1540 Committee in its four areas of work are crucial
to combating the threat. The full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and resolution 2325 (2016)
requires the ongoing efforts of all States — at the
17-18622

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

national, regional and international levels — as well as
greater assistance and cooperation in capacity-building
and in the exchange of best practices among States.
International cooperation must be strengthened even
further in order to prevent, deter, halt and eliminate the
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems by terrorist groups. Uruguay stresses
the need to enhance assistance and cooperation among
States, and among States and international, regional
and subregional organizations that are relevant to the
1540 Committee.
The primary responsibility of States is to take
appropriate steps at the national level, in line with their
national legislation and international law, to strengthen
export controls and to control access to intangible
technology transfers and to information that could
be used to develop weapons of mass destruction and
their delivery systems. Both importing and exporting
countries should exercise due control over their
operations and ensure the full security of sensitive
materials to prevent them falling under the control of
terrorist groups.
In conclusion, I would like to express Uruguay’s
firm commitment to implementing the resolution. I also
thank the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) for their valuable visit to Uruguay in April,
which enabled us to begin drafting our national plan of
action for the resolution’s implementation.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome you, Mr. President, in your
capacity as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We listened with great interest
to your statement and the briefings by Ms. Nakamitsu,
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Ballard, representing the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). We are also grateful to the Bolivian chairship
of the Committee for its responsible and professional
leadership of that subsidiary body of the Council.
Resolution 1540 (2004), initiated jointly by Russia
and the United States in 2004, is one of the pillars
of non-proliferation. Ensuring that every country
can fully implement it is one of the international
community’s pressing tasks, and it is our hope that
today’s debate will be a major contribution to tackling
that global challenge. Resolution 1540 (2004) remains
the sole universal international document on the

S/PV.7985

non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs), obliging all countries to establish effective
national systems for controlling WMDs, their delivery
systems and related materials, and preventing them
from falling into the hands of non-State actors.
That goal has taken on major significance in the
wake of the unprecedentedly complex and numerous
regional conflicts taking place in the world today. The
terror organizations involved in them have access to the
technology and infrastructure needed to develop and
use chemical weapons. We agree with Mr. Ballard that
this is no longer a mere threat but a harsh reality. The
events in the Middle East are a clear example of that,
and serve to emphasize the relevance of our meeting
today. The threat of chemical and biological terrorism
is becoming ever greater in scale and in its transborder
nature. We have heard again and again about militants
from the Islamic State and other groups using industrial
chemicals, and even chemical warfare substances, for
terrorist purposes, facts that have been confirmed — even
officially confirmed — by the Western intelligence
community. With regard to such crimes, we would in
particular like to emphasize that we must realize that,
over the past five or six years, extremist organizations
have gained considerable experience not just in using
chemical weapons but in manufacturing them. The
proliferation of that knowledge is as much of a threat as
is the use of such WMDs.
We support strengthening the counter-terrorist
aspects of non-proliferation. We understand how urgent
it is to find responses to new challenges and threats. In
the light of the current terrorist activities in Syria and
Iraq by the so-called Islamic State, the Al-Nusra Front
and other terrorist groups, the significance of resolution
1540 (2004) can only grow. The Council should
thoroughly investigate and respond to any reports that
non-State actors may have gained access to chemical
weapons, with an objective, impartial and professional
investigation with no potential for politicization. The
process should be based on credible and verifiable
facts and should avoid any potential for deliberate
disinformation. We need to see a tough reaction from
the Council to any violations of the resolution. Any
assistance to non-State actors in acquiring WMDs or
the materials, components and technologies used in
their production is impermissible. Only collaborative
efforts on the part of all Member States to implement
the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) can ensure

17-1862211/33

S/PV.7985

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

successful results. We support the appeals that
Ms. Nakamitsu made on the subject in her briefing.
The issue of combating terrorist attacks is so acute
that the machinery designed to enable resolution 1540
(2004) to carry out its vital function is not enough. We
would therefore like to remind the Council of Russia’s
initiative concerning the drafting of an international
convention on the fight against acts of chemical or
biological terrorism. Such a convention could cover
the advances that the international community has
approved in recent years, particularly through provisions
criminalizing activities falling within its purview,
defining jurisdictions and appropriate levels of legal
response, implementing the principle of extradite-orprosecute, and so forth. It is clear that traditional views
of what constitutes arms control, disarmament and
non-proliferation are gradually blurring. Effectively,
the entire area has acquired a new element and another
dimension — the counter-terrorism dimension. The
so-called Islamic State’s acquisition of the industrial
capacity to produce chemical weapons and the danger
of their proliferation throughout the Middle East
serve to emphasize the relevance of Russia’s efforts to
formulate the such a convention.
We believe that we should work actively to define
the national and regional components for implementing
resolution 1540 (2004). We should study best practices
and conduct seminars for points of contact, because
their benefits are clear. A number of Member States,
including Russia, have already commended the seminars
that have been held for national points of contact, and
we welcome the intention of the People’s Republic of
China to organize a similar event in August.
In order to improve the effectiveness of the
Committee’s work, we should draw on the capacities
of international and regional organizations and ensure
that their planned tasks conform with States’ requests.
We also support the involvement of the scientific and
business communities. Needless to say, all of this
should take place under the leadership and oversight
of State entities. Russia is committed to strengthening
the non-proliferation regime, including within the
framework of the 1540 Committee, and will make every
possible effort to deal with this challenge.
With regard to the statement by the representative
of the United States, I would like to point out that
Syria’s armed forces pose no threat to the American
specialists. We have no information about anything like
12/33

28/06/2017

that, whatever the reports may be. However, we once
again affirm our position that Russia will continue to
insist on a comprehensive, professional and politically
impartial investigation of chemical attacks — not just
in Khan Shaykhun but also with regard to any other
occurrence, or recurrence, of chemical terrorism in
Syria and Iraq — as provided for in resolution 2319
(2016).
With regard to extending the mandate of the OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism for
another year, its geographic scope and counter-terrorism
dimension must be expanded. An objective investigation
is the only way to get to the truth — not based on
the fabrications of terrorists, extremists, opposition
members, their foreign sympathizers and sponsors and
non-governmental organizations and all their efforts to
blame Damascus. For now, it is important that we avoid
any provocation and prevent any unilateral acts, and
that we support the significant political momentum that
the discussions in Astana and the intra-Syrian talks in
Geneva represent.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to thank Bolivia for its
initiative in convening a key discussion as we seek
to strengthen international efforts to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
and to ensure that they do not fall into the hands of
non-State actors, particularly terrorist organizations.
We also congratulate you, Sir, on your wise and able
chairship of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). We welcomed the adoption of
resolution 2325 (2016) under the Spanish presidency
of the Security Council in December last year. I also
thank Ms. Nakamitsu and the representative of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) for their briefings to the Council.
The year 2004 was marked by effective efforts
on the part of the international community to prevent
non-State actors and entities from developing,
acquiring, manufacturing, transporting or using WMDs
in all their forms — whether that be nuclear, chemical,
radiological or biological weapons. Consequently, in
2004 the Security Council adopted resolution 1540
(2004) in response to the clamour of the international
community for steps to be taken.
Nevertheless, we need to acknowledge that the
world has become more complicated since 2004.
International security threats have evolved very rapidly
17-18622

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

and it is difficult to keep up with them. The arsenal of
armed groups and terrorists has expanded to include
the use of chemical weapons — to which they have
recourse as a standard weapon — and other WMDs.
That is borne out by the current state of affairs in the
Middle East and the actions undertaken by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant/Da’esh — actions proven
by the investigations of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism. Other terrorist groups, such
as Jabhat Al-Nusra and other militias, have also used
WMDs to sow destruction and suffering among the
population of that region.
The challenges that the international community
must overcome in that regard will require us to pay
more attention to the way we prevent those entities
and groups from obtaining WMDs and using them. We
would like to share some observations and proposals
on how the international community could step up its
efforts.
First of all, we need to develop an integrated and
effective United Nations model in order to open the
door to a world free of the threat of WMDs falling into
the hands of terrorists. We will need to coordinate and
harmonize United Nations counter-terrorism strategies.
We also must avoid any meddling or interference in the
affairs of sovereign States as the United Nations seeks
to play a coordinating role. States bear the primary
responsibility for setting up national preventive
mechanisms under resolution 1540 (2004). That is a key
responsibility and obligation and a crucial step towards
ensuring the full and effective implementation of the
resolution. States must remember that responsibility.
Secondly, we must take steps to provide timely and
relevant technical assistance to States that request it. We
must plug the current gaps in financing that assistance
by, inter alia, fully funding the voluntary trust fund
of the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
(UNODA).
Thirdly, we must enhance our cooperation with
international and regional organizations, as well as
the relevant subregional organizations. The Egyptian
delegation is responsible for coordinating those efforts
within the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and, through its role in the Committee,
spearheads action to improve collaboration with all the
relevant stakeholders.

S/PV.7985

Fourthly, we must raise awareness and ensure more
comprehensive and integrated international efforts on
issues pertaining to transportation and transparency.
We must work more closely with the Department of
Political Affairs and UNODA, as well as the Office of
the Secretary-General, so as to coordinate our efforts
and approaches. All of those bodies must collaborate
more closely with the Group of Experts of the 1540
(2004) Committee, particularly with regard to chemical
and biological threats, as needed, as well as nuclear
threats.
Fifthly, Egypt suggests that we review the ways
in which we legally deal with new technologies like
e-commerce and other emerging technologies, such
as in the field of biology, to make sure that there is a
proper legal framework that covers new developments.
Egypt will work tirelessly to support efforts in
that regard, whether nationally or internationally. It
submitted four reports — in 2004, 2006, 2008 and
2016 — commensurate with its responsibilities under
resolution 1540 (2004). Those reports detail the steps
taken by the relevant Egyptian authorities towards the
resolution’s implementation at the national. We also
adopted the voluntary national matrix following its
review and endorsement by the specialized authorities
in Cairo. Similarly, in 2007 Egypt set up out a national
commission on this issue.
We are firmly convinced that the only way to
prevent non-State actors and terrorists from acquiring
WMDs is by ensuring that we live in a world free of
such weapons in all their forms. Any such effort must
first seek to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones
throughout the world, including a zone free of WMDs in
the Middle East, in line with the resolution of the 1995
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and in response
to the calls of the relevant international bodies.
Finally, I would like to convey my gratitude to
Bolivia for all its efforts on this matter.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General Nakamitsu and her team, as well
as Mr. Joseph Ballard. It is always good to have
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) represented here in the Chamber, as
cooperation between our institutions is vital.
While this agenda item is a regular feature of the
Security Council’s programme of work, there is in fact

17-1862213/33

S/PV.7985

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

nothing regular about it. The spectre of biological,
chemical or nuclear materials falling into terrorist
hands is the nightmare scenario for many of us in the
Chamber.
The use of such materials by terrorists is, sadly,
not hypothetical matter. Thanks to the hard work of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism in Syria,
we know what happens when terrorists’ hateful intent
is paired with these equally hateful weapons. We saw
the results in the sulfur mustard attack that Da’esh
carried out in Aleppo’s Mari district in August 2015,
leaving residents blistered and burning. Other cases are
also under investigation. Clearly, preventing weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) from falling into terrorist
hands is a vital linchpin for preserving international
peace and security.
That is why it is so crucial that, following the
comprehensive review and adoption of resolution 2325
(2016), the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) focus on reaching the ultimate goal of full,
worldwide implementation — turning resolution 1540
(2004) into reality. As the 1540 Committee does that, it
must take account of new and emerging challenges from
the evolving terrorist threat and advances in science and
technology. The Committee must also look to improve
technical assistance, including by strengthening the
1540 Committee’s process for matching Member States’
requests for support with offers for assistance. We must
do all we can to encourage Member States to submit
their reports on their implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) at the national level. That applies in particular
to the few remaining States that are yet to submit a
national report.
Much remains to be done, but the Committee
should not do it alone. Indeed, the challenges we face
are far too great to simply rely on the 15 Governments
gathered around this table. We must strengthen regional
and international cooperation and outreach to civil
society and industry to support implementation efforts.
Every country and every sector has a role to play, and
we should embrace their help.
While we must take every step to ensure that these
terrible weapons never fall into the hands of terrorists,
we must also never overlook the horrific and, sadly,
growing allegations of the use of these weapons by State
actors. The United Kingdom unreservedly condemns
the use of any chemical weapon in any circumstance.
14/33

28/06/2017

In particular, we are horrified about reports that Kim
Jong-nam was apparently killed with VX in Malaysia
earlier this year. Confirmation that a nerve agent once
banned by the Chemical Weapons Convention was
used at the instigation of a State would be yet another
troubling rejection of international norms.
The United Kingdom has also concluded that the
Al-Assad regime has continued to use chemical weapons
against its own people — in breach of international
law and the rules of war. We look forward to receiving
further reporting from the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic. Once we have the results
of those investigations, the international community
must send a united response.
Let me conclude by calling on the 1540 Committee to
redouble its efforts. The United Kingdom is committed
to playing its part in ensuring that the Committee
succeeds in its vital task ahead. The cost of failure, of
allowing further weapons of mass destruction to fall
into the hands of those who wish to wreak havoc, is
simply too high to bear.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We would like to thank
Bolivia, as President of the Council and Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for convening today’s vital debate. I would also
like to commend Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu
and Mr. Ballard for their insights and to pay tribute to
their commitment to ensuring a safe and secure world
for us.
Kazakhstan urges that we ensure the full and
effective implementation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and
2325 (2016), which we consider extremely important.
The international community must make a concerted
effort if it is to comply with their provisions, for these
two resolutions have a special contribution to make
to strengthening the international non-proliferation
architecture. Our country has experienced first-hand
the horrifying consequences of the testing of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) and is determined to
be at the forefront of the global fight against their
proliferation and the risk of their use. Strict adherence
to all the obligations to prevent the proliferation of
such weapons and relentless efforts to improve national
systems of control over materials that could be used to
produce WMDs are more important than they have ever
been.
17-18622

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

I would first like to draw the Council’s attention to
the following achievements and specific activities that
we have undertaken at the national and regional level.
Thanks to its stringent nuclear-security measures,
Kazakhstan is among the top 20 countries in the world
in its security levels for nuclear facilities and materials.
All our nuclear facilities are under the comprehensive
control of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and accompanied by strong controls of our
borders with neighbouring countries as well as of
aviation and other transit modes. The IAEA’s lowenriched uranium bank will launch in Kazakhstan
on 29 August and is a clear indication of the global
commitment to halting the proliferation of such
sensitive technologies.
Through the Global Threat Reduction Initiative of
the United States and the Russian Federation’s Energy
and Security Centre, active steps are being taken to
ensure the security of nuclear facilities and materials in
Kazakhstan and Central Asia. Early in May, Kazakhstan
hosted a two-day seminar in Astana on strengthening
the safety of radiation sources with a view to preventing
illicit trafficking in radioactive materials in Central
Asia. The participation of all our neighbours will ensure
a well-coordinated intra-regional collaboration in this
area. Very recently, on 12 May, we opened the first
regional nuclear security training centre in Almaty.
With the support of international organizations such
as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
INTERPOL and other specialized institutions, it will
play a valuable role in providing expertise to specialists
in relevant fields for the entire Central Asian region and
beyond.
Secondly, while commending the considerable
progress that has been made on implementing
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016), we must
acknowledge the fact that there is still much more to be
done. In that regard, we would like to propose what we
feel are the most salient steps for the way forward. We
are confident that individual interactions with every
country, increased outreach activities and the provision
of sufficient financial resources will contribute
significantly to ensuring strict control over the
implementation of national commitments in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions. Given
the importance of capacity-building among Member
States, Kazakhstan has decided to make a voluntary
contribution to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Global and Regional Disarmament Activities, with the

S/PV.7985

goal of helping States to implement their obligations
under resolution 1540 (2004).
Taking the evolving nature of the risks of the
proliferation of WMDs into account, including the
use by non-State actors of the rapid advances that are
being made in science and technology, we would like
to emphasize the initiative we have taken to establish
a United Nations register of scientific developments
that can lead to the creation or advancement of WMDs,
designed to track such dangerous discoveries. Since
funding for travelling and regional outreach is limited,
much progress could also be made through the creation
of online training modules, to be offered in a number of
languages on the 1540 Committee website for various
categories of Government personnel — lawmakers,
executives, law-enforcement officials, border-control
agents and criminal prosecutors. We believe that the
Committee’s limited resources and staff could be
supplemented by the academic, scientific, technical and
legal communities, providing valuable input on new
trends and training on the completion of matrices and
on standards verification and assessments.
Lastly, I would like to reaffirm Kazakhstan’s
firm commitment to consolidating the international
community’s efforts to rid the world of weapons of
mass destruction. To achieve that, we must consistently
strengthen and expand the non-proliferation regime,
primarily within the framework of resolution 1540
(2004).
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Sir, for your dual role, as President
of the Council and Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), in organizing
today’s important meeting. I would also like to
thank Ms. Nakamitsu and Mr. Ballard for their very
informative briefings.
I should add that France associates itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union and supports the statement that the
representative of Spain will make on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Resolution 1540.
The past few months have seen a heavy assault
on fundamental aspects of our collective security,
in violation of rules that we all value and of which
resolution 1540 (2004) is a crucial part. The proliferation
of biological, chemical and nuclear weapons and their
means of delivery, and the risk of their use by non-State
actors, have become a dangerous reality. But we should

17-1862215/33

S/PV.7985

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

make no mistake — the repeated assaults on the
non-proliferation regime that we are witnessing in Asia
and the Middle East are far from being a monopoly of
non-State actors, and terrorist groups in particular. In
Asia, we have seen North Korea’s crash development
of its nuclear and ballistic programmes and its
chemical-weapon attack in Malaysia this winter. It is
also the case in the Middle East, particularly in Syria,
where the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime
and Da’esh has been confirmed by the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism. That is made even
more worrying by the fact that the suspected continued
existence of toxic chemical stocks in Syria increases
the likelihood that they will be more accessible to
terrorist groups.
In this difficult context, we must work harder than
ever to mobilize in order to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by anyone, and by
non-State actors in particular. That demands above all
that we do better at considering the risks of exploiting
technological advances for the purposes of proliferation,
a subject that the 1540 Committee has to address. In
that regard, I would like to commend the analytical and
advocacy efforts of the Group of Experts in support of
the Committee.
Needless to say, we must all work harder to
intensify and assess our implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). We must all prevent and discourage the
financing of proliferation, ensure the highest possible
levels of security for sensitive goods and materials
on our territories and strengthen export controls,
especially considering the risk of the use of emerging
technologies. For its part, France has modernized its
national legal framework for combating proliferation,
criminalizing proliferation activities and punishing
their financing. We are also very involved in working to
prevent the risk of terrorists acquiring sensitive nuclear
materials and we are an active supporter of the efforts
of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.
I should also mention the role of the European Union,
whose dynamic and continuing awareness-raising
efforts have contributed to this cooperative action.
The EU adopted a new decision last month giving
€2.6 million to support the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). We also welcome other actions that have
already been undertaken or announced, including
regional workshops for training points of contact in the
implementation of the resolution.
16/33

28/06/2017

However, the sum of our individual actions is not
enough. As stated in the concept note, resolution 1540
(2004) is a unique platform for cooperation. We have
to make this happen by concrete actions through two
means: further anchoring the logic of assistance and
cooperation in our efforts and taking the specificity of
each country concerned into account. As Coordinator
of the Working Group on Assistance, France attaches
particular importance to strengthening the regional
dimension and to improving the coherence between
the needs and the assistance offered. The Committee’s
newly updated template for requests for assistance, for
example, should contribute to that end.
Finally, we must take stock of current challenges by
strengthening synergies with forums facing the same
issues, be they within the United Nations or outside it,
such as the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
the World Customs Organization, or such exportcontrol regimes as the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the
Missile Technology Control Regime, of which France
is the secretariat, the Wassenaar Arrangement and
the Australia Group, whose plenary meeting is being
held in Paris this week, from 26 to 30 June 2017. These
interactions should be encouraged and strengthened.
The Council can count on France’s steadfast
commitment on this priority issue.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on having convened this timely debate in your capacity
both as President of the Security Council for this month
and as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations. We also align ourselves with
the statement to be made by Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi,
representative of Spain, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Resolution 1540. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Spain for the work accomplished
in the Security Council and for its leadership of the
Group of Friends.
(spoke in English)
I also would like to thank both the Under-SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Nakamitsu, and Mr. Joseph Ballard for
their briefings.
17-18622

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV.7985

Resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016) constitute
the central pillars of the international non-proliferation
architecture and are key instruments for preventing
the most dangerous materials in the world from falling
into the wrong hands. The report of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism has proven and
confirmed the use of chemical weapons by both State
and non-State actors.

resource constraints of which we are all aware. As
Chair of the Global Partnership against the Spread of
Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, we invited
the 1540 Committee to make a presentation of its work,
in particular with regard to Africa, in order to highlight
current needs and increase opportunities for donors to
cooperate with the potential recipients, as well as with
the Committee itself. We are willing to continue this
cooperation with the 1540 Committee.

The rapid advances in science and technology,
as well as the globalization of commercial, logistic
and economic transactions, make it harder for States
to control proliferation activities and enable terrorists
to take advantage of transnational criminal networks
to gain access to weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs). In this regard, more attention should
also be paid to the so-called intangible transfer of
technology, which is reflected both in resolution
2325 (2016) and in the programme of work of the
1540 Committee. Strengthening cooperation and the
exchange of experience in the areas of border control,
surveillance of financial flows on the Internet and other
networks and legal assistance have today grown in
importance. Similarly, enhancing protection of critical
infrastructure relevant to the non-proliferation of
WMDs from the increasing risk of cyberattack is more
important than ever. It remains imperative for Member
States to effectively implement the provisions of this
resolution, establish domestic controls, have effective
points of contact and maintain an active dialogue with
the Committees.

Last year represented a significant step forward for
efforts to prevent non-State actors from acquiring and
using weapons of mass destruction. It is important now
that we build upon that momentum. We thank Bolivia
for its leadership and commitment at the helm of the
Committee and pledge our full support.

We take this opportunity to emphasize the need to
achieve the universal implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and the importance for States to submit their first
national implementation reports. Despite admirable
progress, the non-proliferation regime continues to be
confronted with serious threats, and recent alarming
developments have clearly demonstrated that no State
is immune to this danger. We know this from the
work that we have been carrying out this year in the
Security Council.
As underscored in last year’s comprehensive
review, the delivery of technical assistance continues to
represent the key element to facilitating and improving
Member States’s compliance with their obligations.
In this regard, we welcome all the outreach activities
conducted by the 1540 Committee and its strong
engagement in providing capacity-building assistance
to those stakeholders that need it the most, despite the

Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
commending Bolivia for organizing today’s debate
and for its leadership in steering the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu and Mr. Joseph
Ballard for their respective briefings.
Ethiopia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Bolivian Republic
of Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Ethiopia welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
subsequent resolutions aimed at preventing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
and their means of delivery to non-State actors.
However, we note with great concern the continued
risk of proliferation, particularly considering reports
on the use of chemical weapons by terrorists in the
Middle East. Such reports clearly indicate the serious
threats posed by the proliferation of WMDs and their
means of delivery when they fall into the hands of
non-State actors.
In relation to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and subsequent Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2325 (2016), I would like to highlight the
following four points.
First, addressing the risk of proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction would primarily require
a total ban and elimination of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons of mass destruction. That is why
it is important to work towards the universalization
and full implementation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and the Biological Weapons Convention.

17-1862217/33

S/PV.7985

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The successful conclusion of the ongoing negotiation
on a legally binding instrument on the prohibition of the
production and use of nuclear weapons, if not a total ban
on them, with the possible adoption of a legally binding
outcome document would, in our view, significantly
contribute to addressing the risk of proliferation of
nuclear weapons into the hands of non-State actors.
Secondly, as you highlighted in your opening
remarks, Mr. President, the prevention of proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction into the hands of
non-State actors would require a range of legislative
and enforcement measures that prohibits them from
developing, acquiring, manufacturing, possessing,
transporting, transferring or using WMDs and their
means of delivery. Coordinated national measures by
Member States involving all relevant stakeholders, such
as the law-enforcement, customs and financial sectors,
will be critical in preventing the risk of proliferation.
Such national efforts could be complemented by
international and regional efforts. They could also
be supported by assistance programmes within the
framework of the 1540 Committee.
Thirdly, enhancing cooperation between the 1540
Committee and regional organizations would also be
relevant. For instance, the African region, through the
Common African Defence and Security Policy, has
identified the accumulation of stockpiling, proliferation
and manufacture of weapons of mass destruction,
including nuclear, chemical and biological weapons
and their means of delivery, as a common external
threat to continental security as they may endanger or
pose a direct or indirect constraint on individual and
collective efforts to achieve continental security goals.
It is therefore important for the Committee to further
strengthen its cooperation with the African Union
and its member States in the implementation of the
Common African Defence and Security Policy and
other regional frameworks, such as the African nuclearweapon-free zone. Through such a regional approach,
the Committee could identify the specific priorities and
challenges of each region and subregion and strengthen
its support and assistance accordingly.
Enhanced cooperation at the regional and
international levels within the framework of the 1540
Committee, including through assistance programmes
and exchange of information and best practices, is very
important. In this regard, we welcome the holding of
the three original courses for 1540 points of contact.
We would further encourage the Committee to explore
18/33

28/06/2017

other mechanisms to strengthen its support for member
States and regional organizations in accordance with
paragraph 9 of the 1540 Committee’s programme of
work.
I would like to conclude my statement by
reaffirming Ethiopia’s commitment to continuing
to take all the necessary measures to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, to keep
them from falling into the hands of non-State actors
and to fully implement resolution 1540 (2004) and
subsequent Security Council resolutions on the issue, in
particular by strengthening the legal and administrative
framework for prohibiting the manufacture, acquisition,
possession, development, transport, transfer or use of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking the Bolivian presidency for organizing today’s
open debate. The non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) is a priority for Japan. I also wish
to thank the two briefers, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu and
Mr. Joseph Ballard, for their clear and informative
briefings.
Japan aligns itself with the joint statement of the
Group of Friends of Resolution 1540 (2004), which is to
be delivered later by the representative of Spain.
Japan once again welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2325 (2016) in December of last year.
However, we must recognize and remain vigilant
against the threat posed by the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction taking place now. The threat from
North Korea’s nuclear and ballistic-missile development
has reached a new level. These activities are in blatant
violation of Security Council resolutions and present a
clear challenge to the global non-proliferation regime.
This is simply not acceptable. Japan strongly urges
North Korea to refrain from further provocations and
violations and to comply faithfully and fully with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 2321 (2016) and 2270 (2016), as well as its
other commitments.
The threat of WMD proliferation is also evident in
Syria, with the actual use of chemical weapons. Japan
strongly condemn such acts, which are not permissible
under any circumstances.
In the light of these clear and present threats, it is
the responsibility of every State to protect itself and
its people by strengthening international and domestic
17-18622

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

non-proliferation measures. Malicious actors are
misusing rapid advances in science, technology and
international commerce for proliferation purposes.
Proliferation activities must be prevented whenever and
wherever they are attempted. States must be all the more
vigilant, as their people and entities can unwittingly
become complicit in proliferation activities. Japan
strongly believes that enhancing the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), especially the obligations set
forth in the resolution related to domestic and export
control, is imperative. Let me reiterate that resolution
2325 (2016) calls upon States that have not done so to
start developing effective national control lists.
State capacity-building is key for further
implementation because proliferation can occur through
the weakest link. The Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and its Group of Experts can
help States strengthen their domestic non-proliferation
systems by, for example, sharing expertise to formulate
national implementation action plans and clarifying
actual assistance needs. Facilitating direct interactions
between Member States and the Committee will
strongly bolster the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).
This year, Japan disbursed $1 million to the Trust
Fund to support the work of the 1540 Committee. A
significant portion will be used to finance these types
of direct interactions. Japan urges interested States
to contact the Committee and would also be happy to
relay any message to the Committee as the Coordinator
of the Working Group on Monitoring and National
Implementation.
In today’s security environment, we must urgently
strengthen the non-proliferation regime at the global,
regional and national levels. Japan will continue to
actively support these endeavours.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Bolivia’s holding of today’s meeting. I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General and
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs Izumi
Nakamitsu and Mr. Joseph Ballard of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons for their
briefings.
China appreciates the role played by Bolivia as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). The non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) and their means of delivery
bears on international peace, security and stability.

S/PV.7985

It is a common challenge and a major task facing the
international community and an important component
part of global governance. In recent years, thanks
to the joint efforts of the international community,
the international consensus on non-proliferation has
grown in depth and the relevant mechanisms have kept
improving. Countries have scaled up capacity-building
in non-proliferation and deepened cooperation in this
area.
Reviewing past experience in international
non-proliferation, we can draw the following four
lessons.
First, seeking common security is a fundamental
way to advance international non-proliferation. Creating
a peaceful and stable international environment,
building security architecture that features fairness,
justice, joint contributions and shared benefits, and
seeking common security for all countries represent the
ultimate guarantee for the elimination of the driving
forces of terrorism and proliferation.
Secondly, justice and balance constitute the basic
principles in advancing international non-proliferation.
Unilateralism, double standards and discriminatory
practices are detrimental to the authority and
effectiveness of the international non-proliferation
regime. While fulfilling their non-proliferation
obligations, countries are entitled to peacefully enjoy
the fruits of scientific and technological development.
Thirdly, leveraging the role of the international
non-proliferation regime is an important guarantee for
the advancement of international non-proliferation.
The threat of WMD proliferation knows no borders.
On the basis of the universal participation of and
democratic consultation among countries, having
the United Nations and the relevant international
organizations coordinate in non-proliferation efforts
can help strengthen and optimize the international
non-proliferation regime.
Fourthly, dialogue and cooperation are the most
effective way to advance international non-proliferation.
Confrontation, the focus on sanctions and pressure can
only lead to the escalation and overspill of conflicts,
thereby further exacerbating the risk of proliferation.
Dialogue, consultation and seeking peaceful settlements
of regional hotspot issues of proliferation through
political and diplomatic means can produce more durable
and effective results. Over the past several years, the
international non-proliferation situation has remained

17-1862219/33

S/PV.7985

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

serious with certain regional hotspot issues concerning
proliferation defying a solution. Technological progress
has lowered the threshold of proliferation, and the risk
of non-State actors, especially terrorists, acquiring
WMDs and related materials has increased.
The international community needs to work
together and do a better job in the following areas of
global non-proliferation governance.
First, we need to build political consensus and a
process for addressing both the symptoms and root
causes of the problem. We need to abandon the Cold
War mentality; establish a new concept of common,
integrated, cooperative and sustainable security;
improve the security environment of all countries;
and eradicate the breeding grounds of terrorism and
proliferation activities as soon as possible. At the same
time, there is a need to comprehensively implement
non-proliferation obligations and political commitment
in that regard, and commit ourselves to combating the
existing threats of proliferation.
Secondly, we need to strengthen national
responsibility and build a line of defence against
proliferation. National Governments bear the primary
responsibility for non-proliferation. We need to respect
and provide support to countries — based on their
specific circumstances — in their efforts to formulate
non-proliferation policies, improve legal and regulatory
systems on non-proliferation and enhance capacitybuilding in non-proliferation law enforcement with a
view to building a strong line of defence.
Thirdly we need to deepen international
cooperation and enhance non-proliferation capacity.
All countries must actively participate in global
non-proliferation governance, while ensuring the
respect for the sovereignty of all countries engaged in
exchanges and mutual learning, as well as pragmatic
cooperation in an open, inclusive, mutually beneficial
and win-win spirit so as to improve the capacity and
the level of non-proliferation of all countries. The needs
of developing countries for international systems in
non-proliferation should be effectively met.
Fourthly, we need to take a multipronged approach
to implement resolution 1540 (2004) comprehensively
and effectively. Resolution 1540 (2004) was the first of
its kind adopted by the Security Council specifically
concerning non-proliferation, and it represents the
common understanding of all countries in connection
with non-proliferation. The Committee established
20/33

28/06/2017

pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) needs to strictly
abide by the mandate conferred upon it by the resolution,
continue to take forward the spirit of cooperation,
focus on strengthening its assistance function so as to
enhance the awareness and capacity of Member States in
implementing the resolution and promote international
cooperation in the area of non-proliferation.
China resolutely opposes the proliferation of
WMDs and their means of delivery, and has always
strictly fulfilled its international non-proliferation
obligations. We have taken an active part in regional
and international non-proliferation cooperation, worked
hard to promote the political settlement of hotspot
issues in the area of non-proliferation and supported the
United Nations while playing a key role in that regard.
In September 2015 in Qingdao, China, in
cooperation with the 1540 Committee, hosted the
first training course for the points of contact in the
Asia-Pacific region, which yielded positive results.
In August, China, also in cooperation with the 1540
Committee, will co-host another training course in
China. We believe that that training course will play
a constructive role in helping the concerned parties
build capacity in the area of non-proliferation. China
will continue to work with all parties to contribute to
the improvement of the international non-proliferation
regime, the strengthening of global non-proliferation
governance and the maintenance of international peace
and security
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statement to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate their texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version.
I also wish to inform all concerned that, with the
consent of the members of the Security Council, I will
suspend this meeting between 1 p.m. and 2 p.m.
I now welcome and give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Montenegro.
Mr. Darmanović (Montenegro): I would like
to thank the Bolivian presidency for organizing this
timely open debate on the global efforts to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
by non-State actors and for preparing an informative
concept note (see S/2016/1038). I also thank the briefers
for their input at today’s debate.
17-18622

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, as well as
with the statement to be made on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Resolution 1540 (2004). I would, however,
like to make some additional remarks in my national
capacity.
We have witnessed the security, health,
environmental and social effects of testing nuclear
weapons. The nuclear programme of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and putative further
technological developments in its pursuit of military
nuclear capability pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. Montenegro condemns in the
strongest terms the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s repeated violations of the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, Iraq and Malaysia, and the possible
existence of residual capabilities on Syrian territory,
increase the risk of the proliferation of such weapons
and their falling into the hands of terrorist groups. We
have to face the fact that this imminent threat requires
our immediate action so as to avert consequences of a
global scale.
Montenegro supports the global agenda for the
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), as set
out in resolution 2325 (2016). At the national level,
we take a proactive and comprehensive approach in
trying to contribute to regional efforts in addressing
this urgent threat. As a State party to all key
international agreements and instruments related
to WMD proliferation and their means of delivery,
Montenegro has established a solid national framework
and built administrative and institutional capacities
to address the threat efficiently. We were the first
country in the Western Balkans to adopt a strategy
for the non-proliferation of WMDs for the period
between 2016 and 2020. In Montenegro, through the
implementation of that strategy and the implementation
of all accompanying action plans — including the
action plan for resolution 1540 (2004) and the chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear action plan — our
focus is on taking a number of measures at the national
level that ensure full compliance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, thereby contributing to
regional efforts in addressing that threat.
Aware of the fact that the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction is closely related to other aspects of
arms control in general, our attention is on the effective
enforcement of legislation and the establishment of

S/PV.7985

domestic control. In that context, we have established
an effective export control system, while taking into
account measures, such as those regarding intangible
technology transfers and other matters requiring
particular vigilance, including the transfer of the
sensitive facilities, equipment, technology and material
usable as weapons or other nuclear explosive devices.
We firmly believe that putting an emphasis on
the universality of the international provisions on
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
derives from the fact that even small States that do
not possess nuclear capacities or industries are an
important part of the security architecture, which aims
at controlling the use of sensitive materials for peaceful
purposes.
The threat of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors is a global one,
which requires a response at the national, regional and
international levels. We are confident that, only through
the joint and coherent efforts of the international
community, including increased cooperation between
the United Nations and the relevant international and
regional organizations, as well as among the relevant
Security Council Committees and active participation
of all stakeholders — parliamentarians, civil society,
industry and academia — this threat of grave concern
can be effectively addressed. Montenegro stands ready
to make a further contribution in that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Panama.
Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, Sir, let me commend your leadership of
the Security Council this month. We are grateful for the
concept note and thank Ms. Nakamitsu and Mr. Ballard
for their briefings at today’s relevant debate, which,
once again, draws the attention of the Council to the
growing threat of the risk of proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction throughout the world.
Panama aligns itself with the statements to be made
by the Permanent Representative of Spain, on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Resolution 1540 (2004), and by
the Permanent Representative of Venezuela, on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
As a country that is fully committed to strengthening
the disarmament and non-proliferation regime, Panama
reaffirms its commitment to resolution 2325 (2016) and
the ongoing fight against the proliferation of nuclear,

17-1862221/33

S/PV.7985

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

chemical and biological weapons and their delivery
systems because it believes that they pose a serious
threat to international peace and security, in particular
when in the hands of non-State actors.
Panama attaches particular importance to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and to resolution 1540 (2004) because they are the
only legally binding multilateral instruments currently
in force that address global nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. As a member of the Human Security
Network, whose chairmanship we recently assumed,
Panama promotes the safety and security of all of the
world’s citizens and their right to a life of freedom and
dignity, free of threats, so that they can exert their true
potential. Based on that premise, we must combat the
cruel threat posed by weapons of mass destruction.
In February, Latin America and the Caribbean
celebrated the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty
of Tlatelolco — the first regional agreement on
disarmament and the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons that gave rise to the first nuclear-free zone,
which has retained that status. Today, under our
region’s proven leadership, we welcome the progress
made by the United Nations conference to negotiate a
legally binding instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons,
leading towards their total elimination. We believe
that Ambassador Elayne Whyte Gómez will steer the
conference to a successful outcome.
Panama
reiterated
its
commitment
to
non-proliferation
in
1999
by
signing
the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and, 21
years after its adoption, urges that greater efforts be
made to achieve its universalization and entry into
force, through a commitment by all States, without
standards or exceptions. Although Panama does not
import, manufacture or stockpile weapons of mass
destruction or nuclear weapons, it is fully aware of the
emerging trends in proliferation through scientific and
technological advances and in international trade that
could be vulnerable to the risk of the possession and
use of such weapons by non-State actors. That is why
we have been adopting and strengthening a series of
practical measures.
As a country that is pivotal to logistics and global
transit, with a larger Panama Canal, it has even greater
challenges and responsibilities. That is why we are
stepping up efforts to assist in the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Our geographic location, marine
22/33

28/06/2017

biodiversity and the advantages of the connectivity that
Panama offers are all assets, but also pose security
challenges, which our country is addressing.
We have worked to draft modern legislation that
allows us to prevent, combat and punish the financing
of terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. We have adopted a national action plan
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) for
the period 2016-2019 to regulate dual use materials.
We have established a National Coordination
Council against International Terrorism, which is
interinstitutional and has the support of international
experts from the Organization of American States
and the United Nations. In addition, Panama is part of
the Global Container Control Programme, which is a
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and World
Customs Organization initiative. It was implemented
to facilitate information-sharing and cooperation
among participating countries in order to limit the use
of maritime containers for transnational organized
crime. At the regional level, Panama chairs the
Inter-American Committee Against Terrorism, which
we hope will continue to enhance constructive efforts
and cooperation as we stress that they are fundamental
to addressing this grave challenge.
My Government firmly condemns the recent
launches by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
because they are in flagrant violation of Security Council
resolutions and merely heighten tensions in the region.
In that regard, we have reiterated that the manufacture
and use of nuclear weapons cannot continue to be used
as a political tool to assign power in the world. The
humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons is irreversible
and unquantifiable. The global development of such
weapons is measured not only by the number of human
lives that are directly affected, but also by the amount
of resources diverted, which then make it impossible to
meet the aspirations of the well-being of humankind.
We cannot continue to shirk that responsibility.
In conclusion, I underscore the importance of
maintaining a multidimensional approach to security in
the light of the human rights/development nexus, which
is indispensable to building a peaceful and safe world.
Nuclear disarmament must be a global imperative
that, with the necessary political will, can promote
peace and free up billions of dollars for sustainable
development. In that regard, the commitments outlined
here today encourage us to continue the fight, which is
a struggle for humankind, the future and present and
17-18622

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV.7985

future generations, including the young people who are
with me today and who will take part in the meeting
convened by the President of the General Assembly on
education, as part of the efforts to improve the quality
of education in Panama.

means of delivery on the part of non-State actors. In that
sense, resolution 1540 (2004) is today an instrument of
prime importance that provides a specific framework
for States to combat more effectively the terrorist threat
linked to the proliferation of such weapons.

Sir, you have Panama’s ongoing support in ensuring
that the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) continues to fulfil its overarching goal of
encouraging global efforts to combat the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction in all its aspects.

Likewise, we especially value the final document
on the 2016 comprehensive review of the status of
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) (see
S/2016/1038, carried out under the leadership of Spain
and which is endorsed in resolution 2325 (2016),
adopted by the Security Council on 15 December 2016.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Labbé (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
the Permanent Representative of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Ambassador Sacha Llorentty Solíz, in his
double capacity as President of the Security Council
and as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), for convening today’s important
debate on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors.
We welcome the briefings delivered by the UnderSecretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, and the
Senior Officer from the Office of Strategy and Policy
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, Mr. Joseph Ballard.
Chile aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the representative of Spain on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Resolution 1540.
Today’s debate could not be more timely. It is
being held as a treaty is being negotiated in this very
building to prohibit weapons of mass destruction. The
most recent category of weapons of mass destruction,
which is contrary to international law, in particular
international humanitarian law, has still not been
expressly prohibited by a convention. There is no doubt
that such a convention would help to strengthen the
global disarmament and non-proliferation regime.
One of the key components of the non-proliferation
architecture is resolution 1540 (2004), which was
unanimously adopted on 28 April 2004 and represents
a historic milestone, to which Chile was proud to
contribute at the time as a non-permanent member of the
Council. It is indeed the first resolution of the Council
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
that established concrete measures to combat the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their

It is important to note that current global trends
are intensifying proliferation threats. For example,
globalization and increased trade in components and
in trans-shipment, accelerating technological advances
and the facilitation of the intangible transfer of
technologies, shell companies, overseas procurement
networks and black-market distribution networks must
all be considered in developing effective measures
against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and dual-use components.
Strategic controls are key to preventing important
technologies from reaching the hands of non-State
actors. Proliferation agents attack the weaknesses
of the existing control and commercial distribution
chains. That is why resolution 1540 (2004) requires
States to adopt and enforce effective measures to
establish national controls aimed at preventing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
related materials.
We are convinced that strengthening national
capacities, assistance and cooperation are essential to
progress in the implementation of existing measures and
in considering future actions. Therefore, Chile, together
with the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the Office for
Disarmament Affairs, organized a training course for
focal points in Latin America and the Caribbean that
are responsible for its implementation, which was held
in Santiago from 24 to 28 October of last year.
The use of chemical weapons or toxic chemicals
by non-State actors is no longer just a threat, but a
worrying reality, as confirmed by the research of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
In conclusion, we hope that those results will deter
those who are determined to use chemical weapons in
the future.

17-1862223/33

S/PV.7985

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Gómez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, and Bolivia for convening
this important meeting. Allow me to start by reiterating
the obvious. We must strengthen the collective response
through cooperation and international law in order to
address the increasing risk of weapons capable of wiping
out entire communities through cruel, indiscriminate
effects, as well as the risk that they may fall into the
hands of non-State actors and terrorist groups.
Mexico categorically condemns the existence
of weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons, and their use by any
actor under any circumstance. This meeting coincides
with the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty of Tlatelolco
and shows that a world free of nuclear weapons is a
goal within our reach. As the concept note prepared for
the previous Council meeting on this topic in December
indicates (S/2016/1013, annex), the extraordinary
advances in science and technology and the dynamism
of international trade should not threaten our security.
Our challenge is to find a balance that will enable us
to meet our non-proliferation commitments, while
avoiding obstacles to trade, technology and our own
industries.
Mexico is a responsible global actor and a country
that rejects weapons of mass destruction, as well as
being the world’s leading recipient of foreign direct
investment in its aerospace industry. With one of
the largest chemical industries in the world, we have
developed a national export-control regime for dual-use
materials, based on coordinated efforts generating
firm, flexible and sophisticated responses, thereby
enabling us to fulfil our international obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004), and those under our voluntary
memberships, including the Wassenaar Arrangement,
the Australia Group and the Nuclear Suppliers Group.
But such efforts are of little or no use if we do
not strengthen our national capacities and if we do
not engage in real-time information exchange and
continuous cooperation among States. In those efforts,
the leadership of the Security Council is essential, as
is the commitment of the five permanent members.
The review of the status of resolution 1540 (2004) by
the Council last year. under the leadership of Spain,
highlighted the urgent need to strengthen our collective
efforts.
24/33

28/06/2017

Two weeks ago, in collaboration with Germany,
the 1540 Committee Group of Experts and the Office
for Disarmament Affairs, Mexico hosted a successful
meeting on the Wiesbaden process that enabled us
to share our experience and good practices with the
countries of the Pacific Ocean Alliance and with
Brazil. Industry representatives from those countries
participated in awareness-raising with regard to the
diversion of dual-use goods and technologies for
proliferation purposes. Important efforts that are
critical to ensuring a safer region are taking place in
Latin America.
Multilateralism and the United Nations remain key
in addressing the risks of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and their materials and in forging
the secure world that we all desire.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Tenya Hasegawa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu and Mr. Joseph
Ballard for their informative briefings today.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Spain on behalf
of the Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004). We
would also like to add a few comments in our national
capacity.
My delegation is grateful for this opportunity
to engage in dialogue on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, as well as for the efforts
undertaken by the chairmanship of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), currently held by the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, with a view to strengthening international
cooperation on this very important issue.
Peru believes that the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery systems represents
one of the most serious threats to international peace
and security. The situation has deteriorated in recent
years, with an increased likelihood of non-State actors,
in particular terrorist groups, developing, acquiring
or using such weapons and their means of delivery,
or trading in them. The threat is real, as we have seen
in recent instances, and has been facilitated by rapid
advances in science and technology as well as by the
expansion of international trade.
Spurred on by this realization, Peru co-sponsored
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016), which we deem
17-18622

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

vital instruments for promoting the urgently needed
universalization and comprehensive implementation
of the multilateral treaties aimed at preventing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Moreover,
we consider it imperative to develop and implement
national legislation so as effectively to monitor the
illicit trade in such weapons and their components and
delivery systems.
In that connection, we would underscore that Peru
has made considerable efforts to meet its obligations
under the resolutions I mentioned — in terms of nuclear
safety, radiological security and the physical protection
of nuclear material. As set out in the reports we have
submitted, we have adapted our legislation and taken
various criminal and administrative measures to ensure
effective migration and customs control in the aerial
and maritime areas.
Peru believes, moreover, that efforts to address
the threat of such weapons falling into the hands of
non-State actors must go hand in hand with greater
cooperation at the subregional and regional levels, with
the goal of prevention and of the transfer of technology
for peaceful purposes. That was the stance taken
recently by Peru at the United Nations Security Council
Resolution 1540 (2004) Regional Industry Outreach
Conference for the Pacific Alliance States and Brazil,
organized recently by the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs in Mexico City last June.
By the same token, we believe it vital to ensure
accurate, predictable and coherent action by those
bodies charged with implementing the non-proliferation
regime, in particular the Security Council. Another key
challenge facing the international legal regime on that
issue is the imperative need to eliminate the weapons
of mass destruction currently held by various States.
That is a long-standing aspiration of the international
community whose realization will require greater
involvement on the part of civil society and the
scientific community, including non-governmental
organizations, in our efforts to foster understanding of
and outreach on the obligations borne by States under
resolution 1540 (2004) and other related instruments.
To conclude, Peru reaffirms its unstinting
commitment to complying with international norms
aimed at ensuring the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, as well as its concomitant
international cooperation and coordination efforts,

S/PV.7985

with the ultimate goal of setting the world free from the
daunting threat of such weapons.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Roet (Israel): The alarming threat of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
to non-State actors continues to grow. Advances in
science and technology, alongside the evolving nature
of terror, present challenges never before seen.
To stop the proliferation of chemical, biological
and nuclear weapons to ill-intentioned actors, the
Security Council adopted resolution 1540 (2004), the
only legally binding document dedicated specifically
to the non-proliferation of WMD and their means of
delivery to non-State actors, especially terrorists.
Israel understands the severity of this issue firsthand, as our citizens live under constant threat, both
conventional and unconventional. As such, we consider
the non-proliferation of WMD a top priority.
In recent years, the absolute norm against the use of
chemical weapons has been eroded and challenged time
and again. Failing States have transformed the Middle
East region into a breeding ground for terrorists. The
recklessness of some States has aggravated the threat of
proliferation of WMD to non-State actors.
The Al-Assad regime’s systematic use of chemical
weapons has incentivized terrorists and non-State
actors to obtain the materials and know-how to produce
and deploy WMD. It is clear, therefore, that the
responsibility for the proliferation of chemical weapons
in Syria lies squarely at the feet of Al-Assad.
The United Nations-Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) found both the Al-Assad regime and
Da’esh guilty of employing chemical weapons against
innocent civilians. Last fall, after the JIM concluded
that the Syrian regime was responsible for three
chemical attacks, some in the international community
had hoped this finding would deter Al-Assad from
continuing to carry out such horrible attacks. But,
sadly, they were wrong.
On 4 April, at 6:30 a.m., the Al-Assad regime
bombarded the people of Khan Shaykhun, a small town
in the Hama area, with air strikes including sarin gas.
As a first responder recalled:

17-1862225/33

S/PV.7985

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

“I saw something I had never seen in my life ...
children trying to breathe a gasp of air, with saliva
and foam coming out of their mouths and nostrils”.
With approximately 100 people killed and hundreds
more wounded that morning, the attack on Khan
Shaykhun is the latest example of the repeated abuses
committed against innocent Syrians since 2013. The
Al-Assad regime’s systematic use of chemical weapons
must be stopped.
Resolution 1540 (2004) prohibits the proliferation
of WMD and their means of delivery. The development
and testing of ballistic missiles increases the risk
of proliferation of this means of delivery. Having
developed and fired ballistic missiles consistently since
the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), Iran has done its
part to increase this global threat.
On 18 and 19 June, Iran fired six Zulfiqar surface-tosurface missiles and one Qiam medium-range missile at
the Deir ez-Zor area in Syria, claiming to have been
targeting Da’esh. Following these launches, Sheikh
Hussein al-Islam, an adviser to Iran’s Foreign Minister,
made Iran’s true intention clear. He stated:
“Israel is the main enemy of Iran. I think [Israel]
understood the message. It now has to worry.”
The international community must understand this
message. It cannot ignore such a direct threat by one
Member State against another.
Today I shall use this forum to present new
information outlining yet another unacceptable, blatant
threat by Iran against Israel. This information has only
recently come to light. Last December, Iran conducted
a launch test of the Qiam, a Missile Technology Control
Regime (MTCR) category 1 missile that can carry a
nuclear warhead. The missile landed very close to the
target: a bullseye shaped like a Star of David. This use
of the Star of David, the symbol of the Jewish people,
for target practice is hateful and unacceptable.
In the light of Iran’s missile launches, support
for terror and bolstering of Al-Assad’s murderous
regime, the Security Council must guarantee Iran’s full
compliance with the relevant resolutions, especially
on the eve of the Security Council’s briefing on
non-proliferation.
Over the years, Israel has taken extensive steps
to implement resolution 1540 (2004). Israel has
joined the Group of Friends of resolution 1540 and
26/33

28/06/2017

supports the statement delivered by the representative
of Spain on behalf of the Group today. The Israeli
Government has instituted intelligence-gathering
and intelligence-sharing improvements in border
control and the development of advanced detection
and identification devices. Israel has also enhanced
facility and relevant dual-use material security as well
as the strengthening of export controls. We believe
that this multipronged strategy is key to the successful
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Finally, the international community must take
clear action to counter State-sponsored proliferation
and the proliferation of WMD to terrorists. Israel is
fully committed to serving as an active partner in this
international effort.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me begin by expressing
the appreciation of my delegation for your personal
efforts, Sir, in leading the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and for holding this open debate.
I also thank the Under-Secretary-General and
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs and the
representative of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for their statements.
Pakistan aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
The debate on global efforts to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors is important and timely. It needs to
be situated within the larger non-proliferation context.
Resolution 1540 (2004) has emerged as an important
instrument in the global non-proliferation architecture,
as it seeks to prevent non-State actors from acquiring
or using weapons of mass destruction. It has made a
useful contribution to the advancement of our shared
non-proliferation goals.
While two recent successes, first in the
Disarmament Commission and then the agreement
reached on objectives and the agenda for a fourth
special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament, are encouraging. However, other aspects
of the disarmament and non-proliferation landscape
do not evoke similar optimism. Some nuclear-weapon
States are not willing to give up their large inventories
17-18622

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

of nuclear weapons or their modernization programmes,
even as they pursue non-proliferation with great zeal,
purposively ignoring the fact that disarmament and
non-proliferation are organically linked.
Further progress may be impeded by recent
developments, including the fact that one of the five
permanent mebers of the Security Council has vowed
to greatly strengthen and expand nuclear capabilities
by outmatching and outlasting potential competitors.
That would renew a nuclear arms race, in flagrant
disregard of the basic principles enshrined at the first
special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament.
Another key challenge to long-held non-proliferation
norms and rules remains the granting of discriminatory
waivers to some nations, thereby creating exceptions
based on power or profit motives. Such special
arrangements carry obvious proliferation risks and open
up the possibility of the diversion of material intended
for peaceful uses to military purposes, in addition, of
course, to undermining regional strategic stability.
With regard to the implementation of the resolution,
the importance of staying one step ahead of non-State
actors who seek to kill and maim innocent people by
using weapons of mass destruction, especially in view
of the rapid advancements in science and technology,
cannot be overstated. Effective cooperation is the only
way to proceed in that matter. It is imperative to leverage
the cooperative approach and the spirit of national
ownership that resolution 1540 (2004) engenders.
Pakistan has been a consistent supporter of the
objectives of resolution 1540 (2004), and our commitment
to its implementation is, we believe, exemplary. We
have submitted five national implementation reports,
the latest only last month. Over the years, Pakistan has
acquired considerable experience and expertise in the
safe and secure utilization of nuclear energy, as well as
in the application of chemistry and biology for peaceful
purposes.
With regard to assistance in particular, our latest
implementation report notes Pakistan’s readiness
to offer assistance, in collaboration with the 1540
Committee, to interested States for capacity-building,
technical assistance and training in the following areas:
regulatory infrastructure in export controls and the
safety and security of nuclear and radioactive materials;
commodity identification training for enforcement
officials; training for licensing officers; internal

S/PV.7985

compliance; industry outreach and public awarenessraising; and academic and specialized courses in the
field of nuclear safety and nuclear security, assistance
and protection courses related to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction, as well as chemical safety and security.
Pakistan also hosted a two-day regional seminar
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in
Islamabad in March 2017, in which representatives
from 18 countries and officials from the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the OPCW and INTERPOL
actively participated. The seminar also emphasized
the key role of assistance aimed at strengthening the
implementation of the resolution.
However, the real value of such assistance will
remain limited at best until we transform the process
from one that is donor-driven to the one that caters
to the actual needs of the States in need of help and
assistance.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that as the Nuclear
Suppliers Group (NSG) deliberates on the legal, technical
and political aspects of the membership of countries that
are not party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), it must establish and adhere to
transparent, objective and non-discriminatory criteria
that ensures equal treatment of non-NPT applicants for
the Group’s membership, thereby strengthening, and
not weakening, the non-proliferation regime.
Pakistan’s strong credentials as an active partner
in global non-proliferation efforts has established its
eligibility to become a member of the NSG.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Archbishop Bernardito Cleopas
Auza, Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the
Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza: Preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and of their means of
delivery constitutes a common challenge facing the
international community and is a key element in global
governance and international peace and security.
It has been nearly six months since the Council’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 2325 (2016), on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
However, the situation has not, in our view, substantially
changed, because, as Pope Francis has stated, we may
say, “never again”, but at the same time we produce

17-1862227/33

S/PV.7985

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

weapons and sell them to those who are at war with
one another. The Pope would like to remind us that
it is an absurd contradiction to speak of peace and to
negotiate peace, while at the same time promoting or
permitting the arms trade. He invites national leaders
to commit themselves firmly to ending the arms trade,
which victimizes so many innocent people, and he
reiterates his strong support for the rapid adoption of
steps that would lead to the elimination of weapons of
mass destruction and to the reduction of the world’s
reliance on armed force in the conduct of national and
international affairs.
The principal legally binding instrument currently
available for combating the proliferation threat is
resolution 1540 (2004), adopted unanimously more
than a decade ago. That resolution’s preventive role and
the 1540 Committee’s efforts in the five areas of its
work, namely, implementation, assistance, cooperation,
transparency and dissemination, are fundamental in
guiding the actions of all States in seeking to pool
efforts to combat proliferation.
In that regard, my delegation would like to reiterate
that it is essential to improve assistance to States
and cooperation among them, if we are to combat
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. It
is necessary to increase the coordination of national,
regional and international efforts, as appropriate, so as
to strengthen our response to that serious challenge.
All States ought to take appropriate measures,in
accordance with national and international law, and
they ought to fulfil scrupulously their obligations under
international law and the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations. The establishment of zones free of
weapons of mass destruction would also be a big step in
the right direction, as it would demonstrate that we can
indeed move toward a universal agreement to eliminate
all such weapons.
The proliferation of weapons, both conventional
and those of mass destruction, aggravates conflict
situations and results in huge human and material
costs that profoundly undermine development and the
search for lasting peace. Indeed, non-proliferation,
arms control and disarmament underpin global
security and sustainable development. Without them,
the achievement of the much-vaunted 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development will be seriously jeopardized,
peace will continue to be dangerously in grave deficit
and human sufferings will sadly remain unabated.
28/33

28/06/2017

It is imperative, therefore, that all State actors
overcome their differences and find political solutions
that can prevent and halt the involvement of non-State
actors in wars and conflicts. Otherwise, the human
cost of wars and conflicts will continue to grow and
the proliferation of biological, chemical and nuclear
weapons, along with their delivery systems and the risk
of their use by States or terrorist groups, will remain
very clear and present dangers.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself
with the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union.
First, we would like to thank Bolivia for convening
an open debate on this relevant topic, which is more
pressing than ever. We fully agree that the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery constitutes a serious threat to international
peace and security. Such threats are continuously
evolving, owing, inter alia, to rapid developments in
science, technology and international commerce. The
risk of State or non-State actors, particularly terrorists,
seeking to develop or acquiring weapons of mass
destruction is especially worrisome and, unfortunately,
we have already seen those risks materializing.
Toxic chemicals have repeatedly been used as
weapons in Syria, and new credible allegations have
been reported by the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism attributed the
responsibility for the series of chemical-weapon attacks
to both the Syrian armed forces and the terrorists. The
threatening and destabilizing actions by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea represent a serious threat
to international peace and security and undermine the
global non-proliferation and disarmament regime.
We therefore need to redouble our efforts at
the national, regional and global levels to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring sensitive materials
and technologies. We believe that the key to effective
counter-proliferation is universal adherence and the
full implementation of multilateral disarmament and
non-proliferation treaties and agreements. We also
must strive to make progress towards strengthening
the existing instruments and regimes. We strongly
support the multilateral disarmament, non-proliferation
and arms-control treaties, such as the Biological and
17-18622

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Toxin Weapons Convention, the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty. We also stand ready for the immediate
commencement and early conclusion of the negotiation
of a treaty banning the production of fissile material
for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices. We welcome the establishment of the highlevel expert preparatory group whose mandate it is to
make recommendations on substantive elements for a
future treaty.
Resolution 1540 (2004) remains the fundamental
pillar and a key preventive instrument for a cooperative
approach aimed at helping Member States to
develop capabilities to face evolving threats in the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
I would like to reaffirm Estonia’s readiness to
implement, in a proactive manner, resolution 1540
(2004), as urged in resolution 2325 (2016) and the
comprehensive review report (see S/2016/1038). We
believe that effective implementation entails effective
legal enforcement and export controls. We also attach
high importance to the existing multilateral exportcontrol regimes. We continue to contribute to a number
of global and regional non-proliferation initiatives,
such as the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism and the Proliferation Security Initiative.
We also continue to support resolution 1540 (2004) by
sharing our experience and knowledge in the area of the
export control of dual-use items. Every step promoting
transparency and greater responsibility contributes to
the broader capacity-building of interested States.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The following
countries align themselves with this statement: the
candidate countries Turkey, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia.
First of all, I would like to express my gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for convening this debate and
for putting this important issue on the agenda of our
meeting today. That is a clear and welcome sign of the

S/PV.7985

Security Council’s continued engagement in support of
resolution 1540 (2004) and its determination to drive
forward the implementation of last year’s comprehensive
review of that resolution.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is
a growing threat to international peace and security. It
puts at risk the security of our States and our peoples.
Some States have sought, or are seeking, the means and
technology to develop weapons of mass destruction and
their delivery systems. The risk that terrorists could
acquire such weapons is particularly worrisome. That
should be a cause of serious concern for all of us.
The international community needs to respond
firmly. In the European Union’s view, our response
should be based on a number of principles. First
of all, we must continue to address the root causes
of instability. Secondly, multilateral disarmament
and non-proliferation treaties and agreements must
be upheld and strengthened. Thirdly, multilateral
institutions, especially those dealing with verification
and compliance, deserve our full support. Fourthly,
export-control lists and regimes play an important role
in stemming proliferation. Finally, we must mainstream
non-proliferation into our overall policies, resources
and instruments.
The European Union’s global strategy, issued
one year ago, provides the foundation for the EU to
continue, and even step up, its efforts in the coming
years. In line with the global strategy, we strongly
support the multilateral disarmament, non-proliferation
and arms-control treaties and regimes, and we will
use every means at our disposal to assist in resolving
proliferation crises, as we successfully did with the
Iranian nuclear programme.
The EU and its member States believe that resolution
1540 (2004) remains a central pillar of the international
non-proliferation architecture. Resolution 1540 (2004)
has become even more important in the current
security environment, which is characterized by acute
and diffuse threats, and where external and internal
security issues must be seen and tackled together.
We are therefore pleased to see that the
comprehensive review conducted in 2016 reaffirmed
the centrality, importance and authority of resolution
1540 (2004) in the multilateral non-proliferation
architecture. All 28 EU member States sponsored the
new resolution 2325 (2016), which the Security Council
unanimously adopted on 15 December 2016. I would

17-1862229/33

S/PV.7985

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

like to warmly congratulate my Spanish colleagues for
their outstanding work on that topic.
As a follow-up to the comprehensive review and
the adoption of resolution 2325 (2016), last month
the EU Council adopted a decision in support of
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). That
new EU Council decision is an ambitious funding
scheme designed to help implement the outcome
of the comprehensive review. Based on our fruitful
cooperation in the past, we will again ask the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs to perform the
role of implementing partner for this project. The new
scheme extends over a three-year period and is worth
more than €2.6 million.
Through the new Council decision, we will support
cooperation and capacity-building, both nationally and
at the regional level. We will pay special attention to the
role of industry and support the relevant initiatives. Last
but not least, we are keen to foster closer cooperation
between EU-funded projects implemented by the
Office for Disarmament Affairs and by other regional
organizations, such as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, and those implemented
by the European Commission through our centres
of excellence.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the readiness
of the European Union and its 28 member States to
implement in a proactive manner the outcome of
the 2016 comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004). We will do so in close cooperation with the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and in partnership with
all United Nations States Members and with other
non-governmental stakeholders.
The proliferation challenges are multifaceted and
complex, and its consequences extremely worrying.
But, working together, we can succeed in preventing
the worst-case scenario from happening.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland
Mr. Winid (Poland): Poland aligns itself with the
statement just delivered by the observer of the European
Union and with the statement delivered by the Chair
of the Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004).
My delegation would like to make some additional
comments from our national perspective.
30/33

28/06/2017

We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
open debate and for your first quarterly message in
your capacity as the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), which was circulated in May. The ability of
non-State actors to acquire and use weapons of mass
destruction poses a continuous and real threat to global
security and to the non-proliferation regime.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
entry into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC) — one of the most universal treaties in the field
of disarmament. However, it is with grave concern
that we are following the recurring cases of the use of
chemical weapons in Syria and Iraq. Reports by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW)-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
have confirmed that the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham was among those responsible for horrific attacks
on civilian populations over the past few years. Any use
of chemical weapons strikes at the very foundations on
which the CWC has been built.
Although the OPCW is not an anti-terrorist
organization, Poland believes it has the potential to
counter the threat of the misuse of toxic chemicals by
non-State actors. The OPCW position against terrorism
can be strengthened by the full implementation of CWC
provisions by States Parties. Poland also supports OPCW
cooperation with other international stakeholders,
including the Global Partnership against the Spread of
Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
and the 1540 Committee.
Half a year ago, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2325 (2016), which Poland had the honour
to support and co-sponsor. It was the culmination
of the six-month-long comprehensive review of
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
identified the strengths and areas for the improvement
of the resolution. The resolution drew conclusions on
the evolving nature of the risk of proliferation and the
rapid advances in science and technology that might
influence the non-proliferation regime. We fully
share the approach taken in resolution 2325 (2016),
which states that more attention should be paid by
States to enforcement measures, to measures relating
to biological, chemical and nuclear weapons, and to
national export and transshipment controls.
As you have accurately pointed out, Mr. President,
17-18622

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

“Experience shows that taking full advantage
of direct interactions with Member States is the
best way to achieve sustainable and measurable
results with regard to effective implementation of
the resolution”.
We therefore commend Chile, China and the
Russian Federation, which hosted regional courses for
the 1540 contact points. Based on our own experience,
we understand how important it is to develop
cooperation at the regional level in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004). We also repeat our readiness
to assist other States, at their request, in their capacitybuilding efforts.
Some simple steps may significantly strengthen
non-proliferation. To name just the basic ones — we
encourage the remaining 16 States to submit their national
implementation plans with regard to resolution 1540
(2004). We also call on States that have not yet done
so to accede to the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
Poland welcomes enhanced cooperation between
the 1540 Committee and international organizations
such as the International Atomic Energy Agency
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. We encourage Member States to develop
direct engagement with the 1540 Committee and with
other relevant forums, such as the Global Partnership,
the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Australian Group, the
European Union Chemical, Biological, Radiological
and Nuclear Risk Mitigation Centres of Excellence
Initiative, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Global Initiative to Counter Nuclear
Terrorism and the Proliferation Security Initiative.
In conclusion, I wish to state that my country
has traditionally been a firm advocate of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction at
all levels. We stand ready to cooperate with all actors
interested in strengthening the non-proliferation regime
and security for all in a world free of weapons of mass
destruction. Resolution 1540 (2004) plays a pivotal role
in achieving that goal. I can therefore assure you of our
full support, Mr. President, as well as of our support for
the work of the 1540 Committee.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I have the privilege of
speaking on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely,

S/PV.7985

Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own
country, Norway.
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) and
subsequent resolutions, such as resolution 2325 (2016),
supplement agreements on disarmament and on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD). It fills a critical gap in terms of preventing
non-State actors, notably terrorist groups, from
developing, acquiring, manufacturing, possessing,
transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons and their means of delivery.
The resolution’s continued relevance is underscored
by recent reports of use of chemical weapons in Iraq
and Syria.
Efforts to prevent non-State actors, including
terrorists, from acquiring and using weapons of mass
destruction is an ongoing process. Hence, we agree
with the President’s view that the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-term task. It requires
the continued vigilance and active participation of all
relevant stakeholders, such as States Members of the
United Nations, relevant international and regional
organizations, the private sector and other civil-society
partners. Our efforts must be dynamic. New threats are
emerging, such as cyberthreats relating to weapons of
mass destruction. The biological and chemical sectors
require more attention, as significant gaps remain there
as well.
It is crucial that we take into account the rapid pace
of technological development. Technological advances
may, on the one hand, facilitate our efforts to implement
resolution 1540 (2004), but new technologies may
also lead to new threats. It is therefore important that
we continuously update our tool box for combating
WMD terrorism. That must be an important task for
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), as well as for the Council
itself during its regular deliberations on WMD-related
issues. States that have the necessary legislation and
enforcement measures in place are better placed to
benefit from ongoing technological advances. Hence,
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) also
contributes to social and economic progress.
The comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004), undertaken last year, showed that considerable
progress has been made in both the outreach and the
implementation of the resolution. Initial reporting from
Member States has clearly improved, but progress

17-1862231/33

S/PV.7985

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

has been uneven. We need to do more to ensure that
domestic legislation and enforcement measures are
adequate for addressing the current challenges. That
is primarily a national responsibility, but the Nordic
countries recognize the need for international support
and assistance, and we provide such support in
various ways.
Since its adoption by the Security Council,
resolution 1540 (2004) has become more firmly
anchored within the United Nations system and is
complemented by work under relevant multilateral
treaties. Such extensive ownership is crucial, since
no nation is immune to WMD terrorism. Over the
past decade, a broader international architecture of
initiatives and partnerships has emerged to fight WMD
terrorism. It is of the greatest importance that all such
efforts be mutually supportive.
The Nordic countries are active in the broader
partnership. We have contributed financially to
the Secretariat’s work on resolution 1540 (2004).
At the latest Nuclear Security Summit, held in
Washington, D.C., in 2016, individual Nordic countries
made national pledges, such as working towards
minimizing the use of highly enriched uranium in the
civilian sector and enhancing the nuclear-detection
architecture. We are also engaged in long-standing
technical cooperation with several countries on both
nuclear safety and nuclear security. Other examples
of relevant cooperation projects include the training
of chemists from developing countries and assisting
States in building their capacity to prevent and counter
biological threats.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is clearly a key component
of the international security architecture. We must all
strive towards its full and global implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Sir, for organizing this open debate. I also
thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Joseph Ballard, Senior
Officer of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, for their briefings.
The mere existence of weapons of mass destruction
constitutes a threat to humankind, and therefore to
international peace and security. The possibility that
such weapons may fall into the hands of non-State actors,
32/33

28/06/2017

especially terrorists, is of particular concern — all the
more so today, as evidenced by the use of chemical
weapons in Syria and Iraq. We are also concerned about
the vulnerability of countries in the face of new threats
resulting from the development of new information and
communication technologies, which have been used by
non-State actors to carry out cyberattacks specifically
designed to target States’ critical infrastructure.
As a member of the Security Council, Brazil actively
participated in the discussions that led to the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004), and we have remained firmly
committed to its implementation — as demonstrated by
the national matrix prepared by the Group of Experts of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and approved by the Committee.
Our Constitution prohibits any nuclear activity for
non-peaceful purposes on Brazilian territory. Brazil is
a party to all of the major treaties and conventions in
the field of disarmament and non-proliferation. At the
same time, Brazil clearly promotes the peaceful uses of
sensitive and dual-use goods and products, especially in
activities related to industry, research and development.
Brazil has followed with interest the comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
concluded last December, and participated in the open
consultations convened in June 2016 by the Chairman
of the 1540 Committee. As the report on compliance
with resolution 1540 (2004) acknowledges, the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a longterm task that requires continued efforts at the national,
regional and international levels. We are pleased
that resolution 2325 (2016) also assigns a key role to
international cooperation and assistance for the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
We recognize the important work carried out by the
1540 Committee and its Group of Experts, in particular
in trying to match offers of and requests for cooperation.
In order to address some of the shortcomings of
that process, countries in a position to do so should
assist countries to formulate requests for assistance.
Brazil has participated in cooperation and assistance
initiatives that contribute to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), especially in the drafting of
national legislation on chemical and biological weapons
and related materials.
Despite the importance of resolution 1540 (2004),
the focusing of international efforts exclusively on
the fight against the proliferation of weapons of mass
17-18622

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

destruction is insufficient. Disarmament measures are
a fundamental component of any reasonable strategy
to prevent such weapons from falling into the hands of
non-State actors.
Over the past 50 years, the international community
has successfully adopted legally binding multilateral
instruments banning biological and chemical weapons.
Given the destruction and unimaginable suffering that
nuclear weapons are capable of inflicting, the lack of
similar instruments for such weapons is unacceptable
and constitutes a flagrant violation of article VI of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
As we meet in the Council, the United Nations — in
a debate open to all States, international organizations
and civil society under a mandate pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 71/258 — is taking a decisive step
to fill that vacuum through the negotiation of a nuclearweapon-ban treaty. We are pleased with the constructive
nature of today’s debate, and we are optimistic that by
7 July we will reach a treaty to ban nuclear weapons.
Such a treaty would represent an important contribution
towards their total elimination, since, as evidenced by

S/PV.7985

the example of chemical weapons and anti-personnel
mines, prohibition is the first step towards elimination.
The international community has often been
confronted with the reasoning that security and stability
concerns hamper the goal of nuclear disarmament. That
is a false dichotomy. Relying on nuclear deterrence
doctrines and strategies undermines the medium- and
long-term security of all States. The risk that non-State
actors may wish to acquire nuclear weapons is just one of
many examples of such threats to international security.
As former Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon has
repeatedly said, “There are no right hands for wrong
weapons.” We hope that, after years of stagnation, the
international community will finally make concrete
progress towards the goal of a world free from all
weapons of mass destruction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the consent of
the members of the Security Council, to suspend this
meeing until 2 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

17-1862233/33
