A /70/PV.38

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

38th plenary meeting

Friday, 23 October 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/70/L.4)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered agenda item 122 at its 29th
and 30th plenary meetings, held on 12 October. I
wish to thank all delegations for their proposals and
cooperation, which resulted in the submission of the
draft resolution under this item. I particularly thank
the Spanish delegation for undertaking the process of
consultations. It is fitting that the General Assembly
should consider a declaration on the occasion of the
seventieth anniversary of our Organization, in which

we solemnly reaffirm our faith in the United Nations
and our unfailing commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter, as well as to the Charter in its
entirety, and on the eve of the anniversary of its entry
into force.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/70/L.4, entitled “Declaration on the
occasion of the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations”. May I take it that the Assembly decides to
adopt it?
Draft resolution A/70/L.4 was adopted (resolution
70/3).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 122.
The meeting rose at 3.10 p.m.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-33159 (E)

*1533159*
