V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

venue in Latin America would be taken at the right time
and in the right place, and noting with interest the desire
of Cuba to act as host to the seventh session of the
Conference,
Taking note further of Trade and Development Board
resolution 245 (XXIII) of 5 November 1981, 49 in which the
Board recommended that the sixth session of the Conference
should be held at Libreville in May/June 1983,
1. Welcomes the offer of the Government of Gabon to
act as host to the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at Libreville;
2. Decides to convene the sixth session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development at Libreville
in May/June 1983, to be preceded by a two-day meeting
of senior officials at Libreville;
3. Endorses the decision of the Trade and Development
Board that the sixth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development should have a selective
agenda supported by concise action-oriented documents and
should be so organized as to ensure the attendance of ministers and other high-level policy makers and to permit all
delegations to contribute effectively to its decision-making
process;
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development to inform the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session of the state of
preparedness for the sixth session of the Conference.
100th plenary meeting
/6 December 1981

36/143.

Signature and ratification of the Agreement
Establishing the Common Fund for Commodities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling that the United Nations Negotiating Conference
on the Common Fund under the Integrated Programme for
Commodities successfully concluded its work on 27 June
1980 by adopting the Agreement Establishing the Common
Fund for Commodities, 50
Recalling also that the Agreement has been open for
signature and deposit of instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval at United Nations Headquarters since I
October 1980,
Recalling further its resolution 35/60 of 5 December
19S0, in paragraph 2 of which the General Assembly urged
all Governments to complete expeditiously the procedures
required for signature, ratification, acceptance or approval
of the Agreement,
Mindful of the objectives of the Common Fund for Commodities, namely:
(a) To serve as a key instrument in attaining tile agreed
objectives of the Integrated Programme for Commodities
as embodied in resolution 93 (IV) of 30 May 1976 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 51
•• Ibid., part four, annex I.
'° United Nations publication, Sales No. E.81.11.D.8.
" See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, Fourth Session, vol. 1, Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D. lO and corrigendum). part one. sect A.

107

(b) To facilitate the conclusion and functioning of international commodity agreements, particularly concerning
commodities of special interest to developing countries,
Noting that the Agreement shall enter into force on 31
March 1982 if, by that date, instruments of ratification,
acceptance or approval have been received from at least
ninety States whose total subscriptions of shares comprise
not less than two thirds of the directly contributed capital
of the Common Fund, as laid down in article 57 of the
Agreement,
Noting further that so far seventy-four States have signed
the Agreement and only fourteen States have ratified, accepted or approved it,
Welcoming the pledges already announced for voluntary
contributions to the second account of the Common Fund,
Expressing concern at the slow pace of progress in the
signature and ratification of the Agreement,
Concerned also about the slow progress in the negotiations on international commodity agreements and expressing
the need to promote the objectives of the Integrated Programme for Commodities through, inter alia, more rapid
progress in concluding the negotiations on international
commodity agreements,
1. Stresses the need for the early entry into force of the
Agreement Establishing the Common Fund for Commodities;
2. Urges States that have not yet done so to sign and
ratify the Agreement without delay;
3. Expresses the hope that States which have signed but
have not yet ratified the Agreement will expedite the necessary action to that effect;
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development to submit a report
on the progress being made towards the entry into force of
the Agreement to the Preparatory Commission for the Common Fund for Commodities for bringing the Common Fund
into operation;
5. Decides to consider at its thirty-seventh session, if
by that time the Agreement has not entered into force, the
progress made towards the entry into force of the Agreement, taking into account the work of any meetings of States
under article 57 of the Agreement as well as any related
developments;
6. Also urges States to ensure more rapid progress in
concluding the negotiations on international commodity
agreements.
100th plenary meeting
16 De-:ember /981

36/144.

Arrangement regarding International Trade
in Textiles

The General Assembly,
Noting that the Arrangement regarding International
Trade in Textiles, 52 also known as the Multifibre Arrangement, adopted by the Contracting Parties to the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade at Geneva on 20 December
1973 for a period of four years, was extended by the Protocol
of 14 December 1977 53 and will expire on 31 December
1981,
Convinced that trade in textiles and clothing is a dynamic
element in the development efforts of many developing
countries,
"United Nations, Treatv Series, vol. 930, No. 814 (LXXV), p. 166.
" See General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, Basic Instruments and
Sele~ Documents, Supplement No. 24 (Sales No. GA TI/1978-1). p. 5.

108

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Believing that the establishment of an orderly and equitable conduct of trade in textiles and clothing is in the interest
of all countries,
Noting that negotiations are in progress at Geneva on the
revision or modification of the Arrangement,
1. Appeals to all countries participating in the current
negotiations on the Arrangement regarding International
Trade in Textiles, in particular to developed countries, to
show the necessary political will and spirit of mutual accommodation, inter alia, to achieve an expansion of trade
in textiles and clothing, a reduction of the barriers to such
trade and the progressive liberalization of world trade in
textile products, while at the same time ensuring the orderly
and equitable development of such trade and avoiding disruptive effects in individual markets and on individual lines
of production in both importing and exporting countries;
2. Recalls that one of the principal aims of the Arrangement is to further the economic and social development of
developing countries and to secure a substantial increase in
their export earnings from textile trade;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the text
of the present resolution to the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade for the information of the Contracting Parties and
other countries participating in the negotiations.
100th plenary meeting
16 December 1981

36/145.

United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202 (S-Vl) of
I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-Vll) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980,
the annex to which contains the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
Deeply concerned about the continuing economic crisis,
particularly in the developing countries, and the very limited
progress in the areas of c!evelopment and international economic co-operation,
Recalling resolution 127 (V) of 3 June 1979 of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development 54 on economic co-operation among developing countries, in particular paragraph 13, and in this context the convening of the
meeting to be held in 1982 of governmental experts of
developing countries in economic co-operation among developing countries to finalize and approve the rules for the
launching of negotiations to establish the global system of
trade preferences,
I. Takes note of the report of the Trade and Development Board on its twenty-second and twenty-third sessions; 55
2. Takes note of Trade and Development Board resolution 238 (XXIII) of 9 October 1981. 56 entitled '' Assistance
to national liberation movements recognized by regional
intergovernmental organizations: Namibia and South Africa";

54
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), part one, sect. A.
" Official Records of the General Assemhlv. Thirt_v-sixth Sesswn, Si.1 ,plement No. 15 (A/36/15 and Corr. 11.
"Ibid .. part three, annex I.

3. Also takes note of Trade and Development Board
resolution 239 (XXIII) of 9 October 1981, 56 entitled "Assistance to national liberation movements recognized by
regional intergovernmental organizations: Palestine'';
4. Takes note with appreciation of the initiative of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development in preparing, on an annual basis,
a trade and development report to assist the Trade and Development Board in its consideration of the world economic
situation and of medium-term and longer-term structural
changes;
5. Takes note with interest of the intention of the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development to provide an in-depth study of the world
inflationary phenomenon in response to General Assembly
resolution 34/197 of 19 December 1979 and of the agreement that the Trade and Development Board would consider
the report at its twenty-fifth session;
6. Welcomes Trade and Development Board resolution
226 (XXII) of 20 March 1981, 57 entitled "Protectionism
and structural adjustment", by which the Board decided to
establish a sessional committee at its twenty-fourth session,
and annually thereafter at its first regular session:
(a) To conduct the annual review of the patterns of
production and trade in the world economy, as provided for
in section A of resolution 131 (V) of 3 June 1979 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development; 54
(h) To continue to review, along with the subsidiary
bodies of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development concerned. developments involving restrictions
of trade, as provided for in section B of Conference resolution 131 (V), with a view to examining and formulating
appropriate recommendations concerning the general problem of protectionism.
7. Stresses the need to review developments in international trade, including those arising from the implementation of the results of the multilateral trade negotiations,
and, in this context, emphasizes that the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development has an important
role to play in considering multilateral trade in general and
in formulating principles and policies relating thereto, and
notes that proposals in this context are to be further examined at the twenty-fourth session of the Trade and Development Board;
8. Reaffirms the importance of the generalized, nonreciprocal and non-discriminatory system of preferences for
expansion and diversification of the export trade of developing countries and for acceleration of the rates of their
economic growth and. to that end, of the preference-giving
countries implementing fully the agreement reached at its
ninth session by the Special Committee on Preferences of
the Trade and Development Board;-' 8
9. Recalls its resolution 35/60 of 5 December 1980,
notes with concern the delay in convening the second session
of the Ad Hoe Intergovernmental High-Level Group of Experts on the Evolution of the International Monetary System,
requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to convene the second
session of the Group as early as possible in 1982, urges all
States members of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development to participate and requests that the report
of the Group, together with the comments of the Trade and
Development Board thereon, should be made available to
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
"/hid., part one, annex I.
" See Official Records ,,( the Trade and Development Board, Twentvfirst Session, Supplement No. 3 (TDIB/802), annex I.
