S/2010/491

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 September 2010
Original: English

Letter dated 17 September 2010 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the joint letter addressed to me by the signatories
to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement dated 17 July 2010 (see annex). In addition
to the technical and logistical assistance mandated by the Security Council, the two
parties have requested the United Nations to establish a monitoring mission to
increase confidence in the upcoming referendum processes. This is in line with the
provisions of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, which provides for international
monitoring of the referendum processes.
In this regard, I wish to inform the Council of my decision to establish a threemember panel to monitor and assess the referendum processes for Southern Sudan
and the Abyei area, including the political and security situation on the ground. The
panel will also engage the parties at the appropriate level to take corrective
measures and, in close consultation with me, issue public statements on the
referendums.
The panel will be supported by field reporting officers, their coordinators and
other liaison officers located in Northern and Southern Sudan. It will be distinct
from the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and will report to me through the
Department of Political Affairs.
I wish to inform you of the appointment of Benjamin Mkapa, former President
of the United Republic of Tanzania, to head the panel. The other members of the
panel will be Antonio Monteiro, former Minister for Foreign Affairs of Portugal,
and Bhojraj Pokharel, former Chair of the Election Commission of Nepal.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

10-54675 (E) 220910

*1054675*

S/2010/491

Annex
Letter dated 17 July from the signatories to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement addressed to the Secretary-General
Subject: United Nations role in the Southern Sudan referendum
We would like to register our profound appreciation of the role of the United
Nations in supporting the Sudanese people and the Parties to the CPA to fully
implement the CPA. As Your Excellency is aware that the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission has been formed, the Parties are now exploring
mechanisms and measures that would support the work of the Commission and
ensure that the referendum is conducted in free and fair environment.
In order to ensure confidence in the referendum to be held on 9 January 2011
as per the provisions of the CPA, the Parties to the CPA, having deliberated on the
numerous challenges of conducting free, fair and credible referendum, have decided
jointly to seek the essential assistance of the United Nations in the process.
Specifically, the Parties would like the United Nations, within its mandate in the
Sudan, to:
1.

Provide the urgently needed funding;

2.

Provide technical expertise on the various referendum phases;

3.

Help with the enormous logistical needs;

4.

Provide the main monitoring mission and any other kinds of assistance
the United Nations can render as long as the organization of such a
mission and provision of any other such assistance do not entail the
pushing of the referendum date beyond 9 January 2011.
Signed for the Government of the Sudan by:
His Excellency
Mr. Idris Abdelgader
Signed for the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement by:
His Excellency
Mr. Luka Biong Deng

2

10-54675
