UNITED NATIONS

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

rti~,: !,I,,,‘;*,jj,!,t“i’

th
MEETING:

29 APRIL

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2276)

.. .,,.. ..... ,....,.. ,...... ..........

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . ..*.*..............**.....*..............

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated i0 April 1981 from the Permanent Representative of Uganda to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14434) * . . . * , , . . , . , . , . , . , , . , *. . . . . . , . , . . . . . . , , . , . * , . , * , . . . . . . . , .

1

SlPV.2276

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Of$cial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement
in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council,
numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published
in yearly volumes of Resolufians and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2276th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 29 April 1981, at 11 a.m.
President:

Mr, Noel DORR (Ireland).

(Guinea), Mr. Sinclair (Guyana), Mr. Rao (India),
‘. Kusumaatmadjlt
(Indonesia),
Mr.
Shearer
; amaica), Mr. Kasina (Kenya), Mr. Burwin (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Monreiro
(Mozambique),
Mr. Baba (Nigeria), Mr. Shahi (Pakistan), Mr, Marinescu (Romania), Mr. Niasse (Senegal), Mr. Conteh
(Sierra Leone), Mr. Koh (Singapore), Mr. Fourie
(South Africa), Mr. Balasubramaniam
(Sri Lanka),
Mr. Akakpo-Ahianyo
(Togo), Mr. Salim (United
Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Vrhovec (Yugoslavia),
Mr. Kamanda
wa Kamanda
(Zaire), Mr. Coma
(Zambia) and Mr. Mangwende (Zimbabwe) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America,
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2276)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14434)

2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision taken at the 2267th meeting, I invite the President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the delegation of the Council to take places at the Security
Council table.

The meeting was called to order at 12.10p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President of the United Nafions Council for Namibia) and
the other members of the delegation took places at
the Council table.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14434)

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with another
decision taken at the 2267th meeting, I invite Mr. Peter
Mueshihange to take a place at the Council table,
At the invitation of the President,
took a place at the Council table.

1.‘ The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions
taken at previous meetings [2267th to 2272nd, 2274th
und 2275th meetings], I invite the representatives of
Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Brazil, Burundi,
Canada, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Guinea, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Jamaica, Kenya, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mozambique, Nigeria, Pakistan, Romania,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Togo, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia and Zimbabwe to participate in the discussion without the right to vote.

Mr. Mueshihange

4. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision taken at the 2275th meeting, I invite the Chairman
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to take the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abduluh
(Chairman, Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
andPeoples)
took a place at the side of the Council
chamber.

At the i&ration
of the President, Mr. Benyahiu
(Algeria), Mr. Jorge (Angola), Mr. Kaiser (Bangillticsh), Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. CorrCa da Costa
(Brwil), Mr. Simbananiye
(Burundi},
Mr. Dupuy
~C~l~ldl~cr),Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Gedle-Giorgis (Ethiopia), Mr. Jelonek (Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. Coutnbassa

5. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have
before them the following documents: S/14459, which
contains the text of a draft resolution sponsored by
1

Mexico, the Niger, Panama, the Philippines, Tunisia
and Uganda; and S/14460, S/14461, S/14462 and
S/14463, which contain the texts of draft resolutions
sponsored by the Niger, Tunisia and Uganda.

11. The arguments for adopting the measures contained in these draft resolutions have already been set
out in great detail through the statements made by
many delegations during the general debate; therefore
I shall not repeat them now.

6. Mr. OTUNNU (Uganda): In the letter of 10 April
contained in document S/14434, my delegation, acting
on behalf of the Group of African States at the United
Nations, requested an urgent meeting of the Security
CounciI to consider the question of Namibia in the light
of the persistent refusal of South Africa to comply with
the relevant resolutions and decisions of the Council.

12. As to the contents of the five draft resolutions,
they are clear and straightforward. The first draft
resolution, S/14459, is an “umbrella”
resolution
designed to embrace the full scope of comprehensive
and mandatory sanctions, including economic and
political sanctions, an oil embargo and an arms embargo.

7. It is now more than a week since the Council
began consideration of this item. It has been a most
unusual week in the history of the Council. Never
before has the Council witnessed such a high level of
participation and such a global interest in its deliberations, No less than 19 Ministers for Foreign Affairs,
with a mandate from the Organization of African Unity
and the movement of non-aligned countries, and
representing the overwhelming majority of humankind, assembled in New York with one purpose-and
one purpose only: to demand that the Council, acting
as a matter of urgency under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, should impose comprehensive
and mandatory sanctions against South Africa for
its continued illegal occupation of Namibia. This
message has been reinforced by most of the other
speakers who have participated in this debate.

13. The second draft resolution, S/14460, covers
general economic and political sanctions, including
all aspects of diplomatic, consular and trade relations.
It is a well-known fact that without external economic
and political patronage, which at present is bountiful,
the intransigence and arrogance of the Pretoria regime
would crumble and, with it, that regime’s act of illegality.
14. The third draft resolution, S/14461, proposes a
comprehensive oil embargo, including the direct and
indirect supply of petroleum and petroleum products
to South Africa and occupied Namibia. South Africa
depends on imports for all its supply of oil. Without
that supply of oil the wheels of oppression and occupation would surely grind to a halt.
15. The fourth draft resolution, S/14462, covers
proposals for arms embargo with specific reference
to the situation in and around Namibia and without
prejudice to the provisions of Council resolutions 418
(1977) and 421(1977). The arms embargo would include
the sale or transfer of weapons, ammunition, military
and paramilitary equipment, military and paramilitary
vehicles and their spare parts.

8. In the course of the debate we have presented a
straightforward and incontestable case. We have
shown why and how all measures hitherto adopted
by the Council, over a span of no less than 15 years,
have failed to dislodge South Africa from Namibia.
9. We have demonstrated, by ample evidence, that
South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of Namibia has given rise, in the context of Article 39 of the
Charter, to the following grave developments: first,
a breach of international peace and security; secondly,
a threat to international peace and security; and,
thirdly, persistent acts of aggression.

16. Without the infusion of arms from outside, South
Africa would find it impossible to sustain its massive
military buiIdup in Namibia and the constant armed
attacks launched from Namibia against the independent
States in that region.

10. In view of the grave situation created by these
developments, and in the light of the dismal failure of
previous measures, we demand that the CounciI,
acting in accordance with its responsibilities under
Article 41 of the Charter, impose comprehensive and
mandatory sanctions against South Africa. To that end,
I have the honour, on behalf of the delegations of
Mexico, Niger, Panama, the Philippines and Tunisia
and my own delegation, to present to the Council draft
resdlution S/14459, already submitted and circulated
under our collective sponsorship, I also have the
honour, on behalf of the delegations of the Niger and
Tunisia and my own delegation, to present to the
CounciI draft resolutions S/14460, S/14461, S/14462
and 5114463, al1 of which have already been submitted
and circulated under our colIective sponsorship,

17. The final draft resolution, S/14463, provides for
the establishment of a committee of the Security Council to monitor the implementation of the substantive
resolutions.
18. In these draft resolutions we have proposed only
measures of peaceful pressure aimed at inducing
peaceful compliance with the relevant resolutions
and decisions of the Security Council. As members
of the Council are aware, the Charter provides, under
Article 42, for other measures should the ones proposed
in the present draft resolutions prove inadequate.
19. Namibia remains the unique responsibility of the
United Nations. In that connection, Council resolution 435 (1978), which is non-negotiable, constitutes
2

the only basis for transition to Namibian independence,
The purpose of the comprehensive and mandatory
sanctions proposed in the draft resolutions is, therefore, to bring an end to the illegal occupation and
bring about genuine independence for Namibia, by
compelling South Africa to comply with resolution
435(197%

aligned movement, and for the sake of peace and
freedom, I wish to commend draft resolutions S/14459,
S/14460, S/14461, S/14462 and S/14463 to the members of the Security Council for their consideration
and approval.
27. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
Today we have come to the crucial stage of our work.
We have come to the moment of conclusions and decisions. Since 21 April, we have witnessed a debate
which has been described as historic and exceptional.
Exceptional it has indeed been, if only by its richness,
its frankness and the rarely equalled level which it
has reached. Historic it will no doubt be because upon
the decisions that the Council is now called upon to
adopt will, in the final analysis, depend the fate of the
ideals and principles embodied in the Charter of the
United Nations, as well as the future role of the Organization. Historic it will be also because practically all
of mankind has proclaimed with a strong and determined voice, its unshakable will to put an end once
and for all to the anachronistic hotbeds where colonization is still perpetuated as well as the domination
and exploitation of peoples. Historic it will be, lastly,
becausethe Namibian people will have proved that the
entire world stands by it in its struggle for its national
liberation and for the triumph of its just cause. The
Namibian people will have had confirmation that the
hour of the inescapable advent of its independence is
irrevocably here.

20. It is significant that throughout the course of the
general debate no speaker contested the fact that South
Africa’s continued illegal occupation of Namibia has
given rise to a serious breach of international peace
and security and to constant acts of aggression and
continues to pose a grave threat to international peace
and security. Nobody has challenged the fact that all
previous measures adopted by the Council have
failed. Nobody has questioned the fact that the Council has therefore a definite responsibility to take measures under Article 41 of the Charter.
21. Instead, it has been said that resolutions do not
solve problems. Yet a resolution is a necessary programme of action without which the Council cannot
act. We are surely not the first to come to the Security
Council proposing resolutions for action, and I have
a feeling that we shall not be the last.
22. It has been said that declarations do not secure
independence. Well, what would we say to the founding
fathers who issued that famous Declaration of 4 July
1776?What shall we say to the peoples all over the
world which continue to draw inspiration and strength
from that monument of colonial resistance and independence? Shall we rewrite those episodes of history
where men and women have been moved by powerful
declarations to fight for their freedom and self-determination?

28. Since 21April the voices of highly responsible and
authoritative representatives from Africa, Asia,
Europe and the Americas have been heard in this
forum, recalling first of all that, in those States’ capacity as Members of the Organization, they have given
the members of the Council the main responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security, so
that, as provided for in Article 24 of the Charter, they
can “ensure prompt and effective action by the United
Nations”. They have also come here to recall that the
Security Council, in fulfilling the .tasks entailed in its
responsibilities, acts on their behalf.

23. It has been said that we should continue to wait.
We have waited for 15 years for the Council to take
decisive measures. The people of Namibia have been
held hostage for 100years. The peopIe of Angola have
already lost 1,800 men and women and suffered 290 air
raids and 72 land attacks with an estimated material
damage to the tune of $7 billion. There comes a time
when waiting becomes an act of benign neglect. This is
such a time.

.

29. Although onerous, our responsibility today is
none the less clear, precisely because we know the
wishes of the overwhelming majority of the Organization, on whose behalf we are called upon to act,

24. It has been said that we should avoid confrontation. We have come to the Council seeking not confrontation but collective action. The real confrontation
is between the Council, acting on behalf of the international community as a whole, and South Africa,
which has flouted every resolution and decision of
this organ.

30. The draft resolutions which have been submitted
to the Council and circulated as documents S/14459,
S/14460, S/14461, S/14462 and S/14463 merely restate
ideas which have been clearly expressed by the vast
majority of those who have taken part in this debate.
31. Where, indeed, does the question of Namibia
stand, at the end of this debate? Clearly, it is nothing
other than a question of decolonization. It entails the
inalienable rights of a people to self-determination,
freedom and national independence. We therefore
must reaffirm those inalienable rights of the people of
Namibia, in keeping with resolution 1514 (XV),

25. We have come to the Council as men and women
of peace. We have come to the Council because of our
abiding faith in the Security Council as the ultimate
guardian of international peace and security.
26. In the name of the people of Namibia, on behalf
of the peoples of Africa and the countries of the non3

the apartheid rdgime? We know how Pretoria would
which govern
treat our principles, the principles
our work here and are the basis of international relations.

adopted by the General Assembly more than 20 years
ago.
32. Also, in Namibia we have a case of illegal OCCUpation that has lasted for more than 15 years, ever since
the United Nations, through General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI) and 2248 (S-V), put an end to all
South Africa’s administrative powers over the Territory. We must therefore reaffirm the legal responsibility of the Organization towards Namibia as well
as its formal commitment to guide that Territory to
genuine independence.

38. Our objective, the objective of this entire debate,
is clear and precise: we wish the Namibian people to
exercise its right to self-determination,
with order and
peace, under the auspices of the United Nations; we
wish to respect the dates which have already been
accepted, How is it proposed to us that we achieve
this?
39. We have heard here those who, on the basis of the
commitment
they made to the international
community and the Security Council in 1978, have assumed
a specific responsibility on the question of Namibia.
We have listened carefully to the members of the
contact group of Western States. They have indeed
reaffirmed their devotion to the United Nations plan
for Namibia; they have stated that they continue to
be attached to that plan and to resolution 435 (1978);
they have expressed their determination
to continue
with negotiations so as to enable Namibia to regain
its independence and sovereignty, and the Namibian
people freely to determine its future. But we have also
heard them speak in vague terms of the need to reexamine that plan, to strengthen it.

33. But we are also faced with the attitude of a State
Member of the Organization which is known for its
systematic and persistent refusal to implement resolutions and decisions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly. South Africa refuses to abide by the
relevant resolutions of the Organization; it refuses
to withdraw its illegal administration from Namibia;
it refuses to implement Council resolution 435 (1978),
which provides for the settlement of the Namibian
question through the peaceful means of negotiation and
elections. In so doing it clearly, under the terms of
Article 39 of the Charter, poses a serious threat to
international peace and security.
34. By its illegal occupation of Namibia-the
decisions of the International
Court of Justice and the
injunctions of the Organization notwithstanding; by
its policy aimed at dismembering a country whose
indivisibility
and unity have been internationally
recognized; by its practice of oppression and repression of innocent peoples who love freedom and justice;
by its practice of apartheid, which is considered to be
a crime against mankind; and by its base and shameless
exploitation of resources which do not belong to it,
South Africa clearly, under the terms of Article 39
of the Charter, is in breach of international peace.

40. So far, despite our appeals, the members of the
contact group have not told us clearly what they
understand by “strengthen”.
41. If the contact group has new suggestions to make
-suggestions which do not affect the principles contained in the plan so carefully worked out by the United
Nations, suggestions that would allow the Namibian
people to exercise its right to self-determination
under
the auspices of the Organization and within established
time-limits; if the contact group has new suggestions
to make, we should have liked to be told of them, to
hear them here. Perhaps we would have been able
to lend them our support.

35. By using the Territory of Namibia as a military
base enabling it to commit armed attacks against
neighbouring
independent
and sovereign States,
South Africa clearly, under the terms of Article 39
of the Charter, commits serious acts of flagrant
aggression.

42. For our position is quite clear: we have agreed
to support the plan proposed by the five Western
Powers and adopted by the United Nations. The South
West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), for its
part, has not hesitated to make all possible concessions
in order to promote the sincere implementation
of that
plan. Our preference for negotiation cannot be questioned, even though that in no way could deprive the
people of Namibia and its sole authentic representative, SWAPO, of their legitimate
right to have
recourse to all means deemed useful to free their
Territory. At the same time, we have no reason to
believe that South Africa has any intention to join us on
the path of sincere negotiations to settle the question
of Namibia.

36. In sum, those are the facts, the,objective facts
which have been set forth during the debate and which
have served as the point of departure for preparing the
draft resolutions which are now before the Council.
Given those facts, implacable facts, what steps should
be taken? It has been established that the Security
Council must take steps; otherwise, it would be failing
in its main responsibility.
37. Must we condemn South Africa again? Of course,
But what effect would another moral condemnation
have? What echoes would there be in Pretoria from
a new resolution that would be added to the already
too long list of resolutions, that would appeal merely
to the sense of duty and morality of a rCgime such as

43. So what should be done and what measures
should be taken?
4

---__

44. The draft resolutions that have been submitted
for the Council’s consideration propose the only
effective measures which, at this stage, make it possible
to speed up the independence of Namibia. Their sole
purpose is to exercise on South Africa real and effective pressures likely to induce it to give up its attitude
of arrogance and defiance and agree truly to join in a
process leading to the independence of Namibia,

49. Members of the Council that at one time or
another may have been reticent in this connection
cannot remain insensitive to the urgings and entreaties
of the overwhelming majority of the Organization nor
shirk the responsibilities entrusted to them by the
Charter. A solemn appeal has been made to them.
Mr. President, in the remarkable, masterly statement
you made yesterday in the Council in your capacity
as representative of Ireland [2275th meefirzg], you
made a stirring appeal to avert division and confrontation in the Council. We for our part whole-heartedly
join you in that appeal, so that the Security Council
may remain unanimous in defending the principles
of the Charter: ensuring scrupulous implementation
of the resolutions of the Organization; and taking the
strong measures called for by the seriousness of the
situation and by the Charter against those that are
endangering international peace and security, as is
currently the case in southern Africa.

45. The time for appeals and moral condemnations
has passed; this is the time for specific decisions; this
is the time for enforcement measures which alone are
likely to deprive South Africa of the means to carry
out its policy and the assurance of impunity it has
enjoyed so far. The time has come for comprehensive
mandatory sanctions against South Africa under
Chapter VII of the Charter.
46. We venture to believe in the effectiveness of the
measures we are proposing that the Council take; we
venture to believe in the effectiveness of the draft
resolutions we are proposing that the Council adopt;
we venture to believe that, because once those draft
resolutions are adopted their implementation will not
be dependent upon South Africa’s attitude. On the
contrary, the draft resolutions we are proposing for
adoption to apply sanctions against South Africa are
addressedto the other Member Statesof the Organization, whose commitment to the principles of the
Charter is not being questioned-far from it. Of these
other Member States, as well as non-Member States,
we ask-in draft resolution S/14460-that they put
an end to their political, economic and trade relations
with South Africa; of those other States we ask-in
draft resolution S/1446&that they ensure that an end
beput to supplies of petroleum and petroleum products
which South Africa needs for the operation of its
war machine; of those other States we ask-in draft
resolution S/14462-that they adopt appropriate
measures for a real embargo on arms destined for
South Africa; of those other States we ask that they put
an end to the considerable assistance they have thus
far been lending South Africa, which has enabled it to
commit acts of aggression against innocent peoples
and sovereign States, to defy the United Nations and
to violate international peace and security. Finally, of
the Organization we ask-in draft resolution S/14463that it set up the necessary machinery to follow up
the implementation of our own decisions.

50. Mr. OUMAROU (Niger) (ilzterprelnlion j?om
French): The draft resolutions that have just been
introduced by our brother and colleague the representative of Uganda faithfully reflect the conclusions
drawn here by most speakers from Africa, Asia,
Europe, the Americas and the Pacific who, one after
another, came to this table to stress their mutual
concerns with regard to the burning problem of Namibia; they included some 20 distinguished Ministers
for Foreign Affairs with a mandate from the Organization of African Unity and the non-aligned movement.
51. Hence, those are not partisan draft resolutions.
They are not meant to meet the demands of a particular
side nor are they an attempt by a group or a continent
seeking to drown its impatience, its frustration and
its resentment in excessive proposals, They represent
the outcome of a progression of a long and arduous
process towards the fulfilment of a duty which law,
morality and the simple observance of international
rules should have made easy, but which has been
jeopardized by South Africa’s flagrant obstinacy.
52. Mr. President, yesterday, in your capacity as
representative of Ireland you made an outstanding
statement-both courageous and lucid-in which you
yourself noted the many efforts of the international
community and Africa’s patience with regard to the
question of Namibia. In particular, we noted that your
concern-I was about to say your indignation-was
no less than ours at hearing South Africa claim, on
29January at Geneva, that it was premature to proceed.
And that, as you pointed out so well, was 60 years
after the initial Mandate over Namibia had been
conferred upon South Africa; 35years after the General
Assembly had first rejected that country’s attempt to
annex the Territory; 30 years after the International
Court of Justice had ruled that it remained subject to
the supervision and control of the General Assembly
with regard to its administration of Namibia; 15 years
after the end of its Mandate over the Territory had
been proclaimed; 10 years after the Security Council

47. Those are the comprehensive mandatory sanctions which, with almost total unanimity, delegations
that have spoken in this forum have asked us to adopt
against South Africa.
48. By adopting them, the Council would unquestionably be promoting decisively the process started
by the United Nations to allow the people of Namibia
to exercise its recognized right to self-determination
and independence.
5

-

had declared its presence in Namibia illegal and called
upon it to withdraw; 3 years after specific proposals
for a peaceful decolonization had been so generously
made; 2 years after South Africa had assured the
Secretary-General of its will to co-operate in the speedy
implementation of Council resolution 435 (1978).
53. What can one do about such a partner? Forget it
and encourage it to continue, for centuries perhaps,
its illegal and repressive domination in Namibia?
Concede to it, as a reward for its good behaviour, the
right to denigrate, ignore and humiliate the international community? Or take recourse to the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations clearly to
demonstrate to it the gravity of its acts and the political
,and economic cost of defying the rest of the world?

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

SE PROCURER

CONSEGUIR

Lilho

in United

Nations,

New

York

PUBLICATIONS

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

sont en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas
de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Nueva York o Ginebra.

paties

The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup&
des ventes.
New York ou Geneve.

COMO

54. The latter path has been chosen by the sponsors
of the draft resolutions that have just been submitted.
We do not believe the measures proposed to be miraculous, nor do we allow ourselves the ndive belief
that South Africa does not know what it is doing. It has
solid supporters, to which of course it is a burden but
which still believe that there is yet time to take strong
measures. We do not call far a confrontation-especially because South Africa may welcome it, and it
could cause even more suffering for Namibia. It is our
hope that here as elsewhere the Security Council will
assume its responsibilities and speedily meet the
challenge that is damaging its prestige and is a source
of consternation for all nations.

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
e&n
en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

cil300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et Ies agences
B : Nations

depositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Section
de Ventas,

8661103-June

1988-2,050
