United Nations

A/RES/58/149

General Assembly

Distr.: General
24 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 112

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2003
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/58/503)]

58/149. Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons
in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/183 of 18 December 2002,
Recalling also the provisions of its resolution 2312 (XXII) of 14 December
1967, by which it adopted the Declaration on Territorial Asylum,
Recalling further the Organization of African Unity Convention governing the
specific aspects of refugee problems in Africa of 1969 1 and the African Charter on
Human and Peoples’ Rights, 2
Recalling the Khartoum Declaration 3 and the Recommendations on Refugees,
Returnees and Internally Displaced Persons in Africa 4 adopted by the Organization
of African Unity 5 at the ministerial meeting held at Khartoum on 13 and
14 December 1998,
Welcoming decision EX/CL/Dec.46 (III) on the situation of refugees, returnees
and displaced persons in Africa adopted by the Executive Council of the African
Union at its third ordinary session, held at Maputo from 4 to 8 July 2003, 6
Welcoming also decision AHG/Dec.165 (XXXVII) on the fiftieth anniversary
of the adoption of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, adopted
by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its thirty-seventh ordinary session, held at Lusaka from 9 to 11 July 2001, 7
Recalling its resolution 57/2 of 16 September 2002 on the United Nations
Declaration on the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, and affirming that
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1001, No. 14691.
Ibid., vol. 1520, No. 26363.
3
A/54/682, annex I.
4
Ibid., annex II.
5
On 8 July 2002, the Organization of African Unity ceased to exist and, in its place, the African Union
came into force on 9 July 2002.
6
See A/58/626, annex II.
7
See A/56/457, annex I.
2

03 50352

A/RES/58/149

international support for the implementation of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development 8 is essential, notably as it relates to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons,
Reaffirming that the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, 9
together with the 1967 Protocol thereto, 10 as complemented by the Organization of
African Unity Convention of 1969, remains the foundation of the international
refugee protection regime in Africa,
Recognizing that the fundamental principles and rights embodied in those
conventions have provided a resilient protection regime within which millions of
refugees have been able to find safety from armed conflicts and persecution,
Welcoming in that regard the Declaration adopted at the Ministerial Meeting of
States Parties to the 1951 Convention and/or its 1967 Protocol relating to the Status
of Refugees, held at Geneva on 12 and 13 December 2001, 11 as an expression of
their collective commitment to full and effective implementation of the Convention
and the Protocol,
Recalling the Comprehensive Implementation Plan adopted by the Special
Meeting of Governmental and Non-Governmental Technical Experts convened by
the Organization of African Unity and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees at Conakry from 27 to 29 March 2000 on the occasion
of the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the Organization of African Unity
Convention governing the specific aspects of refugee problems in Africa of 1969,
and noting its endorsement by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity at its seventy-second ordinary session, held at Lomé from 6 to 8 July
2000, 12
Commending the convening of the first African Union Ministerial Conference
on Human Rights in Africa at Kigali on 8 May 2003, and recalling the attention paid
to issues relevant to refugees and displaced persons in the Kigali Declaration 13
adopted by the Conference,
Recognizing the contributions made by African States to the development of
regional standards for the protection of refugees and returnees, and noting with
appreciation that countries of asylum are hosting refugees in a humanitarian spirit
and in a spirit of African solidarity and brotherhood,
Recognizing also the need for States to address resolutely the root causes of
forced displacement and to create conditions that facilitate durable solutions for
refugees and displaced persons, and stressing in that regard the need for States to
foster peace, stability and prosperity throughout the African continent to forestall
large refugee flows,
Convinced of the need to strengthen the capacity of States to provide
assistance to and protection for refugees, returnees and displaced persons and of the
need for the international community, within the context of burden-sharing, to

_______________
8

A/57/304, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
10
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
11
HCR/MMSP/2001/10, annex I.
12
See A/55/286, annex I, decision CM/Dec.531 (LXXII), para. 8.
13
See MIN/CONF/HRA/Decl.1 (I).
9

2

A/RES/58/149

increase its material, financial and technical assistance to the countries affected by
refugees, returnees and displaced persons, to simultaneously address the
inadequacies of existing assistance arrangements and to support initiatives in this
regard,
Acknowledging with appreciation that some assistance is already rendered by
the international community to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and host
countries in Africa,
Noting the “Convention Plus” initiative of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, which is aimed at strengthening the international
protection regime through the development of comprehensive approaches to
resolving refugee situations, including improving international burden- and
responsibility-sharing and realizing durable solutions,
Deeply concerned about the continuing critical humanitarian situation in
African countries, in particular in the Horn of Africa and southern Africa,
aggravated, among other things, by persistent natural disasters, including drought,
floods and desertification, which can precipitate the displacement of people,
Noting with great concern that, despite all the efforts made so far by the
United Nations, the African Union and others, the situation of refugees and
displaced persons in Africa remains precarious,
Stressing that the provision of relief and assistance to African refugees by the
international community should be on an equitable and non-discriminatory basis,
Considering that, among refugees, returnees and internally displaced persons,
women and children are the majority of the population affected by conflict and bear
the brunt of atrocities and other consequences of conflict,
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General 14 and the United
1.
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; 15
2.
Notes with concern that the deteriorating socio-economic situation,
compounded by political instability, internal strife, human rights violations and
natural disasters, has led to increased numbers of refugees and displaced persons in
some countries of Africa, and remains particularly concerned about the impact of
large-scale refugee populations on the security, socio-economic situation and
environment of countries of asylum;
Encourages African States to ensure the full implementation of and
3.
follow-up to the Comprehensive Implementation Plan adopted by the Special
Meeting of Governmental and Non-Governmental Technical Experts convened by
the Organization of African Unity and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees at Conakry from 27 to 29 March 2000 on the occasion
of the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the Organization of African Unity
Convention governing the specific aspects of refugee problems in Africa of 1969;1
4.
Calls upon States and other parties to armed conflict to observe
scrupulously the letter and the spirit of international humanitarian law, bearing in
mind that armed conflict is one of the principal causes of forced displacement in
Africa;

_______________
14
15

A/58/353.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/58/12).

3

A/RES/58/149

5.
Expresses its appreciation for the leadership shown by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees since assuming office in January 2001,
and commends the Office of the High Commissioner for its ongoing efforts, with the
support of the international community, to assist African countries of asylum and to
respond to the protection and assistance needs of refugees, returnees and displaced
persons in Africa;
Reaffirms that international protection and the search for durable
6.
solutions for refugees and, as appropriate, other persons of concern to the Office of
the High Commissioner, which were examined, inter alia, in the Global
Consultations on International Protection process and are reflected in the Agenda for
Protection, 16 are at the core of the mandate of the Office;
7.
Welcomes the efforts of the Office of the High Commissioner to
strengthen its linkages with the other parts of the United Nations system in order to
enhance refugee protection and to identify and implement durable solutions for
refugees and other persons of concern to the Office, and appreciates the efforts of
the Office to strengthen partnerships with operational and implementing partners;
Takes note of the Ministerial Meeting of States Parties to the
8.
1951 Convention and/or its 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees as an
expression of their collective commitment to full and effective implementation of
the Convention9 and the Protocol;10
9.
Reaffirms that the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol relating to the
Status of Refugees, as complemented by the Organization of African Unity
Convention of 1969, remain the foundation of the international refugee protection
regime in Africa, encourages African States that have not yet done so to accede to
those instruments, and calls upon States parties to the Conventions to reaffirm their
commitment to their ideals and to respect and observe their provisions;
10. Notes the need for States to address the root causes of forced
displacement in Africa, and calls upon African States, the international community
and relevant United Nations organizations to take concrete action to meet the needs
of refugees, returnees and displaced persons for protection and assistance and to
contribute generously to national projects and programmes aimed at alleviating their
plight;
11. Also notes the link, inter alia, between human rights violations, poverty,
natural disasters and environmental degradation and population displacement, and
calls for redoubled and concerted efforts by States, in collaboration with the African
Union, to promote and protect human rights for all and to address those problems;
12. Encourages the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to continue to cooperate with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the African Commission on Human and
Peoples’ Rights, within their respective mandates, in the promotion and protection
of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of refugees, returnees and displaced
persons in Africa, and welcomes in this regard the signing of the memorandum of
understanding between the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on 26 May 2003;

_______________
16

4

Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/57/12/Add.1), annex IV.

A/RES/58/149

13. Notes with appreciation the ongoing mediation and conflict resolution
efforts carried out by African States, the African Union and subregional
organizations, as well as the establishment of regional mechanisms for conflict
prevention and resolution, and urges all relevant parties to address the humanitarian
consequences of conflicts;
14. Expresses its appreciation and strong support for those African
Governments and local populations that, in spite of the general deterioration of
socio-economic and environmental conditions and overstretched national resources,
continue to accept the additional burden imposed upon them by increasing numbers
of refugees and displaced persons, in compliance with the relevant principles of
asylum;
15. Welcomes the decision of African heads of State and Government to
address the situation of refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa within
the context of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development;8
16. Expresses its concern about instances in which the fundamental
principles of asylum are jeopardized by unlawful expulsion or refoulement or by
threats to the life, physical security, integrity, dignity and well-being of refugees;
17. Reaffirms that host States have the primary responsibility to ensure the
civilian and humanitarian character of asylum, and calls upon States, in cooperation
with international organizations, within their mandates, to take all necessary
measures to ensure respect for the principles of refugee protection and, in particular,
to ensure that the civilian and humanitarian nature of refugee camps is not
compromised by the presence or the activities of armed elements or used for
purposes that are incompatible with their civilian character;
18. Deplores the deaths, injuries and other forms of violence sustained by
staff members of the Office of the High Commissioner, urges States, parties to
conflict and all other relevant actors to take all necessary measures to protect
activities related to humanitarian assistance, prevent attacks on and kidnapping of
national and international humanitarian workers and ensure their safety and security,
calls upon States to investigate fully any crime committed against humanitarian
personnel and to bring to justice persons responsible for such crimes, and calls upon
organizations and aid workers to abide by the national laws and regulations of the
countries in which they operate;
19. Condemns any exploitation of refugees, especially their sexual abuse and
exploitation, calls for those responsible for such deplorable acts to be brought to
justice, welcomes in this regard the conclusion on protection from sexual abuse and
exploitation adopted by the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees at its fifty-fourth session, 17 and notes with
deep concern that inadequate protection and/or inappropriate assistance, particularly
concerning the quantity and quality of food and other material assistance, increases
the vulnerability of refugees and asylum-seekers to sexual abuse and exploitation;
20. Welcomes the decision of the Office of the High Commissioner to put in
place a code of conduct for humanitarian personnel aimed at preventing the
exploitation of refugees, especially in the area of sexual exploitation;

_______________
17

Ibid., Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/58/12/Add.1), chap. III, sect. E.

5

A/RES/58/149

21. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner, the African Union,
subregional organizations and all African States, in conjunction with agencies of the
United Nations system, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and
the international community, to strengthen and revitalize existing partnerships and
forge new ones in support of the international refugee protection system;
22. Calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner, the international
community and other concerned entities to intensify their support to African
Governments through appropriate capacity-building activities, including training of
relevant officers, disseminating information about refugee instruments and
principles, providing financial, technical and advisory services to accelerate the
enactment or amendment and implementation of legislation relating to refugees,
strengthening emergency response and enhancing capacities for the coordination of
humanitarian activities;
23. Reaffirms the right of return and the principle of voluntary repatriation,
appeals to countries of origin and countries of asylum to create conditions that are
conducive to voluntary repatriation, and recognizes that, while voluntary
repatriation remains the pre-eminent solution, local integration and third-country
resettlement, where appropriate and feasible, are also viable options for dealing with
the situation of African refugees who, owing to prevailing circumstances in their
respective countries of origin, are unable to return home;
24. Notes with satisfaction the voluntary return of millions of refugees to
their homelands following the successful repatriation and reintegration operations
carried out by the Office of the High Commissioner with the cooperation and
collaboration of countries hosting refugees and countries of origin, and welcomes
the efforts under way, in cooperation with other United Nations agencies and
development actors, to promote a framework for durable solutions, particularly in
protracted refugee situations, including the “4Rs” approach (repatriation,
reintegration, rehabilitation and reconstruction) to sustainable return;
25. Appeals to the international community to respond positively, in the
spirit of solidarity and burden-sharing, to the third-country resettlement requests of
African refugees, and notes with appreciation that some African countries have
offered resettlement places for refugees;
26. Calls upon the international donor community to provide financial and
material assistance that allows for the implementation of community-based
development programmes that benefit both refugees and host communities, as
appropriate, in agreement with host countries and consistent with humanitarian
objectives;
27. Welcomes the programmes carried out by the Office of the High
Commissioner with host Governments, the United Nations, non-governmental
organizations and the international community to address the environmental and
socio-economic impact of refugee populations;
28. Calls upon the international donor community to provide material and
financial assistance for the implementation of programmes intended for the
rehabilitation of the environment and infrastructure affected by refugees in countries
of asylum;
29. Expresses its concern about the long stay of refugees in certain African
countries, and calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to keep its
programmes under review, in conformity with its mandate in the host countries,
taking into account the increasing needs of refugees;
6

A/RES/58/149

30. Notes the conclusion adopted by the Executive Committee of the
Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees at its
fifty-fourth session on the importance of early and effective registration systems and
censuses as a tool of protection and as a means to enable the quantification and
assessment of needs for the provision and distribution of humanitarian assistance
and to implement appropriate durable solutions; 18
31. Emphasizes the need for the Office of the High Commissioner to collate
statistics, on a regular basis, on the number of refugees living outside refugee camps
in certain African countries with a view to evaluating and addressing the needs of
those refugees;
32. Urges the international community, in a spirit of international solidarity
and burden-sharing, to continue to fund generously the refugee programmes of the
Office of the High Commissioner and, taking into account the substantially
increased needs of programmes in Africa, to ensure that Africa receives a fair and
equitable share of the resources designated for refugees;
33. Requests all Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to pay particular attention to meeting the special needs of refugee
women and children and displaced persons, including those with special protection
needs;
34. Calls upon States and the Office of the High Commissioner to make
renewed efforts to ensure that the rights, needs and dignity of elderly refugees are
fully respected and addressed through appropriate programme activities;
35. Expresses grave concern about the plight of internally displaced persons
in Africa, calls upon States to take concrete action to pre-empt internal displacement
and to meet the protection and assistance needs of internally displaced persons,
recalls in that regard the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, 19 and urges
the international community, led by relevant United Nations organizations, to
contribute generously to national projects and programmes aimed at alleviating the
plight of internally displaced persons;
36. Invites the Representative of the Secretary-General on internally
displaced persons to continue his ongoing dialogue with Member States and the
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned, in accordance
with his mandate, and to include information thereon in his reports to the
Commission on Human Rights and the General Assembly;
37. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on
assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa to the General
Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, taking fully into account the efforts expended by
countries of asylum, under the item entitled “Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons and humanitarian questions”, and to present an oral report to the Economic
and Social Council at its substantive session of 2004.
77th plenary meeting
22 December 2003

_______________
18
19

Ibid., sect. B.
E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.

7
