General Auembly-1blrty-fourtb Session

:200

6. Urges the administering Powers, in co-operation
with the Government of the New Hebrides, to safeguard
the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the
enjoyment of their natural resources by taking effective
measures which guarantee the right of the people to own
and dispose of those natural resources and to establish
and maintain control of their future development;
1. Welcomes the joint commitment of the two administering Powers to the independence of the New
Hebrides and notes their invitation to the SecretaryGeneral to dispatch a mission to observe the forthcoming elections in the Territory; 3
8. Requests the Secretary-General, after consultation with the Chairman of the Fourth Committee, to
appoint a mission to observe the forthcoming elections
in the Territory and to report thereon; 5
9. Expresses the hope that the New Hebrides will
move towards independence in a smooth and speedy
fashion.
52nd plenary meeting
2 November 1979
*

*

United Nations Educadonal and Training Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa,
in particular resolution 33/42 of 13 December 1978,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the Programme for 1978/796 and the results of the
Conference on the Situation of Refugees in Africa, held
at Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, from 7 to 17
May 1979,
Strongly convinced that the continuation and expansion of the Programme is essential in order to assist
the people of South Africa, Namibia and Southern
Rhodesia,
Recognizing that a substantial increase in contributions is required in order to enable the Programme to
meet its current level of obligations and to deal with a
marked increase in the level of demand for assistance,
Noting that an evaluation of the Programme, as requested by the General Assembly in paragraph 4 of its
resolution 33/42, will be undertaken in 1980,
l. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions or provided scholarships
to the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa;
• 2. . Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa for their efforts
to promote the Programme;
5
11

See A/34/852.
A/34/571.

75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979

*

At the 52nd plenary meeting, the President of the General
Assembly announced that the Secretary-General, in accordance
with paragraph 8 of the above resolution, had appointed the
following States as members of the United Nations Mission to
Observe the Elections in the New Hebrides: AUSTRALIA, FIJI,
IVORY CoAST and UNITED REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON.

34/31.

3. Expresses its satisfaction that six new members
have been added to the Advisory Committee pursuant
to General Assembly resolution 33/42;7
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Advisory Committee, to complete arrangements
for an early evaluation of the Programme in order to
determine its effectiveness and to identify priorities for
further work;
5. Encourages the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee to continue to develop close co-operation with the Organization of African Unity and other
scholarship donors with a view to co-ordinating policies,
to the extent possible and desirable, in order that maximum over-all benefits may be obtained from available
sources;
6. Appeals to all States, organizations and individuals to recognize the increasing demand for educational
opportunities by the people of South Africa, Namibia
and Southern Rhodesia and to acknowledge the rapidly
increasing costs of higher education and training at
advanced levels by offering generous financial support
to the Programme in order to ensure its continuation
and expansion.

34/32.

Offers by Member States of study and training
facilides for inhabitants of Non-SeU-Governing
Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33 / 43 of 13 December 1978,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, 8
prepared under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mind the continued need to provide educational and training facilities at all levels for the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, particularly those in southern Africa, and, whenever possible,
to provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Requests the administering Powers to ensure the
widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating
to offers of study and training facilities made by States
and to provide all the necessary facilities to enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
7 See A/34/591. The Advisory Committee is now composed
of the following Member States: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Canada, Denmark, India, Japan, Liberia, Nigeria,
Norway, United States of America, U01ted Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Zaire and Zambia.
a A/34/572.

VD.

Resolutlo111 adopted on Che reportl of the Fourth Committee

Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
34 / 33.

lnformadon from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December
1963, in which it requested the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General under Article 73 e of
the Charter of the United Nations and to take such information fully into account in examining the situation
with regard to the implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 33/37 of 13 December
1978, in which it requested the Special Committee to
continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under
resolution 1970 (XVIII),
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter9 and the
action taken by the Committee in respect of that information,
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the item, 10
Deploring the fact that some Member States having
responsibilities for the administration of Non-SelfGoverning Territories have ceased to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the
General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
Territory has attained a full measure of self-government
in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering
Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with respect to
that Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the SecretaryGeneral the information prescribed in Article 73 e of
the Charter, as well as the fullest possible information
on political and constitutional developments in the
Territories concerned, within a maximum period of six
months following the expiration of the administrative
year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with
established procedures, and to report thereon to the
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev.1), chap. XXXIII.
10 Al34/SS4.

34/34.

201

Question of Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat and the
Turks and Caicos Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda, the
British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Montserrat
and the Turks and Caicos Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 11
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the Territories listed above, in particular
General Assembly resolution 33/35 of 13 December
1978,
Taking into account the statement of the administering Power relating to the Territories listed above, 12
Noting the continued readiness of the administering
Power to grant independence to the peoples of the
Territories under its administration, on the basis of their
express wishes and aspirations in that regard, and its
declared policy of fostering the growth of free and democratic political institutions in those Territories,
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the Territories concerned,
Bearing in mind the constructive results that can be
achieved as a consequence of United Nations visiting
missions to colonial Territories, which provide an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the Territories
visited, and reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of
such missions is essential for securing adequate and firsthand information in regard to the political, economic
and social conditions in those Territories and to the
views, wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein,
Mindful that those Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territories concerned and stressing the necessity of diversifying and
strengthening further their economies as a matter of
priority in order to promote economic stability and reduce their dependence on fluctuating economic activities,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman
Islands, Montserrat and the Turks and Caicos Islands;13
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
those Territories to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev.l), chaps. IV; V,
annexes 111-V; VI, annex III; and XXI-XXV.
12 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 12th meeting, paras. 7-16; and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle,
corrigendum.
13 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/
Rev.I), chaps. XXI-XXV.
