appointments which he has made after consultation with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
4. The Secretary-General is authorized to seek

the advice of the Investments Committee in regard to the investment of special and other funds
under the control of the United Nations as well as
the pensions funds.

Hundred and fifteenth plenary meeting,
15 November 1947.
156 UI). United Nations Staff Benefit Committee: appointment of alternate
members

The General Assembly,

probation de l' Assemblee les nominations auxq uelles il aura procede apres consultation du Comite coru:ultatif pour les questions administratives
et budgetaires;
4. Le Secretaire general est autorise a prendrc
l'avis du Comite des placements en ce qui concerne non seulement le fonds de retraite mais aussi
les placements de fonds speciaux ou de tous autres
fonds administres par )'Organisation des Nations
Unies.
Cent-quinzieme seance pleniere,
le 15 novembre 1947.

156 (II). Comite des pensions du personnel
de !'Organisation des Nations Unies:
nomination de suppleants
L'Assemblee generale

1. Declares that
Mr. E. de Holte-Castello (Colombia),
Mr. Edward A. Ghorra (Lebanon),
Mr. J. Katz-Suchy (Poland),
are elected as alternate members of the United
Nations Staff Benefit Committee in acr:ordance
with the terms of section 201 of the provisional
regulations for the Staff Pension Scheme;

2. Declares that these members shall serve for
two years, beginning 1 January 1948.

Hundred and fifteenth plenary muting,
15 November 1947.

I. Declare
M. E. de Holte-Castello ( Colombie),
M. Edward A. Ghorra (Liban),
M. J. Katz-Suchy (Pologne),
elus membres suppleants du Comite des pensions
du personnel de !'Organisation des Nations Unies,
conformement aux dispositions de l'article 201 du
rcglement provisoire de la Caisse des pensions du
personnel;
2. Declare que ces membres siegeront au Comite pendant deux ans a compter du ler janvier
1948.
Cent-quinzieme seance pleniere,
le 15 novembre 1947.

157 (II>. International Children's Emergency Fund: audit of the accounts for
the fiscal year 1946

157 (ID. Fonds international de secours a
l'enfance: verification des comptes de
l'exercice financier 1946

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-

L' Assemblee generate
Prend note du rapport presentc par le Secretaire general concernant les operations effectuees
par le Fonds international de secours a l'enfance
au cours de l'excrcice 1946°.

General concerning the financial transactions of
the International Children's Emergency Fund
during the fiscal year 1946 2 ,

Hundred and nineteenth fJlenary meeting,
20 November 1947

C ent-dix-neuvierne seance pleniere,
le 20 novembre 1947.

158 (II). United Nations telecommunications system

158 (II). Reseau de telecommunications de
!'Organisation des Nations Unies

The General Assembly

L'Assemblee generale

Directs the Secretary-General to take all steps
necessary to ensure that the United Nations can
proceed with negotiations now in progress for obtaining the wave-lengths (frequencies) , call signs,
rights and privileges necessary for the operation of
a United Nations telecommunications system,
and to report and submit appropriate recommendations to the General Assembly at its third regular session.
Hundred and twenty-first plenary meeting,
20 November 1947.

Charge le Secretaire general de prendre toutes
les mesures necessaires pour garantir aux Nations
U nies les moyens de poursuivre les negociations
actuellement en cours; en vue d'obtenir les longueurs d'ondes (frequences), les indicatifs, les
droits et privileges necessaires a!'exploitation d'un
reseau de telecommunications des Nations Unies,
de presenter un rapport a cc su jet et de soumettre
a I'Assemblee generale, lors de sa troisieme session
ordinaire, les recommandations appropriees.
Cent-vingt et unieme seance pleniere,
le 20 novembre 1947.

Sec Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly durin~ the second part of its first session, page 158.
See document .'\/337.

' Voir Jes Resolutions adoptees par I' Assembltie 1:lnlrale
pendant la srconde partie de sa premiere session, page 158.
'Voi,- le document A/137.

1

64
