S/2021/460

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 May 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 12 May 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and Ms. Nadia Murad, Nobel Peace Prize
Laureate, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia,
France, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam in connection with the
video-teleconference on “Threats to international peace and security” convened on
Monday, 10 May 2021. A statement was also delivered by the representative of Iraq.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
President of the Security Council

21-06347 (E) 140521 110621

*2106347*

S/2021/460

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes
Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Karim
Asad Ahmad Khan
I am honoured to address you this morning to present my sixth and final report
(see S/2021/419) as Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD).
In December 2018, I provided my first briefing to you (see S/PV.8412), outlining
how our Team of five staff members in Iraq had begun work on the implementation
of the innovative mandate established pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017), at the
request of the Government of Iraq. Today, two and half years on, I am pleased to
be able to report on the activities of more than 200 staff, including national experts
appointed in consultation with the Government of Iraq, working from offices in
Baghdad, Dahuk, Erbil and New York and harnessing the investigative activities of
six field investigation units addressing crimes committed against all communities in
Iraq. Specialized thematic units on gender-based crimes and crimes against children,
financial tracking and witness protection are providing targeted support across
all aspects of our work, while a dedicated mass-graves unit has now successfully
supported excavations at 22 sites.
UNITAD is now a fully functioning investigation team capable of addressing
some of the key challenges faced by national authorities in prosecuting members
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) for their crimes in Iraq. Drawing
on this infrastructure, the Team rapidly expanded its evidentiary holdings in the
past six months, including significant developments in the collection of forensic
evidence from mass grave sites, digital data extracted from ISIL hard drives and the
digitization of documentary case files, in cooperation with Iraqi authorities.
In parallel, the introduction of advanced technological tools has further
enhanced our evidence-processing capabilities, allowing investigators to search
rapidly across data sets in order to reconstruct events, respond to targeted requests
for information and ensure that evidence is properly corroborated.
In a significant development, the application of artificial intelligence and
machine learning tools in the analysis of internal ISIL databases now allows the
Team to establish clear timelines of the activities of key ISIL members. Drawing
together information from ISIL immigration records, medical records, payment logs
and fighter rosters, we have directly tied persons of interest to ISIL battalions and
crime scenes.
Building on this progress, a landmark moment has been reached in our work,
with initial case briefs completed in relation to two key investigative priorities: the
mass killing of unarmed cadets and military personnel at Tikrit Air Academy in
June 2014 and the attacks against the Yazidi community in the Sinjar region. The
crimes committed against the Yezidi community represent some of the most brutal
and widespread acts of violence inflicted by ISIL on the people of Iraq.
The Team has established a detailed account of these atrocities through
the excavation of mass grave sites, by ensuring the most vulnerable of witnesses
have been able to come forward with their accounts and by collecting extensive
documentary evidence, in cooperation with Iraqi authorities, non-governmental
organizations and other partners.
2/32

21-06347

S/2021/460

I can confirm to the Security Council that, based on our independent criminal
investigations, UNITAD has established clear and convincing evidence that genocide
was committed by ISIL against the Yazidi as a religious group. The intent of ISIL to
destroy the Yazidi, physically and biologically, is manifest in its ultimatum — applied
remorselessly to all members of their community — to convert or die. Thousands
were killed pursuant to this ultimatum, either executed en masse, shot as they fled or
dying from exposure on Mount Sinjar as they tried to escape. Thousands more were
enslaved, with women and children abducted from their families and subjected to
the most brutal abuses, including serial rape and other forms of unendurable sexual
violence. For many this abuse lasted years, often leading to death. The intent of these
acts was to permanently destroy the capacity of these women and children to have
children and build families within the Yazidi community.
The Team has also established that numerous other international crimes were
also committed against the Yazidi community, including extermination, enslavement,
sexual violence, forcible transfer, persecution on religious and gender grounds and
conscription of children into an armed group. Yazidi children were in many cases
directly targeted and disproportionately impacted by Da’esh crimes. Anyone who
escaped alive, but particularly children, carry daily the burden of the lasting effects
of these crimes.
But let us not forget: these crimes are ongoing. Thousands of Yazidi women,
boys and girls remain detached from their families or disappeared — and some even
continue to be held by their original ISIL captors or those to whom they were sold.
We will not forget them, and our work to ensure justice for all those impacted by
these crimes will continue.
Through investigations into the attacks by ISIL on predominantly Shia
unarmed air cadets and personnel from Tikrit Air Academy, the Team has compiled
and analysed extensive evidence detailing their capture, torture and mass execution.
These acts were carried out in the most brutal circumstances imaginable, with many
men humiliated prior to being killed.
Based on its independent investigative work, the Team has concluded that
these acts constitute the war crimes of murder, torture, cruel treatment and outrages
upon personal dignity. Furthermore, the Team has concluded, based on clear and
convincing evidence, that a Da’esh video released in July 2015 showing these
killings constitutes a direct and public incitement to commit genocide against Shia
Muslims. The narration glorifying the horrifying images of these mass executions
contains a repeated and clear exhortation to ISIL followers: “Kill them wherever
you find them”.
As the Team has finalized its initial case briefs in relation to its initial
investigative priorities, we have also established key additional lines of investigation
into crimes within our mandate. This has included the establishment of a new field
investigation unit dedicated to the investigation of crimes committed against the
Sunni community in Iraq.
Information obtained from ISIL electronic devices has also led to the opening
of a new investigation into the development and successful deployment of chemical
and biological weapons by ISIL in Iraq. Evidence collected to date details how ISIL
used laboratories at Mosul University as the epicentre of its chemical weapons
programme, drawing on the expertise of scientists and medical professionals
from Iraq and abroad. Initially weaponizing chlorine from water treatment plants
overtaken in 2014, ISIL subsequently developed toxic lethal compounds, including
thallium and nicotine, which were tested on live prisoners, leading to death. As its
capacity strengthened, ISIL developed a sulfur mustard production system that was
21-063473/32

S/2021/460

deployed in March 2016 through the firing of 40 rockets at the Turkmen Shia town
of Tazah Khurmatu.
This investigation is developing rapidly, with an initial case brief anticipated
to be completed and available to national authorities within five months. By the end
of 2021, the Team also anticipates the completion of case briefs addressing crimes
committed against Christian, Kaka’i, Shabak, Shia Turkmen and Sunni communities
in Iraq, as well as the massacre of predominantly Shia inmates at Badush prison.
In line with the mandate that the Security Council has provided, it is of course
not sufficient for evidence to be collected and synthesized for findings to be reached
and presented in reports. To fulfil this mandate, and most importantly to meet the
expectations of survivors, our work must be put before national courts to prosecute
those responsible for the horrific crimes that I have just described.
In this spirit, I am pleased to be able to confirm to the Security Council
that arrangements have now been put in place with the Iraqi judiciary that have
allowed us to transfer evidence collected by the Team concerning financial crimes
committed in support of ISIL activities in Iraq. This represents an important initial
step in ensuring that our work contributes tangibly to accountability efforts in Iraq
in a manner consistent with our terms of reference.
I am also continuing to support efforts by the Iraqi Council of Representatives
to adopt legislation establishing a legal basis for the prosecution of ISIL members in
Iraq for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. This will be a further
crucial step towards the delivery of comprehensive accountability for ISIL crimes in
Iraq in partnership with our Team.
I am also pleased to inform the Security Council that, last week, legislation
was presented before the Parliament of the Kurdistan region to establish a court with
jurisdiction over international crimes committed by ISIL. I commend the President
and Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Regional Government for their strong support
for this legislation and for their efforts in securing accountability for these crimes.
The adoption of this law could potentially represent an important moment in efforts
to achieve the full implementation of our mandate.
In parallel with these initiatives in Iraq, the Team has sought to harness
existing channels for the use of its evidence in criminal proceedings, strengthening
its support to other national authorities in response to requests for assistance. As
reflected in my report, a total of 14 States have requested the Team’s assistance
with respect to ongoing national proceedings. Drawing on our expanded evidentiary
holdings, and in particular our exploitation of internal ISIL documentation, we have
been able to respond positively to a significant majority of requests received.
Much of the progress and activities I have described to you today have
emphasized one of the key principles of our strategic approach: innovation. As
Council members may be aware, on Wednesday this week UNITAD will participate
in an Arria Formula meeting highlighting some of the key ways in which we have
harnessed technology and drawn on advanced psychosocial practices to accelerate
our investigations.
However, equally important is the other core principle underlying all of our
activities: that of partnership. This is reflected in particular through the excellent
cooperation and collaboration our Team has developed with the Government of Iraq
throughout my time as Special Adviser.
As reflected in my report, the cooperation and assistance received from
the national coordinating committee responsible for facilitating our work in Iraq
have remained central to progress achieved. The Iraqi judiciary has continued to
4/32

21-06347

S/2021/460

be exemplary in its engagement with the Team, working with us as partners in the
digitization of evidence and providing extensive information that has accelerated
investigations. The Kurdistan Regional Government has also provided steadfast
support for our Team.
As channels begin to be opened for information-sharing with Iraqi
authorities, we have also expanded our provision of capacity-building support. Last
week, I was delighted to inaugurate a new 10-part training course on international
criminal law for 27 senior judges and prosecutors. Delivered in collaboration with
the Australian National University, this course will provide participants with indepth knowledge of international criminal law and its application to the crimes
of ISIL. Building on this basis, our Team will mentor individual judges in the
construction of case files against specific ISIL members for war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide.
Combining this training with our ongoing support to Iraqi authorities in the
excavation of mass grave sites and the digitization of documentary evidence, the
Team has sought to establish a strong basis on which prosecutions of ISIL members
for international crimes may be taken forward swiftly following the establishment of
an appropriate legal basis in Iraq.
Our ongoing and strengthening partnership with survivor groups, nongovernmental organizations and religious authorities has also continued to be central
to progress in investigative activities. I would wish to extend my sincere thanks to all
of our Iraqi partners for the invaluable contribution they have made in our collective
pursuit of accountability for ISIL crimes.
Through the progress made by the Team in the collection of evidence and the
parallel strengthening of channels available for its use in national courts, I believe
a path has now been set, in collaboration with our Iraqi partners, for the successful
completion of the Team’s work.
Reflecting this, I have outlined in my report a series of steps that would
allow for the conduct of trials in Iraq addressing key crimes committed against all
impacted communities, drawing extensively on the evidence collected by the Team.
I consider it possible that such trials could begin next year.
In taking these steps together, we must ensure that focus remains on those we
have ultimately been mandated to serve. Throughout my time as Head of the Team I
have sought to ensure our work draws on deep connections with the communities of
Iraq. The message I have received from community leaders, religious authorities and
survivor groups is consistent and clear. If we are to meaningfully address the legacy
of ISIL crimes in Iraq, justice must be the basis on which such efforts are built.
The imperative of heeding these calls was underlined to me in March this
year as our Team supported the return of remains of 103 Yazidi men recovered from
mass graves previously excavated in Kojo village. In that profound setting, I was
struck that the pain reflected among families present is also felt constantly by the
hundreds of thousands of Iraqis from Yazidi, Shia, Sunni, Kaka’i, Christian and
other communities who have lost family members or had their lives irreversibly
impacted by the crimes of ISIL. So many will not even have the chance to bury those
they loved.
It is fitting that we are joined today by Ms. Nadia Murad, Nobel Peace Prize
Laureate, whose call to action and appeal to our collective conscience gave rise to
the establishment of UNITAD. As the Team moves into a crucial phase of its work,
we must remain conscious of the promise made to Ms. Murad and all communities
impacted by ISIL crimes that the international community will stand with them in
ensuring those responsible for such acts are held accountable.
21-063475/32

S/2021/460

Annex II
Briefing by Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Nadia Murad
It is an honour for me to join you here today as a Yazidi and a survivor
of the atrocities of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). I would like to
start by expressing my gratitude for the Council’s support of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) and relaying to you my community’s
hopes for the future.
When I sat in this Chamber, alongside my friend and lawyer Amal Clooney
(see S/PV.8502), we asked for the Council’s support to ensure that ISIS would not
succeed in its goal of eradicating the Yazidi people from Iraq. Adopting resolution
2379 (2017) was a vital step, and I am grateful to the members of the Council for
supporting UNITAD’s creation and ongoing work.
UNITAD’s work presents opportunities for justice. The Investigative Team is
contributing evidence to a number of ongoing proceedings and a handful of survivors
have been able to face their abusers in court. A few months ago, I was able to bury
two of my brothers, along with over 100 victims of the Kojo massacre, thanks to the
exhumation of mass graves and identification of remains. But we cannot rest on these
accomplishments because much work remains. With successful investigations, the
Council must now prioritize and accelerate concrete action to address the findings.
The evidence collected by Mr. Khan and the UNITAD team affirms the
conclusion reached by the United Nations in 2016 — ISIS crimes against Yazidis
constitute genocide. Formal evidence collection is, of course, critical for courts and
history books. However, today I call on the Council to examine the human lives
impacted by UNITAD’s mandate.
The progress of the Commission for Investigation and Gathering Evidence is
not only remarkable for its innovations in digital platforms, artificial intelligence
and data analysis; the findings are monumental because each data point represents a
human life and evidences its suffering. Together, this evidence tells the story of the
Yazidi people, whom we lost, and what we survived.
Yazidis experienced the worst atrocities known to humankind. I will never
forget the grief in my mother’s eyes when she realized her sons had been executed —
not knowing she would face the same fate. I can still feel my niece’s hand being
ripped out of mine as we were separated and loaded onto buses like cattle. And I can
still calculate what my body was worth to those who bought and sold it.
For nearly seven years, Yazidis have been unable to move forward and
resume our lives. Over 200,000 Yazidis remain in internally displaced person camps
only hours away from their homeland where they wait, hoping for justice and the
restoration of Sinjar’s security, governance and infrastructure. And thousands of
families continue to hope for the day when their relatives’ remains will be exhumed
from mass graves, so they can bury and honour their loved ones. But the true horror
exists for the 2,800 women and children who remain in ISIS captivity.
Evidence of ISIS genocide paints a clear picture. ISIS never attempted to hide
its intentions. Mass graves were clearly marked and decrees issued on the immorality
of Yazidism. Manuals were published to codify the slave trade and auctions selling
Yazidi women still take place online. Their intent to eradicate our community,
religion, and culture was declared far and wide. ISIS was proud of their genocide.
Despite all of the horrors I just described, Yazidis continue to work together
to rebuild their homeland, restart their livelihoods, and advocate for accountability.
6/32

21-06347

S/2021/460

They are eager to take part in the local governance and security of the greater
community. Yazidis know that stabilizing Sinjar is the best hope for preventing
further persecution. Yet, our progress is constrained by politics, competing interests
and inaction. We try to turn the page, only to find there is no pen with which to write
our next chapter.
The international community can give the Yazidi community the pen. I ask
the Council to help us write a new chapter. Legal accountability for ISIS crimes
would dramatically impact every aspect of my community’s recovery.
I firmly believe that public trials and recognition of the genocide will
help avert future violence and facilitate the healing of survivors. International
monitoring is needed to ensure that Iraq’s national courts see justice through.
And international tribunals are needed to address the universal magnitude of ISIS
crimes against humanity.
Amal and I called on the Council five years ago to create a clear plan for
prosecution. We asked it to refer this genocide to the International Criminal Court
or to establish a court by treaty. We were met with empty promises and competing
priorities. Justice was deferred. Yazidis have been persecuted for centuries. These
abuses have gone unchecked. When impunity is accepted, violence is repeated.
Accountability is essential to defeating ISIS and formally acknowledging the trauma
survivors continue to endure.
Survivors have spent years reliving and sharing their experiences, as I have
today. Evidence has been found, but we are still searching for the political will to
prosecute. It is time for the international community to do more than listen. It is time
to act. If world leaders have the political will to act on this evidence, then justice is
surely within reach. ISIS’s genocide will not come to an end until all Yazidis can live
a life of dignity in their homeland.
The Yazidis may be a minority community within Iraq, but the treatment of
this case has major implications for the human rights of people everywhere. We must
ask ourselves what message our collective conscience wants to send to women who
have been used as weapons of war. Will we turn a blind eye to ethnic cleansing and
sexual violence? Will we look on with pity murmuring “never again” until the next
atrocity grabs our attention? Or will we finally say, “your body, your life, and your
rights matter as much as mine”?
This is the potential of UNITAD’s evidence: to hold perpetrators accountable
for genocide and crimes against humanity. But transforming evidence into justice
and accountability requires action. The international community has shown that it
will act to counter ISIS’s terrorism. But does it stand against genocide? Does it stand
against sexual violence? Will it stand with Yazidis?

21-063477/32

S/2021/460

Annex III
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: Chinese and English]
China thanks Special Adviser Karim Khan for his briefing. In the past three
years, he has led the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) in
collecting evidence of crimes committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), pursued accountability for terrorist acts, done a great deal of work, and made
much progress, which has China’s positive evaluation. Mr. Karim Khan is about to
leave for his new post, and I wish him every success in The Hague. I also wish to
thank Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Ms. Murad for her briefing.
We have read the sixth report submitted by Special Adviser Karim Khan
(S/2021/419), and I welcome the results of the investigation into the attacks against
the Yazidi community and the attack on the Tikrit Air Academy. We hope that these
developments will bring comfort to survivors, including Ms. Murad.
UNITAD has collected a large amount of evidence of crimes committed by
ISIL. Only its timely transfer to the Government of Iraq can translate it into the
tangible results of holding terrorists accountable, thereby achieving the intended
objectives of resolution 2379 (2017). We hope that UNITAD will hand over the
evidence to the Iraqi side in a timely and complete manner, in accordance with the
relevant Council resolutions.
Terrorism is the common enemy of humankind. The international community
should continue to support Iraq in its fight against terrorism, bring terrorists to
justice and consolidate hard-won counter-terrorism gains. At the same time, the
international community should also earnestly respect Iraq’s sovereignty and
jurisdiction over crimes committed on Iraqi territory, and support Iraq in its pursuit
of accountability against terrorists, in accordance with domestic laws.
We appreciate Iraq’s active effort to take forward its domestic legislation to hold
former ISIL terrorists accountable. All the parties concerned and the United Nations
should also support Iraq in dealing with foreign terrorist fighters on its territory.
In its report, UNITAD puts forward some preliminary ideas around a completion
strategy, and China encourages the Investigative Team to fully communicate and
coordinate with the Government of Iraq in this regard. The Council should study and
discuss the relevant issues in due course.

8/32

21-06347

S/2021/460

Annex IV
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Estonia

to

the

I thank our briefers, Special Adviser Khan and Ms. Murad, for their detailed
briefings. The ongoing investigations of crimes committed in Iraq by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) will help to end impunity and bring justice to
the victims.
The personal tragedies of the many who have suffered due to ISIL, such as
in the testimony of Ms. Murad, need to be heard. The personal accounts further
underline the important work that the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD) is doing. In that regard, I join others in recognizing the tremendous
efforts that Mr. Khan has made while leading the team with utmost dedication.
Estonia acknowledges the successful work carried out by UNITAD during
the last reporting period despite the challenging circumstances in the political and
security spheres, as well as in the light of the coronavirus-disease restrictions.
We recognize the recovery of the 103 Yazidi victims from nine mass graves.
Although a solemn affair, we commend UNITAD’s efforts, in cooperation with Iraqi
authorities, to help to ensure that the commemoration of the victims takes place
in line with local traditions and customs. We look forward to seeing the outcome
of the crucially needed interfaith dialogue, which is helping engage with religious
communities seeking to engage in accountability processes.
We fully support UNITAD in its efforts to strengthen the capacity of Iraqi
authorities, and commend the significant progress made in terms of using new
resources and technical innovations. In particular, we would like to highlight
the collection and digitization of extensive internal ISIL documentation through
effective cooperation with Iraqi institutions.
We welcome the arrangement between UNITAD and the Iraqi judiciary,
allowing the sharing of information about financial crimes committed in connection
with ISIL activities in Iraq. It is a notable step as it paves the way for even stronger
cooperation in the future.
We value UNITAD’s work, as it meaningfully contributes to achieving
accountability in Iraq with full respect for the principles and best practices of the
United Nations.
I would also like to stress the importance of the continued work of UNITAD
through the respective UNITAD special units on the issues of sexual and genderbased crimes and crimes against children; its focus on witness protection as well
as providing psychological support for witnesses and survivors so as to avoid
secondary trauma.

21-063479/32

S/2021/460

Annex V
Statement by the Minister Counsellor
United Nations, Diarra Dime Labille

of

France

to

the

[Original: French]
France wishes to thank Special Adviser Karim Khan and his team for their
sixth report (S/2021/419) and to congratulate him on his work over recent years
leading the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes
Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD), as well as on
his election to serve as Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court. We sincerely
wish him every success and assure him of France’s support in the context of that
future endeavour.
We thank Nadia Murad for her courageous testimony and her call for justice
to be done by all victims of Da’esh, including the Yazidis. I welcome the presence
of the Ambassador of Iraq, which once again reflects Iraq’s commitment to working
closely with the international community and UNITAD to ensure justice for all
victims of crimes committed by Da’esh on Iraqi territory.
Regarding the sixth report, France take note of the significant progress
achieved by the Special Adviser’s Team since he briefed the Council on 10 December
2020 (see S/2020/1193). We are referring to the completion of evidence collection
in both the initial cases opened by UNITAD — on the attacks against the Yazidi
community in the Sinjar region, and on the mass killing of young military cadets at
the Tikrit Air Academy. We encourage UNITAD to continue the open investigation
into the development and use against civilian populations of chemical and biological
weapons by Da’esh in Iraq between 2014 and 2016, as well as the implementation of
the joint mass grave-excavation strategy.
The situation of victims, including victims of sexual and gender-based violence,
is fundamentally important. We welcome the efforts of the Special Adviser and the
Team to provide psychological support to victims, survivors and witnesses alike.
Despite the challenges of the coronavirus disease, UNITAD has found a way
to achieve results by implementing creative and innovative solutions. The pandemic
has given new relevance to the strategy developed by the Special Adviser and his
Team, harnessing technological tools to deliver on its mandate, including through
artificial intelligence. We commend the efficiency of the team, which has been able
to deal with a rapidly growing body of evidence in the digitization project, with the
participation of the Iraqi authorities.
We believe that the progress achieved and UNITAD’s success are indeed the
results of the very good cooperation that exists with Iraq and all its communities,
including religious communities. In this regard, France welcomes the strengthening
of collaboration between UNITAD and the national coordinating committee
established by the Government of Iraq as well as the finalization of the agreement
on facilitating information-sharing on financial crimes committed by Da’esh.
Improving Iraqi judicial authorities’ understanding of the mandate of
UNITAD, as defined by resolution 2379 (2017), of 21 September 2017, is crucial.
We welcome the participation of UNITAD in training Iraqi investigating judges on
international criminal law and on developing case files and prosecutions against
members of Da’esh for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
It is important to recall the United Nations consistent position of nontransmission of material in the context of legal proceedings involving the possibility
of a death sentence, wheresoever it may be. We encourage the Iraqi authorities to
10/32

21-06347

S/2021/460

continue in their efforts to finalize the legislative framework to bring members
of Da’esh to justice, in accordance with the highest human rights standards
and principles.
In conclusion, the fight against the impunity for all perpetrators of war crimes,
crimes against humanity or genocide committed in Iraq by Da’esh is imperative for
stabilization, reconstruction and reconciliation not only for the Yazidis, as Nadia
Murad highlighted, but for the Iraqi people as a whole.
To prevent Da’esh, in all its forms, from resurging, the Security Council must
remain engaged and continue to support the efforts of the Iraqi authorities, including
to prosecute the most serious crimes.

21-0634711/32

S/2021/460

Annex VI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative and Political
Coordinator of India to the United Nations, Ravindra Raguttahalli
I welcome Special Adviser Karim Asad Ahmad Khan and the Permanent
Representative of Iraq, Ambassador Mohammed Hussein Bahr Aluloom, to the
meeting. I echo the appreciation of other colleagues for the Special Adviser’s
contribution to the work of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (UNITAD). I wish him success in his next assignment as Chief Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court. I also welcome Noble Peace Prize Laureate Nadia
Murad and thank her for her briefing.
India strongly believes that the credibility of our collective fight against
terrorism can be strengthened only when we ensure accountability for the grave and
inhuman acts of terror committed by terrorists and take strong measures against
States that encourage, support and finance terrorism. The Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) has carried out inhuman atrocities against the people of Iraq. Victims
of ISIL’s horrific crimes also include 39 Indian nationals. ISIL has systematically
committed genocide, torture, rape, slavery and kidnapping throughout the territory
under its control in Iraq and Syria. The Islamic State therefore cannot be seen as
just another regional terrorist outfit; it is a global syndicate with affiliated terrorist
groups across the world, including in our neighbourhood.
We are pleased to note that UNITAD, under the leadership of the Special
Adviser, is fighting impunity and ensuring accountability for the crimes committed
by ISIL in Iraq. Accountability for such crimes, especially those committed against
various minority communities in Iraq, is critical for achieving smooth reconciliation
and sustained peace in Iraq. In that regard, we welcome the adoption of the Yazidi
Female Survivors Law. Implementation of that key law and the recent Sinjar agreement
will help Iraq move closer to achieving justice for the victims and contribute to
restoring normalcy in the lives of Yazidi survivors, as well as enhance their quality
of life and pave the way for their safe return. UNITAD’s work also supports the
Iraqi Government’s efforts aimed at national reconciliation. The completion of
initial case briefs by UNITAD in the attacks against the Yazidi community in the
Sinjar region and the positive progress in case briefs on other communities are also
important developments.
We welcome UNITAD’s investigation into the development and use of
chemical and biological weapons by ISIL in Iraq. We note with concern the Team’s
observation that evidence collected and analysed confirms the repeated use of
chemical weapons by ISIL against civilians. India firmly condemns the use of
chemical weapons anywhere, at any time, by anybody and under any circumstances.
On many occasions, India has highlighted the serious threat to international peace
and security emanating from the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by ISIL
and other terrorist groups, as well as the need for greater international cooperation to
prevent it. We hope that UNITAD’s investigation will also provide valuable insights
in that regard so as to help global non-proliferation efforts, including through the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
We appreciate the close partnership and excellent cooperation between the
Iraqi authorities and UNITAD. This partnership has been central to the effective
delivery of UNITAD’s mandate. The continued involvement of Iraqi experts in
the work of the Investigative Team, alongside international experts, is crucial to
UNITAD’s success. Such joint work, along with the training of various Iraqi
authorities, will ensure that national capacities are strengthened in order to ensure
12/32

21-06347

S/2021/460

accountability in the long-term for the horrific crimes perpetrated by ISIL. That also
holds true for the efforts of UNITAD to jointly develop case files with the judicial
authorities of Iraq to prosecute such crimes.
We note with satisfaction UNITAD’s innovative use of technology in fulfilling
its mandate and in overcoming the challenges posed by the coronavirus disease
pandemic. The Shuhud digital platform deserves special appreciation, as it enables
the victims and other Iraqi people to submit information and evidence to support the
Team’s accountability efforts in a much faster and easier way. Harnessing the benefits
of technological innovation for the betterment of humankind is an important priority
for India. We encourage UNITAD to continue its pursuit of advanced technological
solutions to enhance the efficiency of its work.
India also welcomes the technical and financial support extended by other
Member States to UNITAD. Such efforts should also contribute to strengthening
Iraq’s judicial system and law enforcement capabilities.
Terrorists and terrorist groups affiliated with ISIL have committed crimes
against humanity in an unprecedented manner. The perpetrators of those crimes
should be brought to justice in their respective countries of origin. The sharing of
information and evidence collected by UNITAD with other Member States will
further strengthen those efforts.
The full realization of UNITAD’s mandate will not be possible until the
Team is able to share its large volume of evidence with the Iraqi authorities. It is
unfortunate that, despite a lapse of almost three years, UNITAD has been unable
to fully service its primary client. We hope this will be rectified soon, in keeping
with the timelines indicated in the Special Adviser’s report (see S/2021/419). Delays
in evidence-sharing will further delay justice to those victims and their loved ones
whose lives have been devastated by the atrocities committed by ISIL.
The people of Iraq have made immense sacrifices in their fight against ISIL.
Justice will not be delivered to them until those responsible for the atrocities carried
out are held to account. The full implementation of UNITAD’s mandate would help
secure justice for the survivors in Iraq and beyond. India stands ready to offer its
support to UNITAD in that regard.

21-0634713/32

S/2021/460

Annex VII
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Ireland

to

the

I would like to thank Special Adviser Karim Asad Ahmad Khan for his report
(see S/2021/419) and briefing today. Before I begin my statement, and as this is
Mr. Khan’s last briefing to the Security Council in this role, I want to take the
opportunity to acknowledge his service and leadership over the past three years.
I would also like to thank Ms. Nadia Murad for her powerful briefing this
morning. As she did when she advocated for the creation of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD), she again eloquently set out the
very real need of survivors of the crimes of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) for justice and accountability. That is the reason we must ensure that evidence
of atrocity crimes is preserved, and her courageous testimony today is central to
that task.
In spite of the restrictions imposed by the coronavirus disease, it is clear
from today’s briefing that UNITAD’s work has continued apace with the completion
of initial case briefs on its two core investigative priorities — the attacks against
the Yazidi in the Sinjar region and the mass killings at the Tikrit Air Academy. I
want to commend the Team’s use of innovative technologies to gather and analyse
evidence, including through the use of artificial intelligence and machine learning
and translation.
Tangible evidence of the results of those efforts and the cooperation between
UNITAD and the Iraqi authorities can be seen in the important work that led to the
excavation of mass grave sites and the identification and return of the remains of 103
Yazidis — per the wishes of the Yazidi community. Faced with this horrific evidence
of ISIL’s crimes, we want to acknowledge the work done by the Team and the Iraqi
authorities in adopting a victim- and survivor-centred approach.
We know that accountability is essential to heal the wounds of conflict and build
sustainable peace. However, the manner in which we pursue justice is also important.
We welcome the detail provided in the most recent report on the Team’s
approach to the investigation of sexual and gender-based crimes and the terrible
crimes against children. It is noteworthy that, in spite of restrictions on the Team’s
presence in Iraq, the Sexual and Gender-Based Crimes and Crimes against Children
Unit has commenced an investigation on ISIL crimes against the lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex community, has conducted interviews with
survivors of sexual violence and has appointed focal points within field investigations
units. We strongly support UNITAD’s work to enhance the provision of psychosocial
support to survivors and witnesses, in particular women and children.
When it comes to conflict-related sexual violence, truth-telling, lifting stigma
and documenting crimes are critical. However, it is essential that we move from
evidence-gathering to the prosecution of, and conviction for, crimes of sexual
violence committed by ISIL and to real accountability. Ms. Murad and all survivors
deserve nothing less.
We also welcome the Yazidi Female Survivors Law, introduced in recent
weeks, and its inclusion of Turkmen, Christian and Shabak communities and other
survivors of atrocity crimes. We look forward to the full implementation of this
landmark law by delivering on reparations for survivors.
We commend the support provided by UNITAD to the Iraqi authorities to
develop a domestic legislative framework that would enable the domestic prosecution
14/32

21-06347

S/2021/460

of war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. We also note the training
provided by UNITAD, including to the Iraqi judiciary, in order to assist in the
development of case files against ISIL for atrocity crimes. We strongly urge the
continuation of that important work.
We also welcome further work to develop a means of sharing evidence
that complies with United Nations policies and best practices for use in fair and
independent criminal proceedings — one that is consistent with applicable
international law, including international human rights law. In that regard, I want
to recall Ireland’s unequivocal opposition to the use of the death penalty in all cases
and circumstances.
We look forward to engaging with colleagues on the Security Council ahead of
the renewal of UNITAD’s mandate in September, and once again wish to pay special
tribute to UNITAD, its important work and the excellent briefing we received today.

21-0634715/32

S/2021/460

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
On behalf of Kenya’s delegation, I congratulate Special Adviser Karim Khan
on his election as the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
Kenya thanks the Special Adviser for his briefing and welcomes the progress
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes
Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) has made, as
reflected in its sixth report (see S/2021/419). We also welcome the briefing by Ms.
Nadia Murad.
All acts of terrorism, whether by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL)/Da’esh and its affiliates or by any other terrorist group, must be met with
the full force of the law. The survivors, their families and communities and the
world at large expect the perpetrators to be held legally accountable as a minimum
requirement for justice to be done. We urge the international community to recall
that ISIL’s monumental crimes went beyond targeting individuals; it rose to the level
of genocide.
As the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic found, ISIL undertook a genocidal campaign against the Yazidi community
and people. It also documented the extensive use of gender-based and sexual violence,
as well as other atrocities and crimes against humanity.
For countries that have pledged to combat genocide, whether now or in the
past, holding ISIL and its members accountable is critical. The same is true for those
that have determined that sexual and gender-based violence must be prosecuted to
the full extent of the law. I therefore reiterate Kenya’s unequivocal support for the
prosecution of members of ISIL — not only for their core terrorist acts, but also for
related crimes, including war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
As we point out ISIL’s crimes, it is critical that we do not lose sight of the
unfortunate fact that its ideas, ideals and aims are still being perpetrated. In multiple
countries and continents, ISIL’s affiliates and those of its parent group, Al-Qaida,
are waging war against the innocent. ISIL’s crimes are inspiring others, including
in multiple countries in Africa. Kenya strongly urges the Security Council and the
international community to once again stand tall against terrorism. The fight against
terrorist groups has been long and costly, but to relent is to give them the opportunity
to recover their momentum and confidence.
Returning to the briefing at hand, Kenya takes note of the improved
cooperation and close collaboration between the Team and the relevant authorities of
the Government of Iraq. That collaboration and partnership has facilitated progress,
including in the implementation of the joint strategy on the excavation of mass grave
sites in Kojo village and Badush prison. It has also led to the collection of additional
evidence of ISIL carrying out rape, enslavement and other atrocities against members
of the Christian community.
Kenya commends the Iraqi authorities for formulating appropriate legislation
and establishing a specialized tribunal that will enable the prosecution of ISIL/
Da’esh suspects for international crimes. The support given to that initiative by the
Investigative Team, in line with resolution 2379 (2017), is appreciated.
Enhancing capacity-building and funding to law enforcement agencies is a
critical element for the success of counter-terrorism measures. Kenya welcomes the
conclusion of the agreement for UNITAD training so as to enable Iraqi investigative
16/32

21-06347

S/2021/460

judges to develop strong case files that meet the requisite evidentiary threshold for
prosecution and conviction.
Kenya is encouraged by the continued integration of advanced technological
tools in the Team’s work. The responsible use of such technology can help build
strong case briefs and can also help protect the mental health of its members.
Kenya commends UNITAD for preparing and making its standard operating
procedures publicly available on its website. This will be an important resource to
national, regional and other practitioners on such topics as conducting interviews
with children and survivors of sexual and gender-based violence. We encourage
additional ways of sharing of information and best practices.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Kenya’s support for the difficult work of
UNITAD even against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease pandemic and
budgetary constraints. We caution against budgetary cuts and call for increased and
urgent funding in order for UNITAD to effectively fulfil its mandate.
We wonder, however: how secure is the technology being employed by the
Information Systems Unit in terms of safeguarding prosecutorial independence and
attorney-client privilege? And will its clear benefits during investigations run into
evidentiary problems that would affect its admissibility?

21-0634717/32

S/2021/460

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico thanks Special Adviser Karim Khan for his latest report (see S/2021/419)
on the work of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD). Such
grave atrocities as war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide must never go
unpunished, and the efforts of UNITAD to ensure accountability in Iraq are critical.
I also thank Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Nadia Murad for her valuable testimony and
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative of Iraq.
With regard to the latest report of the Special Adviser and Head of the
Investigative Team, I would like to highlight several points.
Mexico recognizes the importance of UNITAD’s cooperation with the Iraqi
authorities in a number of areas. That includes the excavation of mass graves, the
cooperation of judicial authorities in sharing information with the Investigative
Team, as well as UNITAD’s training and capacity-building of Iraqi authorities in the
investigation and prosecution of international crimes.
We look to the Iraqi legislature to move forward with the implementation of
national legislation to enable domestic prosecutions for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide, and to hold members of the Islamic State/Da’esh accountable.
We also call for cooperation with other States, mechanisms and international courts
to ensure that those crimes do not go unpunished.
It is worth highlighting the importance of technology and artificial
intelligence in advancing the collection of relevant information for UNITAD’s
investigations. We also believe that efforts to digitize the evidence obtained are
essential for its preservation.
I would like to stress the importance of recognizing the victims of these
crimes and of working with them in order to advance justice and reconciliation. In
that regard, it is essential to intensify UNITAD’s work for the timely recognition
of the trauma suffered by victims and witnesses. We commend the adoption of an
approach that, at last, fully considers mental health.
Equally important are other actions such as the recovery and return of 103
Yazidi bodies to their families — honouring their culture and traditions. We must be
able to bring closure to these episodes of pain and violence in order to move on to a
new stage of personal, family, social and national healing. In all such cases, mental
health services are a priority.
Finally, recognizing that this is Mr. Khan’s last report to the Security Council
in his capacity as Special Adviser and Head of UNITAD, I would like to thank
him for his commitment and efforts in leading the work of the Investigative Team,
and wish him every success in his new duties as Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court.

18/32

21-06347

S/2021/460

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I thank Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan for his briefing. I would also like to
take this opportunity to wish him every success in his new role as prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court. I also thank Ms. Nadia Murad for her moving
testimony, and welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative of Iraq, who
has joined us for this meeting.
My delegation congratulates the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD) on the progress made since the submission of the Team’s fifth
report (see S/2020/1107) six months ago, despite the particularly difficult conditions
associated with the spread of the coronavirus pandemic. We particularly welcome
the successful completion of investigations into the attacks on Yazidis in the Sinjar
region in August 2014 and the massacre of unarmed air force cadets at the Tikrit Air
Academy in June 2014.
We encourage the Investigative Team to continue its efforts to finalize the case
files relating to other crimes committed by the fighters of Da’esh, including the massacre
of prisoners in Badush prison in Mosul on 10 June 2014 and the crimes committed
against the Sunni, Shia, Christian, Turkmen, Shabak and Kaka’i communities.
I would also like to highlight the importance of the development of the new
Shuhud digital platform for the remote submission of evidence by witnesses. I also
commend the efforts that led to the identification and handover to their families of
the remains of 103 Yazidis found in nine mass graves in the village of Kojo, who were
subsequently buried in accordance with the wishes and traditions of their community.
All those successes would not have happened without the support of the Iraqi
people and authorities. We therefore welcome the increased cooperation between the
Investigative Team and the National Coordinating Committee appointed by the Iraqi
Government, including in the continued implementation of the joint national mass
graves excavation strategy.
We also welcome the agreement reached between UNITAD and the Iraqi
judiciary to share information on financial crimes committed in the context of the
activities of Da’esh in Iraq, in line with the Team’s mandate. This will undoubtedly
enhance cooperation in the investigation and prosecution of those who facilitated
and benefited financially from the crimes committed by the terrorist organization in
Iraq, as they too are guilty of these crimes, by association.
In conclusion, my delegation takes note of the continued integration of
advanced technological tools into the work of UNITAD, including the partnership
with Microsoft in the use of artificial intelligence, machine learning and machine
translation in order to rapidly extract facial data from collected images and videos,
as well as the increase in evidence collected by investigators during the reporting
period due to innovative collection methods.
Finally, my delegation would like to reiterate its call for no crime committed
by members of Da’esh — in Iraq, Syria or anywhere in the world — to go
unpunished. We fully support the provisions of resolution 2379 (2017), as well as
the work of UNITAD to establish responsibility and accountability for the acts
committed by Da’esh fighters, which may constitute war crimes, crimes against
humanity or genocide.
21-0634719/32

S/2021/460

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
First, allow me to thank Special Adviser Khan for his comprehensive briefing
today, as well as for his outstanding work leading the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) over the past three years. Norway is grateful for
his service and looks forward to supporting him in his future role as the next Chief
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
Let me also thank Ms. Murad for her strong testimony. Her determination and
perseverance in demanding justice for victims of crimes committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is an inspiration and a clear call to action that the
Security Council must strive to meet. Norway is a staunch supporter of UNITAD.
The Team’s work to collect, store and preserve evidence of crimes committed by
ISIL in Iraq is crucial to ensuring accountability for perpetrators and justice for
victims and survivors — prerequisite conditions for achieving sustainable peace,
with the rule of law at its core.
Norway is encouraged to note several positive developments since the
Special Adviser’s previous briefing to the Security Council (see S/2020/1193). In
particular, we were moved by news of the burials of Yazidi victims that took place in
February in Kojo, which finally offered loved ones a sliver of closure after years of
uncertainty. We commend UNITAD for the support they provided Iraqi authorities
in the exhumation and identification processes, allowing the burials to take place.
Norway is also pleased to note progress in UNITAD’s priority investigations,
particularly the completion of case briefs for crimes committed against the Yazidi
community in Sinjar and for the massacre of unarmed personnel at Tikrit Air Academy.
I would now like to highlight three cross-cutting priorities that Norway
considers crucial to UNITAD’s ongoing work.
First, accountability is key. There can be no justice for victims or survivors
and no reconciliation for the country at large, in the absence of accountability for
perpetrators. In that regard, we welcome the ongoing engagement between Iraq and
UNITAD in order to resolve outstanding legal obstacles that will allow the Team to
share its collected evidence with national authorities, in accordance with its terms of
reference. We also strongly support the assistance that UNITAD has provided other
jurisdictions in their national legal proceedings.
Secondly, it is imperative that UNITAD continue to apply a survivor-centred
approach to its work. Bringing perpetrators to justice and allowing for the proper
burial of loved ones is key to supporting survivors’ healing and rehabilitation. Yet we
must simultaneously ensure that survivors — especially those providing testimony —
have proper access to psychosocial and legal support and that they are questioned in
accordance with established best practices to avoid retraumatization. In that context,
we commend the work of the Team’s Witness Protection and Support Unit.
Finally, drawing upon the high-quality work and expertise that UNITAD
has acquired in the field, the Team must maintain a gender- and age-responsive
approach across all activities. Although horrific crimes were committed against
all members of Iraqi society, we know that women and girls were particularly and
systematically targeted for sexual and gender-based violence — including sexual
slavery and trafficking. Indeed, ISIL carried out these crimes as a deliberate tactic
to recruit fighters, instil terror and traumatize families and communities into
submission. Addressing the health, psychological, legal and social aspects of such
20/32

21-06347

S/2021/460

crimes, including their gendered dimension, must continue to guide UNITAD’s work
moving forward. In that context, Norway also welcomes the recent adoption of the
Yazidi Female Survivors Law in the Iraqi Council of Representatives.
In conclusion, let me once again thank Special Adviser Khan and Ms. Murad
for their briefings today, and reiterate my gratitude to the Special Adviser for his
dedicated efforts to promote accountability for crimes committed by ISIL in Iraq.

21-0634721/32

S/2021/460

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Gennady Kuzmin
[Original: Russian]
We thank Mr. Khan for his briefing and the work completed. We also welcome
Ms. Murad to the Council.
Fighting terrorism continues to be important. We are convinced that this evil
can be effectively countered only through the broadest coordination of counterterrorist efforts. We proceed from the assumption that all stakeholders involved
in countering terrorism in Iraq must respect the sovereignty of the Iraqi State and
coordinate all actions with Baghdad. Action must correspond to the stated goals — to
fight against terrorism and assist the Government of Iraq in stabilizing the situation.
We closely studied the sixth report (see S/2021/419) of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD), headed by Mr. Khan.
We welcome the finalization of case briefs regarding two key tracks of
investigation — attacks on the Yazidi community in Sinjar and the killing of cadets
at Tikrit Air Academy.
Hopefully, the results on the other investigation tracks will be just as quick.
We noted that UNITAD took on some new tracks of investigation, such as the
development and use of chemical and biological weapons by the terrorists. It is
important that all such episodes be duly investigated and that those responsible be
held accountable, no matter where those incidents took place. After all, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) was active not only in Iraq, but also in Syria. But
while in Iraq’s case things are called by their real names, as reflected in UNITAD’s
report, in Syria’s case, with the abundant evidence of chemical-weapon use by
terrorists, the investigations are constantly downplayed. Such double standards are
unacceptable, and we must correct that practice.
It is our understanding that, apart from gaining new evidence of ISIL’s crimes,
UNITAD’s priority tasks must include cooperation with Iraq’s Government and the
transfer of files to Iraq’s competent authorities. Arrangements have been made with
Baghdad with regard to access to data on economic crimes associated with ISIL’s
activity. Now the most important thing is to have those arrangements honoured
and implemented. As for the transfer of materials regarding other crimes, we do
not see any reason to make this sort of cooperation depend on legislative reforms.
The Security Council never prescribed such an approach. UNITAD’s mission, as
articulated by the Council, is to support Iraq’s domestic efforts to hold ISIL terrorists
accountable in the framework of Iraq’s national system of justice. Resolution 2379
(2017) defines the relevant Iraqi authorities as the primary intended recipient of
evidence collected by UNITAD, without other conditions.
Hopefully, the next UNITAD reports will inform us of the progress of court
proceedings regarding the actions of ISIL fighters in Iraq.

22/32

21-06347

S/2021/460

Annex XIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Halimah DeShong
We begin by extending our gratitude to Special Adviser Karim Khan for his
briefing. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks him for the dedication he has
shown to the people of Iraq and for all of his constructive cooperation with the
Security Council. We congratulate him on his appointment as Chief Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, wish him continued success and look forward to
engaging with the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) under
the guidance of his successor. We also thank Ms. Nadia Murad for again providing a
very clear analysis and insights on the actions most urgently needed.
We welcome the progress made by UNITAD on its investigation into crimes
against humanity as it relates to the Yazidi community and the massacre in Tikrit.
It is commendable that, despite a reduced footprint as a result of the coronavirus
disease, UNITAD has continued its efforts to discharge its mandate. To that end,
we recognize the role played by the Government of Iraq, particularly the judiciary,
which continues to engage constructively with the Investigative Team. We encourage
further collaborative efforts between the Government of Iraq and UNITAD, with
full respect for Iraq’s sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity,
and its jurisdiction over crimes committed within its territory.
The people of Iraq have suffered immensely under the surge of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and concerted efforts are needed to achieve
sustainable peace and reconciliation. UNITAD’s focus on the mental health of victims
and survivors is a critical part of this reconciliatory process, and we encourage the
continued provision of psychosocial support. The Trauma-Informed Investigations
Field Guide is an invaluable resource that will assist investigators, including in Iraq,
to better understand the effects of trauma on witnesses.
Another element of the reconciliation and reconstruction process is building
the capacities of various Iraqi institutions. This is critical to ensuring that all branches
of Government are capable of holding accountable all individuals and entities guilty
of violating domestic and international law, as such violations are inimical to peace
and justice, and threaten the safe and dignified return of displaced persons. We
welcome discussions on the draft legislation that establishes a legal basis for the
prosecution of ISIL members for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
Such crimes must be prosecuted in a way that reflects their gravity and provides
a form of justice to the victims and survivors. We urge all stakeholders to work
towards achieving comprehensive accountability for these atrocities.
We also note the findings that ISIL used chemical weapons in Iraq between
2014 and 2016. Chemical-weapon atrocities cannot be ignored, and neither should
there be impunity for the use of chemical weapons by non-State actors. Accountability
is necessary for the protection of civilians, and we thank the Special Adviser and his
team for their efforts to bring these matters to the fore.
In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines would like to recognize
the support provided by UNITAD to the Government of Iraq in returning the
remains of Yazidis to be laid to rest by their loved ones. Nothing can undo the grief
suffered over the loss of loved ones and communities; however, these efforts offer
closure to families whose suffering is unjustified and immeasurable. We encourage
further efforts in this regard, as this is an element of the broader reconciliation and
reconstruction process.
21-0634723/32

S/2021/460

Iraq’s path is not one to be traversed alone. UNITAD’s support, as well as
efforts by the international community, including regional stakeholders, are critical.
For Iraq to heal, all efforts must be made in good faith. There is no room for negative
rhetoric and divisive actions. We affirm our support to the Government and the
people of Iraq and the invaluable work of UNITAD.

24/32

21-06347

S/2021/460

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to thank Special Adviser Karim Khan for briefing
the Council on the sixth report (see S/2021/419) of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD).
I would also like to welcome the participation of Nadia Murad in this
meeting. Tunisia fully supports her and all women and girls who have survived the
abhorrent acts and crimes perpetrated against them by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL).
The testimony of Nadia Murad provides further confirmation that the Iraqi
people have spent years waiting and yearning for justice. Accountability will
undoubtedly help to heal the wounds of victims and their families. It will also
contribute to attaining peace and stability in Iraq and eradicating terrorism once
and for all. We cannot uproot this scourge without delivering justice and holding
accountable all those responsible for the heinous crimes committed against many
Iraqis. We must therefore all support the efforts of the Iraqi Government and the
Investigative Team to proceed to trial as soon as possible.
Tunisia appreciates the significant progress made during the reporting
period, despite the challenges posed by coronavirus disease (COVID-19)-related
travel restrictions and the attendant constraints on field-based activities. Tunisia
commends the Investigative Team on finding innovative ways to continue carrying
out its mandate, including by interviewing witnesses remotely, creating the Shuhud
digital platform to gather evidence and using advanced investigative techniques
based on artificial intelligence and other modern technologies.
In that connection, my country welcomes the adoption of an approach that
prioritizes gender and the rights of survivors and witnesses by respecting their
privacy and providing the necessary psychosocial counselling. We also commend
the Iraqi authorities and the Investigative Team on their commitment to honouring
the wishes and traditions of victims’ families and communities in handling the
remains of victims.
Tunisia deeply appreciates the efforts made by the Iraqi Government to
provide the Investigative Team with valuable and constructive support, as evidenced
by the expanded areas of cooperation with the Iraqi national coordinating committee
mentioned in the report. In addition, steps were taken to strengthen training and
capacity-building programmes for the competent Iraqi authorities and to enlist the
participation of various actors.
During the reporting period, the tangible results of this collaboration included
the finalization of important case-briefs relating to crimes committed by ISIL in
Sinjar and at Tikrit Air Academy.
In that connection, Tunisia reaffirms that, in accordance with resolution
2379 (2017), the relevant Iraqi authorities are the primary intended recipient of
all evidence of crimes collected by UNITAD as it implements its mandate. That
evidence should be used in fair and independent judicial proceedings conducted by
competent national-level courts, with full respect for the sovereignty of Iraq and its
jurisdiction over crimes committed in its territory.

21-0634725/32

S/2021/460

Tunisia looks forward to the full implementation of resolution 2379 (2017),
which provides for handing over the files of completed case-briefs to the Iraqi
judiciary and moving forward with trials, with a view to delivering justice to the
victims and survivors and ensuring that the perpetrators of those heinous crimes are
held accountable.
Lastly, Tunisia reaffirms that the Security Council must continue to rally
around and support the Government and people of Iraq in their quest to seek justice
and accountability as soon as possible, rebuild the country and completely uproot all
remnants of terrorism. In so doing, the Council should respect the national priorities
and approaches of Iraq.

26/32

21-06347

S/2021/460

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
The United Kingdom welcomes Special Adviser Karim Khan’s report (see
S/2021/419)on the continued progress made in recent months by the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD). We commend UNITAD for its
continued flexibility in the face of challenges related to the coronavirus disease
pandemic and applaud the progress to complete initial case briefs on two core
investigative priorities. And we welcome the launch of the Interfaith Dialogue
Series; close engagement with religious communities is critical to achieving justice.
The international community must stand united in its resolve to hold Da’esh
to account and uphold justice. The United Kingdom has supported the Investigative
Team to fulfil its mandate, and we welcome the support of other countries to
UNITAD. This is why the United Kingdom provided assistance to UNITAD’s
investigations into crimes committed against the Kaka’i, Shabak and Shia Turkmen.
Indeed, we commend the Team’s work in this regard and note that it has tripled the
total number of incidents identified as relevant to these investigations, thanks to
close collaboration with civil society, academics and community leaders.
The United Kingdom also notes the continued collaboration among the Team,
the Iraqi judicial authorities and the Governments of Iraq and the Kurdistan Region
of Iraq. We welcome progress on draft legislation to provide the domestic legal
basis for the prosecution of members of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant for
international crimes in Iraq. But given the importance of seeing justice done, we urge
continued momentum and collaboration to secure an evidence-sharing mechanism
that provides assurances on the use of the death penalty.
Justice also means assisting the victims of Da’esh to rebuild their lives. The
work of the Team’s Witness Protection and Support Unit to provide psychosocial
support to witnesses, particularly women and child survivors, is crucial.
The United Kingdom has so far contributed nearly $2.8 million to the work
of the Investigative Team. We continue to engage in New York, London, Baghdad
and Erbil. Regular updates to the Security Council are key in allowing us to see
the progress the Team is making. The Team must seek to engage both with us at
the United Nations and with individual Member States that are providing staffing,
funding and support.
The United Kingdom will host an Arria Formula meeting this Wednesday
with the United States, Iraq, the Netherlands and the United Arab Emirates. We
look forward to hearing from the Special Adviser and expert briefers on how
innovation and technology help to advance investigations, support survivors and
deliver accountability.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to officially note the United
Kingdom’s thanks and appreciation for the work the Special Adviser has championed
over the last three years, in this, his last Council briefing.

21-0634727/32

S/2021/460

Annex XVI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Richard Mills
Let me start by thanking Ms. Murad for her compelling and powerful testimony
and for her insights into what steps need to be taken by the Security Council. Special
Adviser Khan, thank you for your extensive briefing on this difficult topic as well.
As the Special Representative takes on the position as the chief prosecutor at the
International Criminal Court, I would like to commend him and his team for setting
up the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes
Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) and for doing
so much excellent work since.
The “stock-taking section” of the Special Adviser’s report (see S/2021/419) is
both an impressive list of accomplishments and a clear set of signposts for our path
forward. In particular, I would like to especially applaud your efforts, Mr. Khan,
towards returning the remains of 103 Yazidis recovered from nine mass grave sites
in the village of Kojo. For their families, that return must have meant the world.
Your work with the Yazidi community, including making sure that commemorations
were dignified and accommodated Yazidi beliefs and practices, has helped these
communities heal and puts them closer to national reconciliation with other Iraqi
communities. And your legacy will be UNITAD’s continued efforts as it works to
accomplish these sensitive tasks.
That work must continue. And it must continue alongside investigative work
to hold the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams (ISIS) accountable for its brutality.
Specifically, UNITAD must continue to investigate the horrors perpetrated against
members of the Yazidi community in the Sinjar region and the events of June 2014
at the Tikrit Air Academy, where unarmed cadets and military personnel were killed
en masse. These investigations, as well as progress on similar cases involving other
ethnic and religious communities in Iraq, will deliver justice to the Iraqi people.
These investigations are critical for evidence-based trials. But we can never forget
the human toll they take. Exhumations are a deeply painful process. We commend
UNITAD and its partners for providing psychosocial support to staff, survivors and
family members.
Finally, UNITAD must especially make progress on the investigation into
the alleged development and use of chemical and biological weapons by ISIS. The
international community cannot abide the use of chemical weapons, and those who
use them cannot be allowed to do so with impunity.
With all of these investigative goals, success depends entirely on the
partnership between UNITAD and Iraqi national entities. We support UNITAD’s
expanded cooperation with the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government, including Iraqi law enforcement and judicial entities, survivor groups,
non-governmental organizations and religious authorities. This increased cooperation
will lead to more successful prosecutions of ISIS members in Iraq and abroad. And
these partnerships will help ensure positive outcomes for the Iraqi people and the
victims of these terrible crimes.
To push this effort to the next step, we urge Iraq to adopt legislation currently
being considered by the Council of Representatives that would provide a basis for the
Iraqi Government to prosecute atrocity crimes, including those committed by ISIS.
This law will be essential to finalizing an arrangement for UNITAD to share evidence
with competent Iraqi authorities in accordance with the terms of reference. And it
will be in line with the excellent law passed recently by the Iraqi Government — the
Female Yazidi Survivors Law — that recognizes the ISIS genocide against Yazidis
28/32

21-06347

S/2021/460

and other Iraqi communities and seeks to address the needs of the survivors of
these unspeakable atrocities. We look forward to supporting the Iraqi Government’s
implementation of this law.
Similarly, we also commend the Kurdistan Regional Government for
announcing its intention to establish a special criminal court in Erbil for ISIS
crimes. This announcement represents an important step in holding perpetrators of
crimes against Yazidis accountable. We will monitor this court’s implementation
very closely.
Finally, on the difficult question of foreign terrorist fighters, we urge
Member States to repatriate them, prosecute them as appropriate and rehabilitate
and reintegrate their associated family members. And we thank UNITAD for the
valuable support it has provided to Member States, including the United States, to
conduct such investigations and prosecutions.
Accountability is one of the most important pillars holding up our rulesbased order. We thank the Government of Iraq and UNITAD for their hard work and
continued cooperation to hold ISIS accountable for its atrocities.

21-0634729/32

S/2021/460

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
Let me begin by thanking Mr. Karim Khan for his comprehensive briefing
and the great job he has done as the Head of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD). We wish him great success in his new capacity at the
International Criminal Court. I also thank Ms. Nadia Murad for her statement. And
I welcome the participation of the Representative of Iraq to our meeting.
We welcome the sixth UNITAD report (see S/2021/419 ) on the progresses the
Investigative Team made in the past six months in the implementation of its mandate.
The finalization of initial case briefs in two of the Team’s core investigative priorities
is very commendable. The progress is all the more remarkable given the challenges
posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic. We look forward to the completion of
additional case briefs by the end of 2021, as anticipated in the sixth report and the
Special Adviser’s briefing today.
We are encouraged by the Team’s innovative approach and its results. The
application of advanced technologies and digital platforms has proven very efficient
in evidence-collecting activities by allowing witnesses and survivors, including
women, to submit information remotely. We also welcome the Team’s plan to launch
publications aimed at promoting good practices in this direction.
We commend UNITAD for its strengthened cooperation with the Iraqi
Government, which is indispensable to the fulfilment of its mandate. We encourage
the Team to continue its provision of training to relevant authorities to strengthen
domestic capacity for the future prosecution of members of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL).
In this regard, we also value the active engagement of the Iraqi authorities
and impacted communities, as reflected in the Team’s reports, in all aspects of
UNITAD’s mandate. The cooperation of local authorities with the Team regarding
ongoing domestic proceedings is the best example of trust in UNITAD and the
national efforts in holding ISIL accountable for their crimes.
We also note the arrangements in place between the Team and the Iraqi
judiciary that allow for the sharing of information in accordance with the Team’s
terms of reference. We hope that the two sides will continue their efforts to finalize
further arrangements in the upcoming period. At the same time, we continue to
emphasize the importance of protecting witnesses and survivors. We encourage the
Team and Iraqi authorities to apply all the procedures and measures, including the
use of technologies, to ensure that those people who cooperate with the Team can do
so in safety and security.
Finally, we value the support of Member States for UNITAD through the
provision of experts and financial contributions. It reflects the efforts and strong
determination of the international community to fight against terrorism and prevent
the resurrection of ISIL. We believe that the success of the Team is important for
peace and stability in the region beyond Iraq’s borders.

30/32

21-06347

S/2021/460

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
It is an honour to begin my statement on behalf of my country by expressing
our gratitude for the efforts of the main organs and offices of the United Nations,
through their resolutions, recommendations and decisions, and for all international
efforts to assist Iraq in combating terrorism and prosecuting terrorists. I would also
like to congratulate the People’s Republic of China on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May and wish His Excellency Zhang Jun,
Permanent Representative of the People’s Republic of China every success in this
undertaking. I thank Mr. Karim Khan and his team for their significant efforts
to implement his mandate in Iraq, especially amidst the challenges posed by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
In the aftermath of the military defeat of the terrorist organization Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in my country, Iraq, intensive efforts and greater
international cooperation will be required in order to remedy the devastation
wrought by ISIL terrorism and ensure that the perpetrators, supporters and sponsors
of terrorist acts are prosecuted through national and international legal mechanisms.
The ultimate aim is to ensure that those terrorist organizations do not re-emerge,
thereby preventing them from posing a threat to the international community. That
effort will, in turn, necessitate measures to coordinate and align the efforts of various
States and international organizations so as to achieve effective synergies. The legal
measures adopted by individual States to punish the perpetrators of terrorist crimes
will not suffice. States will also need support from the international community in
order to develop their legal, security and economic capacities, improve their political
situations, guarantee fundamental democratic freedoms and protect human rights, as
provided for in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
With regard to the legal framework of international cooperation, my
Government looks forward to the creation of an international legal system to monitor
the implementation of Security Council counter-terrorism resolutions in all their
aspects. Establishing such a system would demonstrate how serious States are
about fulfilling their international obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions. In that regard, my Government stresses that all States must uphold their
duties under international humanitarian law and international human rights law by
complying with Security Council counter-terrorism resolutions.
The long-standing position of Iraq on terrorism is reflected in the measures
it has taken to eradicate this perilous scourge. Domestically, my Government is
working to build the capacities of its counter-terrorism professionals and strengthen
the judicial system, in line with human rights principles and with the country’s
international obligations as provided for in the Iraqi Constitution. The Government
is also making legal preparations to use evidence received from the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) before national courts, thereby
enhancing their legal and judicial capabilities. The Council of Representatives
completed the first reading of a draft law on an Iraqi criminal tribunal to try the
crimes of ISIL that, when adopted, will ensure that evidence of crimes of genocide
and other crimes against humanity perpetrated by ISIL is put to proper use. In
connection with delivering justice to victims, Act No. 8 (2021) on Yazidi women
survivors provides victims with the necessary protection and care.

21-0634731/32

S/2021/460

We underscore that the next phase of the work of UNITAD is vital. After more
than three years of continuous work and concerted efforts by the Government of Iraq
and UNITAD to excavate mass grave sites, identify victim remains and return them
to their next of kin — and especially now that expanded training has been provided
to the competent Iraqi authorities in key areas such as the collection and analysis of
forensic evidence and witness protection — it is crucial for my Government to obtain
the results and evidence gathered by the Investigative Team in Iraq over that period.
Pursuant to paragraph 39 of the UNITAD terms of reference, the Investigative Team
is mandated to provide appropriate legal assistance and capacity-building to the
Government of Iraq in order to strengthen its courts and judicial system. Sharing
the results of the Team’s investigative work with Iraq is only fair and just, given that
the Iraqi people was the main victim of the crimes of the ISIL terrorist organization
in Iraq. Doing so will serve as an incentive to unearth additional evidence of other
crimes perpetrated by the terrorist organization against Iraqis and to proceed with
the necessary measures to preserve and store said evidence in Iraq, in accordance
with resolution 2379 (2017) and the terms of reference.
In that context, we would also like to emphasize that UNITAD should
operate with full respect for the sovereignty of Iraq and its jurisdiction over crimes
committed in its territory against its citizens. The Investigative Team must abide by
its mandate and the periods of time specified therein, which have been extended with
the approval and at the request of my Government. Justice must be achieved, and
achieved promptly, by ensuring that the victims receive redress, terrorists are held
accountable and evidence is not destroyed or erased by the passage of time. Justice
thus realized would enable victims to recover and reintegrate into society.
In conclusion, allow me to express our thanks and appreciation to you and
the other Council members and all friendly countries that have supported my
country in its struggle against terrorism. We must continue to work together to bring
perpetrators before the national judiciary. I once again thank Mr. Khan and his team
for everything they have done during his time as Head of the Investigative Team over
the past few years, exchanging experiences and urging States to provide support;
preparing and rehabilitating national staff; and drawing attention to the magnitude
of the violations inflicted upon the Iraqi people at the hands of ISIL terrorists. We
wish him every success in his future endeavours.

32/32

21-06347
