84

General AHemhly-Sixth Se88ion

2. Urges the Member States which have not yet
done so to reply as soon as possible to the questions put
by the General Assembly in paragraph 4 of resolution
375 (IV);
3. Requests the Secretary-General to publish the
comments and suggestions which will be furnished by
Member States, for such use as the General Assembly
may find desirable at any later stage.
352nd plenary meeting,
7 December 1951.
597 (VI). Comideration of the methods and pro•
eedurea of the General A88emhly for dealing
with legal and drafting questions
The General Assembly,
Considering that various ideas were expressed during
the debate on the methods and procedures for dealing
with legal and drafting questions, and in the draft
resolutions and amendments submitted to the Sixth
Committee concerning the scope of the problems, the
methods for their solution and the nature of these
methods, all of which testify to the complexity of the
problems raised,
Believing that in the circumstances further study of
all the problems involved is necessary,
1. Establishes a special committee of fifteen members consisting of one representative of each of the
following Member States: Belgium, Canada, Chile,
Czechoslovakia, Egypt, El Salvador, France, Indonesia,
Iran, Jsrael, Sweden, the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and
Venezuela, to meet at the Headquarters of the United
Nations;
2. Requests the Special Committee to consider the
documents, draft resolutions and amendments submitted to the Sixth Committee, as well as the records
of its debates, to study the question further and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventh
session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to carry out appropriate studies, to collaborate closely with the Special
Committee and to submit to it, as he may consider appropriate, proposals for the handling of the problems
tlealt with in the present resolution.
356th plenary meeting,
20 December 1951.
598 (VI). Reservations to multilateral conven•
tions
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the provisions of 1ts resolution 478
(V) of 16 November 1950, which (1) requested the
In!e:national <;ourt of J i:stice to give an advisory
opinion regarding reservations to the Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide ahd (2) invited the International Law Commission to study the question of reservations to multilateral conventions,

Noting the Court's advisory opinion 2 ot 28 May 1951
and the Commission's report, 8 both rendered pursuant
to the said resolution,
1. Recommends that organs of the United Nations,
specialized agencies and States should, in the course of
preparing multilateral conventions, consider the insertion therein of provisions relating to the admissibility
or non-admissibility of reservations and to the effect
to be attributed to them;
2. Recommends to all States that they be guided in
regard to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide by the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice of 28 May 1951;
3. Requests the tiecretazy-General:
(a) In relation to reservations to the Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, to conform his practice to the advisory opinion
of the Court of 28 May 1951;
( b) In respect of future conventions concluded
under the auspices of the United Nations of which he
is the depositary:
(i) To continue to act as depositary in connexion with the deposit of documents containing reservations or objections, without passing upon the legal effect of such documents; and
(ii) To communicate the text of such documents
relating to reservations or objections to all
States concerned, leaving it to each State t0
draw legal consequences from such commtmications.
360th plenary meeting,
12 January 1952.
599 (VI). Question of defining aggreHion
The General Assembly,
Considering that, under resolution 378 B (V) of 17
November 1950, it referred the question of defining
aggressibn, raised in the draft resolution' of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics to the International Law
Commission for examination in conjunction with matters which were under consideration by that Commission,
Considering that the Internationai Law Commission
did not in its report 15 furnish an express definition of
aggression but merely included aggression among the
offences defined in its draft Code of Offences against
the Peace and Secudty of Mankind,
Considering that the General Assembly, on 13 November 1951, decided6 not to examine the draft Code
at its sixth session but to include it in the provisional
agenda of its seventh se~sion,
Considering that, although the existence of the crime
of aggression may be inferred from the circumstances
peculiar to each particular case, it is nevertheless pos• See document A/1874.
• See Official Records of the Gene,-al Assembly, Sixth Session,
S-,plement No. 9.
• [bid., Fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 72, document
A/C.1/608.
'Ibid., Sixth Session, Supplement No. 9.
• Ibid., Plenary Meetings, 342nd meeting, para. 42.

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Sixth Committee
sible and desirable, with a view to ensuring international peace and security and to developing international criminal law, to define aggression by reference
to the elements which constitute it,
Considerin(l further that it would be of definite advantage if directives were formulated for the future
guidance of such international bodies as may be called
upon to determine the aggressor,
1. Decides to include in the agenda of its seventh
session the question of defining aggression;
2. Instructs the Secretary-General to submit to· the
General Assembly at its seventh session a report in
which the question of defining aggression shall be thoroughly discussed in the light of the views expressed
in the Sixth Committee at the sixth session of the General Assembly and which shall duly take into account
the draft resolutions and amendments submitted concerning this question;
3. Requests States Members, when transmitting
their observations on the draft Code to the SecretaryGeneral, to give in particular their views on the problem of defining aggression.
368th plenary meeting,
31 January 1952.
600 (VI). Review of the Statute of the
International Law CommiHion
The General Assembly,
Referring to its resolution 484 (V) of 12 December
1950 in which it asked the International Law Commission for "recommendations. . .concerning revisions of
the Statute which may appear desirable, in the light of
experience, for the promotion of the Commission's
work",
Considering that, according to the report covering
the work of its third session, the said Commission, in
pursuance of the General Assembly's resolution, recommended7 that, at the time of the next election of its
members, the Commission should be placed on a fulltime basis,
1. Notes tj,e observations and recommendations
contained in chapter V of the report of the International Law Commission;
2. Expresses appreciation for the work done by the
Commission pursuant to the terms of its Statute;
. 3.. Decides, for the tir.n~ being, not to take any action m respect of the rev1s10n of the said Statute until
it has acquired further experience of the functioning
of the Commission.
368th plenary meeting,
31 January 1952.
601 (VI). Report of the International Law Commission covering the work of its third session
( chapters VI, VII and VIII)
The General Assembly,
Pending its consideration of the questions dealt with
in chapters VI, VII and VIII of the reports of the In'Ibid., Supplement No. 9, para. 67.

85

ternational Law Commission covering the work of its
third session,
·
Notes the progress of the Commission's work on
those questions.
368th plenary mettfflg,
31 Janurwy 1952.

602 (VI), Ways and means for making the evidence of customary international law more
readily available
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 9 of the Secretary-General on ways and means for making the evidence of
customary international law more readily available.
1. Notes with satisfaction that a repertoire relating
to the interpretation of the Charter is already under
way;

2. Instructs the Secretary-General to continue his
studies relating to the best methods for securing for the
United Nations the required national legislative material;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its seventh session a report containing detailed plans as to the form, contents and
budgetary implications in regard to the possible publication of:
(a) A United Nations juridical yearbook, taking
into account the suggestions made during the debates
in the Sixth Committee ;
( b) A consolidated index to the League of Nations
Treaty Series;
~ c) A list of treaty collections supplementary to
those already existing;

( d) A volume containing a repertoire of the practice of the Security Council.
369th plenary meeting,
1 February 1952.

603 (VI). Designation of non-member States to
which a certified copy of the Revised General
Act for the Pacific Settlement of International
Disputes shall be communicated by the Secretary-General for the purpose of acceuion
to this Act
The General Assembly,
Considering that only three Members of the United
Nations have become parties to the Revised General
Act for the Pacific Settlement of International Dis• Ibid., Supplement No. 9.
"Ibid., Sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 53, document

A/1934.
