United Nations

S/PV.4394

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4394th meeting
Monday, 22 October 2001, 12 noon
New York

President:

Mr. Ryan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ireland)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ahsan
Mr. Chen Xu
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Miss Durrant
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Koonjul
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Granovsky
Ms. Lee
Mr. Tekaya
Mr. Kuchinsky
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
General issues relating to sanctions.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-59273 (E)

*0159273*

S/PV.4394

The meeting was called to order at 12.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
General issues relating to sanctions
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Germany and Sweden, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kastrup
(Germany) and Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden) took a seat
at the Council table.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
Permanent Observer of Switzerland, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, if I hear no objection,
I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to extend
an invitation to the Permanent Observer of Switzerland
to the United Nations to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr.Staehelin
(Switzerland) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Assistant-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security

2

Council is meeting in accordance with
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

the

The Council will hear briefings from the
Permanent Observer of Switzerland and the Permanent
Representatives of Germany and Sweden.
I would wish to remind Council members of the
understanding reached in our prior consultations that
the format of this morning’s meeting is not intended to
set any general precedent.
As there is no list of speakers for this meeting, I
would invite Council members who wish to speak or to
ask questions to so indicate to the Secretariat as from
now.
In accordance with the decision taken earlier in
the meeting, I give the floor to the Permanent Observer
of Switzerland to the United Nations.
Mr.
Staehelin
(Permanent
Observer
of
Switzerland): First, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the Council presidency and I wish
to thank you for convening today’s meeting and giving
me the floor.
Over the past decade, sanctions have become an
important tool in the hands of the United Nations
Security Council and the number of sanctions regimes
has increased significantly. Switzerland, as a nonMember State of the United Nations, applies United
Nations sanctions on an autonomous basis. It thus
underlines its commitment to the promotion of
international peace and security and its solidarity with
the international community.
My Government shares the concern that sanctions
should be made more effective while minimizing the
negative humanitarian impact on civilian populations,
as well as the adverse economic effects on third States,
that comprehensive sanctions regimes have. The
concept of targeted sanctions addresses this concern.
They are designed to focus on the individuals and
groups responsible for the policies condemned by the
international community, while ideally leaving other
parts of the population and international trade relations
unaffected.
In this context, targeted financial sanctions are
one of the issues that have received particular attention.
As a major financial centre, Switzerland has significant
expertise
and
know-how
regarding
financial
transactions. In cooperation with the United Nations

S/PV.4394

Secretariat, my Government organized a series of
international expert meetings in Interlaken and New
York to examine in an informal and technical setting
the feasibility of targeted financial sanctions. This socalled Interlaken Process provided a forum for dialogue
among representatives from national Governments and
regional bodies, central bank authorities, the United
Nations Secretariat, the private banking sector and
academia. I wish to thank all those States and
individual experts who participated actively in this
process. Let me also express my thanks to the
Secretary-General, who has encouraged this process,
and to the members of the Secretariat, for both their
participation and valuable support.
The Interlaken process focused on the practical
and technical aspects involved in designing effective
financial sanctions and ensuring their successful
implementation. The key results so far have been as
follows:
First, a better understanding of the specific
technical requirements of targeted financial sanctions
and the preconditions necessary for them to be
effective.
Secondly, language modules and definitions that
can serve as building blocks for future Security
Council resolutions. Such standardized language
elements would enhance a more uniform drafting and
implementation of resolutions in this area, as well as
unambiguous interpretation.
Thirdly, the identification of the basic legal and
administrative
requirements
for
national
implementation of financial sanctions. This includes
the development of elements for a national legal
framework.
Finally, discussions also addressed the need for
the United Nations to develop greater capabilities for
administering and monitoring financial sanctions,
including the provision of guidance and technical
assistance to help States implement sanctions on a
consistent basis.
With the aim of further developing and
operationalizing the substantive work accomplished in
the Interlaken process, the Swiss Government
mandated a university institute, the Watson Institute for
International Studies at Brown University, to undertake
additional research. The outcome, which we are
presenting to the Security Council today, and which

will be distributed to all Missions, is a handbook that
reflects the results of the Interlaken process and the
valuable contributions made by the participants. We
hope it will prove useful to those responsible for
drafting future resolutions imposing targeted financial
sanctions and for implementing them here and in
capitals.
Let me add that, of course, one of the essential
preconditions to making targeted financial sanctions
more effective is to be able to define the target clearly.
And that also implies the effective identification of the
actual economic beneficiary of assets. This is a key
element also for the fight against money laundering
and for tracking and blocking more effectively
financial flows used for terrorist acts, as demanded by
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).
Switzerland, which has strict procedures for
identifying not only bank customers, but also the actual
economic beneficiaries of funds, has recently made
concrete proposals in this regard in the Financial
Action Task Force Against Money Laundering, a body
established by the G-7. These proposals would leader
to higher international standards by improving the
effectiveness of know-your-customer rules.
(spoke in French)
Targeted financial sanctions are likely to be most
effective when they are considered as part of a broader
coordinated political and diplomatic strategy. Strategic
choices regarding the types of sanctions to be imposed
and their modalities depend on a thorough analysis of
the vulnerabilities of the targeted country or actors, as
well as on the political will necessary to enforce such
measures and assess their effects.
Targeted sanctions focusing on financial
measures are not sufficient alone to force Governments
or other actors to alter their behaviour and comply with
their obligations, but they represent an important tool
that can be used in combination with other measures.
In this respect, we were glad to see the German
Government continue these reflections with the BonnBerlin process, which explored other forms of targeted
sanctions, and we welcome of the Swedish
Government’s intention to cover new sanctions issues.
In conclusion, the Interlaken process has shown
that the conceptual, technical and practical elements
required to make targeted financial sanctions effective
are available. It is now primarily a matter of mustering

3

S/PV.4394

the necessary political will at the international and
national levels to translate this into reality.
Mr. Kastrup (Germany): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting. Like the previous speaker, the
Permanent Observer of Switzerland, I am grateful for
the opportunity to present the results of the so-called
Bonn-Berlin process.
Today’s session is another proof of the high
importance attached to the question of sanctions by the
Security Council. I am sure that we all share the same
goals in this respect: minimizing the unintended effects
of sanctions on the civilian population of the targeted
country and on third countries. The results of both the
Interlaken and the Bonn-Berlin processes are designed
to help achieving these goals by introducing targeted or
smart sanctions — in our case with respect to arms
embargoes and travel bans.
Let me briefly recall the history. In 1998,
Germany declared its preparedness, in close
coordination with the United Nations Secretariat, to
continue the process initiated successfully by
Switzerland. Building on the experience gained by our
Swiss colleagues on financial sanctions, we decided to
involve civil society from the outset. Thus, we asked
the Bonn International Center for Conversion, an
independent organization with considerable expertise
in the field of sanctions, to organize a series of
conferences, seminars and workshops on the issues of
arms embargoes and travel bans. The participants were
diplomats and United Nations personnel, as well as
experts
from
academia,
non-governmental
organizations and the private sector. In hindsight, this
proved to be the right mix to tackle a difficult task,
namely, to support the sanctions makers in the Security
Council with model drafting language for resolutions
and checklists for their better implementation.
The two types of sanctions — arms embargoes
and travel restrictions — were obviously not selected at
random. Rather, they were identified because they help
to focus the unavoidable coercive element of any
sanctions regime on those most responsible for a threat
to peace and security. Dealing with both issues at the
same time seemed sufficiently concrete and politically
desirable.
I would like to submit today a handbook
containing the practical results of the Bonn-Berlin
process. It will be sent to all United Nations Member
States and sets out model Security Council resolutions

4

on arms embargoes and travel-related sanctions,
accompanied by an extensive commentary. It also
reflects,
in
two
other
documents,
national
implementation of those types of sanctions. Finally, a
last report makes suggestions for the monitoring and
enforcement of arms embargoes.
Let me stress here that the Bonn-Berlin process
and the handbook before the Council were construed
not as representing the official view of the German
federal Government, but rather as the result of the
careful deliberations and discussions of various experts
from different backgrounds. At the same time,
however, my Government widely agrees with the
outcome of the process. We are convinced that the
documentation before the Council can be very helpful
in conceiving efficient sanctions regimes and in
minimizing unintended negative impacts on civilian
populations and third States.
The primary aim of the United Nations is to
maintain peace and security in the world. In order to
maintain this goal, the Charter, in its Chapter VII,
mandates the Security Council to impose certain
coercive measures. The experience of recent years and
months has shown that sanctions are and will remain an
important tool of the Council in this context. All
Member States are aware of the fact that imposing
sanctions is a difficult step to take. All Council
members, elected or non-elected, carry heavy
responsibility in this regard. When the Council
members decide to apply sanctions, they speak on
behalf of the whole membership of the United Nations.
Generally speaking, sanctions should not be a
punishment; rather, they should lead to compliance
with the United Nations Charter. Amongst the States
Members of the United Nations, there is consensus that
a sanctions regime should neither hit the innocent
civilian population nor affect non-target nations. It
should focus on those responsible for the threat to
international peace and security. Through sanctions,
these people should become aware that the community
of nations does not tolerate behaviour hostile to
international peace and security, acting across borders
or at home. In order to achieve this aim, thorough
deliberations and careful drafting of resolutions are of
the utmost importance.
I hope that members of the Council will agree
that, in the past, not every sanctions regime has been
successful in this regard. The only measure for success

S/PV.4394

is a halt to unacceptable behaviour. Some sanctions
have not led to compliance with the United Nations
Charter; others have had disproportionately negative
side effects on civilian populations and/or on third
States and, in the worst cases, a combination of both.
Even the most equilibrated and fine-tuned sanctions
still depend on a prognosis of the aggressor’s
behaviour. If a tool proves ineffective, it should be our
obligation to reconsider and re-evaluate whether a
change would serve better. A flexible response to
continued outrageous misbehaviour is a sign not of
resignation, but of a smarter use of the legal tools.
My country is of the opinion that only targeted
sanctions can achieve their goals. “Targeted” means
concentrated on crucial issues, such as finances or
arms, and focused on a specific group; it also means
regular reconsideration of the sanctions regime and its
consequences.
The model resolutions included in the handbook
that is before members should be regarded as a
valuable point of reference that merits close
consideration by the Council. We would hope that
those texts will help Council members to draft or redraft targeted sanctions to improve their efficiency.
I cannot conclude without mentioning that even
the most precise sanctions resolutions can fail if some
Member States lack the political will to implement
them. The recommendations set out in our
documentation are aimed at achieving a better level of
national implementation. But it remains a question of
commitment and willingness on the part of every single
Member State to lead coercive measures to success: to
compliance with the United Nations Charter by the
State concerned.
Let me express my thanks to the Secretariat for
its helpful role and its active participation. I would like
also to thank the numerous Members of the United
Nations that have participated in the process and
enriched it.
Finally, let me thank you again, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to share the results of the Bonn-Berlin
process with the Security Council.
The President: I now have the pleasure of giving
the floor to the State Secretary for Foreign Affairs of
Sweden, Mr. Hans Dahlgren.

the challenges that are on the minds of all of us these
days. The search for effective tools in addressing
threats to international peace and security is more
urgent and more important than ever before. It can
therefore only be right now to focus on the search for
improved ways and means to deal with, and to contain,
the sources of aggression and conflict.
Sanctions represent an important part of the
Security Council’s set of instruments for carrying out
its responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. If sanctions can be improved and be
made more effective, it will also strengthen the
authority of the Council. It will make it easier for this
body not only to say what is right, but also to do what
is right.
The aim of sanctions, traditionally, has been to
maximize their effects on the will, the capacity and the
behaviour of decision makers — to the extent that they
will change their behaviour — while minimizing the
damage to others, such as innocent civilians. That is
the theory. In practice, the story is often different.
We have seen how Council decisions, even those
with a substantial economic impact on the target, have
led to little or no change in behaviour. We have seen
too many sanctions being violated or circumvented. We
have seen numerous side-effects, whereby vulnerable
groups have been the hardest hit.
It is no wonder that there is a sense of frustration
here. I felt that frustration myself some years ago as
Chairperson of the sanctions Committee on Sierra
Leone. I remember standing there on the border
between that country and Guinea and seeing how easy
it was to break the oil embargo just by taking another
road through the jungle.
So one question has been whether one can make
these sanctions more effective and at the same time
more humane. And that question has in turn triggered
the search for smart sanctions. That search has been
taken a good bit further through the excellent
initiatives of the Governments of Switzerland and of
Germany.
What
Ambassador
Staehelin
and
Ambassador Kastrup have just reported are, to our
mind, important contributions to the improvement of
financial sanctions, travel restrictions and arms
embargoes. That goes both for the theory behind them
and for their practical applications.

Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): This Security Council
meeting on the use of sanctions is of direct relevance to

5

S/PV.4394

Yet we have also learned through the activities in
Interlaken, in Bonn and in Berlin that much more can
be done to develop the concept and the practice of
smart sanctions. And I am pleased to announce that the
Government of Sweden is now ready to continue the
important work already done by Switzerland and
Germany. Through what we will call the Stockholm
process, we will invite a broad range of Government
representatives,
non-governmental
organizations,
regional organizations, academics and, of course,
United Nations actors to participate in the endeavour.
This is a project that will be carried out for a period of
one year, with a concluding seminar next autumn.
One particular focus of that process will be on the
implementation and monitoring of targeted sanctions,
and on suggesting improvements, building on what has
already been done in the processes so far. That includes
the issue of how to achieve the more coherent and
effective enactment of Security Council resolutions
into national legislation. It includes how the United
Nations and its Member States can better ensure truly
effective monitoring of compliance and enforcement:
there is much lacking there still. We will also look at
how Member States can best be assisted in
implementing sanctions regimes, and at what technical
and financial support might be called for.
Another theme will be more conceptual. If it were
possible to find a clearer understanding within the
international community of both the scope and the
limitations of sanctions, then it might also be easier in
practice to pursue a more effective sanctions policy.
We shall look at how that might be done.
My Government looks forward to an active
interchange with other Member States and with other
actors in this process. We hope that it can help us all to
move on in the pursuit of making sanctions a more
effective tool for the Security Council to use. It is to
you, Mr. President, and to your 14 colleagues that we
all look to make use of these tools, especially in the
light of new and emerging threats. There is no better
illustration of how well that can be done than the
Council’s historic decision to adopt, by consensus,
resolution 1373 (2001).
The President: Before inviting members of the
Council to put questions or make observations, I shall
now give the floor to the Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Ibrahima Fall, to give a
briefing.

6

Mr. Fall: Mandatory measures imposed under
Article 41 in Chapter VII of the Charter are today,
more than ever, an important tool available to the
Security Council in seeking to maintain or restore
international peace and security. However, concerns
have been expressed over the negative effects that
comprehensive sanctions regimes can have on civilian
populations and on neighbouring and other affected
States. Difficulties in implementing Article 50 of the
Charter have also reinforced the need to consider
possible improvement of the sanctions instrument. In
his reports to the General Assembly on the work of the
Organization and in his report on Africa, the SecretaryGeneral has underlined the need for a mechanism that
renders sanctions a less blunt and a more effective
instrument. Efforts towards developing the concept of
smart sanctions, which seek to pressure regimes rather
than peoples and thus reduce humanitarian costs, are
therefore to be welcomed. Sanctions need continued
refining to strengthen their effectiveness and to ease
any possible negative impact, thus consolidating
support by the international community.
Member States, intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and academic experts, with
substantive support from the Secretariat, have been
making efforts to contribute to attaining that objective.
It should be noted that the recent sanctions measures
imposed by the Security Council have been targeted.
The series of Interlaken expert seminars hosted
by Switzerland in 1998 and 1999, with substantive
support from the Secretariat, on targeting Security
Council financial sanctions explored the basis for
cooperation among Member States, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations and experts in the
field, as well as the design and application of targeted
Security Council financial sanctions against decisionmaking elites. After having heard what the
representative of Switzerland has just said, it is not
necessary to come back to the outcome of the
Interlaken expert seminar, except to note that the
monitoring mechanism concerning the sanctions
against UNITA is currently attempting to put some of
the Interlaken recommendations into practice by
tracing the financial transactions of UNITA. I am also
hopeful that the knowledge gained at Interlaken can be
successfully tapped and put to use within the context of
the recently established Security Council Committee on
Counter-Terrorism.

S/PV.4394

The Bonn-Berlin process, which took place from
1999 to 2000, reviewed the successes and shortcomings
of arms embargoes and travel bans. Here also, I will
shorten my statement, after what the representative of
Germany has just said about the results of the BonnBerlin process. Many of the suggestions made there
and discussed in the Security Council Working Group
on General Issues on Sanctions have subsequently
contributed to the improvement of sanctions
resolutions.
Work, such as that which took place in Interlaken
and Berlin, should continue on smart sanctions, and I
would particularly like to welcome the fact that
Sweden will be taking on this role of building on the
previous work, this time in the context of expert
seminars on, among other things, the monitoring and
implementation of Security Council sanctions. Here
also, I do not need to elaborate further after what the
representative of Sweden had to say.
If sanctions are to continue to be a useful tool at
the Security Council’s disposal in the maintenance of
international peace and security, a constructive
dialogue on their implementation and monitoring must
take place. Pragmatic solutions must be found to the
difficulties of monitoring sanctions. This task is the
primary responsibility of Member States, but many of
them lack the capacity to monitor their implementation
and require assistance in carrying out this
responsibility. Such assistance could be provided to
interested Member States by a duly augmented
sanctions secretariat and by competent regional
organizations. The Security Council can encourage
State compliance by continuing to devote greater
attention to mitigating the negative effects of sanctions
measures on civilian populations and third States.
Providing support and inducements for neighbouring
States could also greatly enhance the potential
effectiveness of sanctions.
The Security Council might also consider taking
steps to assist, upon request, Member States in
developing greater legal authority and administrative
capacity for implementing Council sanctions. Indeed,
many Member States do not have the necessary legal
and institutional capacity for implementing these
measures. To assist them, the United Nations could
develop examples of model legislation, as was done
during the Interlaken process, that could enable
interested Member States to make the necessary

adjustments in their domestic laws and regulations to
permit compliance with United Nations sanctions.
The Security Council has addressed this issue of
constructive dialogue and effective support through the
establishment of expert panels and mechanisms, and
some sanctions committees are looking into improving
cooperation
with
regional
and
international
organizations involved in the implementation of
Security Council sanctions. A number of Member
States advocate the establishment of a permanent
sanctions monitoring mechanism to ensure better
targeting and implementation of smart sanctions and to
bring information on non-cooperation and noncompliance to the Council’s attention. This framework
might allow more systematic follow-up for those who
violate sanctions or who do not cooperate with
sanctions committees, as well as provide a point of
contact between the Security Council and other
international and regional organizations dealing with
sanctions, such as the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) and Interpol.
What is needed most is better coordination
between all parties involved in the implementation of
sanctions regimes. Sanctions committees have recently
been establishing strong cooperation with international
and regional organizations such as ICAO and Interpol,
that are involved in the implementation of Council
sanctions regimes. The Chairmen of the Angola,
Liberia and Sierra Leone sanctions committees are also
discussing ways of increasing cooperation among their
committees with a view to holding a joint meeting.
The Security Council might also make more
frequent use of humanitarian assessments before the
imposition of sanctions, and continue to monitor the
humanitarian impact once sanctions have been
imposed, as has recently been the case with
Afghanistan and Liberia.
The use of mandatory sanctions is, as pointed out
by the Secretary-General, “a valuable tool available to
the Security Council, permitting the United Nations to
bring pressure to bear without recourse to the use of
force”. The Secretary-General has also stressed the
importance of continuing “efforts to integrate smarter,
more targeted sanctions into an overall preventive
strategy”. Targeted sanctions can have important
deterrent and preventative roles, and I urge members to
consider the use of sanctions in this context in the
future. Security Council sanctions can also be seen as a

7

S/PV.4394

calculated response by the international community to
emerging breaches of international law.
By way of conclusion, I feel it would be remiss of
me not to reiterate that an enhanced substantive support
to the various sanctions committees, and a more
effective administration of sanctions regimes by the
Secretariat, would require the commitment of adequate
resources. Within the modest resources available, the
Secretariat is doing its utmost to support the work of
the sanctions committees. Developing more effective
Security Council sanctions policies, however, will
require specialized expertise and analytical capacity of
staff supporting those Committees.
Such technical expertise and enhanced analytical
capacity would enable the Secretariat to manage a
credible monitoring system in cooperation with
Member States and regional organizations and to assess
the effectiveness of the sanctions measures. Technical
expertise is urgently needed in the Secretariat in such
areas as military technology, illegal arms trafficking,
illicit
diamonds,
customs
regulations
and
investigations, and international finance and asset
management. Greater availability of legal expertise is
also needed. In short, making sanctions smarter will
not be enough. We must also provide the necessary
means, and the will, for them to succeed.
The President: I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Fall for his briefing.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Today’s
debate is extremely important. I would first like to
thank Ambassadors Jenö Staehelin and Dieter Kastrup
for their statements. I also congratulate them on the
quality, detail and thoroughness of the results achieved
in the Interlaken and Bonn-Berlin processes. The way
in which they were carried out was remarkable and
exemplary on several counts. We would like, through
State Secretary Hans Dahlgren, to thank Sweden for its
readiness to continue this work.
In the first place, this approach was remarkable
because it was grounded in a willingness to cooperate
and undertake a constructive exchange between
members and non-members of the Security Council, on
the one hand, and the United Nations and civil society,
on the other. In fact, the booklet before us owes a great
deal to the enlightened contribution of academics,
researchers, private sector professionals, nongovernmental organizations and research institutes. We
warmly thank all of them.

8

The processes took place in an exemplary way
within the context of a targeted approach to sanctions.
It should be recalled that sanctions are meaningless
unless they are part of a comprehensive political
strategy. We must never lose sight of their objectives.
The better they are targeted, the greater the pressure
exerted where needed, all the while reducing the risk of
negative and undesired effects on innocent civilian
populations and third States. The best possible
implementation will ensure the maximum effect. When
we are all committed to an unprecedented effort to
combat terrorism, in a struggle that has, in particular,
taken the form of economic sanctions against Osama
bin Laden and his associates, no one can doubt that the
results of the Interlaken process will make a valuable
and immediately useful contribution. Moreover, what
can be said of arms embargoes if not that their effective
implementation is a matter of urgency, for if they were
truly effective they would make it possible to end wars
because of a lack of arms supplies.
The booklet that has just been submitted to us is
of excellent quality and has come at the right time.
Allow me to take this opportunity to focus on two
specific points that have emerged from the conclusions
submitted to us — conclusions that, as the Council is
aware, are of particular importance to the French
delegation.
First, the Security Council must conclude its
normative work on sanctions and adopt the conclusions
of the Working Group on General Issues on Sanctions
as quickly as possible. That group has done excellent
work under the chairmanship of Ambassador
Chowdhury of Bangladesh. We have every confidence
in the ability of Ambassador Richard Ryan to lead our
work to success under his presidency.
In addition, it seems to us that, as our friend
Ibrahima Fall has just emphasized, the time has come
to set up, under the authority and control of the
Security Council and its sanctions committees, a
unified, permanent instrument to monitor sanctions and
the traffic in raw materials in armed conflicts.
We need a unified instrument. Two years of
experience with the various ad hoc panels of experts
created by the Council to monitor sanctions against
UNITA, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Afghanistan, or to
inquire into the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
have demonstrated that the problems and the kinds of

S/PV.4394

traffic are the same from one regional crisis to the next.
The networks and those responsible for violating
sanctions and illicit trafficking are frequently the same,
and in each case the same causes produce the same
effects.
For example, the trafficker Victor Bout appears in
every report. The panels of experts have worked in the
same countries, with the same institutions, and have
asked the same sorts of questions. Some experts have
even had to modify their itineraries in order to avoid
arriving at the same time, or just after, their colleagues
from another panel. The membership of the various
panels has been remarkably similar for a very simple
reason: the Council and its sanctions committees
always need the same kind of expertise which is
lacking in the Secretariat. It is also the same expertise
that we need to monitor sanctions and to control and
investigate the role in armed conflicts of illicit
trafficking in raw materials. This is why we
systematically find in one committee after another an
expert on diamonds, an expert on arms trafficking and
yet another expert on financial networks.
The mechanism that we propose would be an
instrument available to both the Council and the
sanctions committees under its authority. It would be
entrusted with specific tasks and called on by the
Council to draft separate reports on the various
questions being examined. It would be a matter not of
mixing everything up, but, on the contrary, of gaining
the full benefit of the synergies that exist between the
different subjects and crises, which, although not the
same, are linked and interconnected, particularly on the
African continent.
A considerable amount of frequently overlapping
data has been compiled by the various panels. It is time
to use them and deal with them in a more cohesive
way. In short, it is time for the Council to be more
systematic and to set up an instrument that would avoid
any duplication of panels with similar competencies.
We would waste less energy, time and money.
The second reason for setting up this new
instrument is that we also need a permanent monitoring
instrument. Particularly with regard to the sanctions
against UNITA, experience has shown that it is
imperative to ensure continuity of monitoring for as
long as sanctions are in place. Otherwise, a disastrous
political signal would be sent. That was our experience

last week in our debate on UNITA and the requests
made by the Government of Angola.
Sanctions must, of course, be limited in duration,
but they should be effectively implemented for as long
as they are in place. To accomplish that, their
implementation must be the subject of both monitoring
and assistance. In that regard, creating a permanent and
unified monitoring instrument would, as Mr. Fall
emphasized, make it possible to establish long-term
working relations with regional and technical
organizations, such as the Organization of African
Unity, the Economic Community of West African
States, the Southern African Development Community,
Interpol, the World Customs Organization and the
International Civil Aviation Organization, whose
cooperation is indispensable in order to ensure respect
for sanctions.
France took note last week, in the course of our
consultations on the extension of the Monitoring
Mechanism on Sanctions against UNITA, of the
interest of the membership of the Council in our ideas
and of the readiness of all to engage in a serious
discussion, with a view to reaching consensus as
speedily as possible on the issue. In this spirit, my
delegation intends to submit an updated proposal and
to call for discussions at the expert level, with a view
to reaching a unanimous decision of the Council. We
believe that a consensus-based approach is
indispensable in dealing with this important issue.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): We are very grateful
to you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting of the Security Council on a question to which
we attach the utmost importance. We would like also to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Ibrahima Fall for his
very informative briefing.
We are glad that the topic of general issues of
sanctions is now being considered in an open format
and is no longer relegated to the place it had occupied
in the last several months — as a footnote to the
Council’s monthly schedule of work. We hope that
from now on the Council will be resuming its
involvement in this important issue.
I should like to thank the representatives of
Germany, Sweden and Switzerland for their initiative
in calling for this discussion and for the introduction of
the “end results” booklets of the Bonn-Berlin and
Interlaken processes in such a lucid and user-friendly
form. I hope that the reports of the Security Council

9

S/PV.4394

will one day become as analytical and useful as the
booklets that were circulated today. These very
important initiatives have become a significant part of
a general process that has brought about visible
improvements in Security Council policy in the area of
sanctions in recent years.
I hope that the Council will carefully consider the
results of the Interlaken and Bonn-Berlin processes and
apply them in its work. I said, “I hope”, Mr. President,
because the Council’s record in this area is less than
perfect. I cannot but express my deep regret at the
prolonged foot-dragging in the consideration of the
draft outcome of the Working Group on sanctions,
which, among other things, contains specific references
to the Interlaken and Bonn-Berlin processes.
Whatever our individual and national attitudes
towards the results achieved by the Group, we cannot
simply disregard its work and the draft outcome
presented by the Chairman. We realize that it is
practically impossible to achieve full consensus on all
issues related to the question of sanctions, and
compromises had to be worked out among delegations.
I believe that the results we have achieved thus far are
the best we can do under the circumstances. Sooner or
later, we should make our final decision on the report,
and I think that it is high time for the Council to do so.

I cannot say that my delegation is entirely happy
with the provisions of the draft recommendations.
Many of our proposals, unfortunately, were not
reflected in the paper. The same can be said about
many other delegations.
While we realize that we cannot get everything
we want, at the same time, we consider that it would be
inappropriate and counterproductive to throw away
what has been achieved during all these months of
negotiations.
Finally, I think that we cannot seriously consider
sanctions-related issues without reviewing ways to
strengthen the capacity of the United Nations in this
area. The establishment within the United Nations of
an office or unit to monitor targeted sanctions as well
as the illicit exploitation and trafficking of high-value
commodities in armed conflict should be considered an
important part not only of the sanctions policy as such,
but also of the Council’s conflict-prevention strategy in
general.
The President: I still have a large number of
speakers on my list. With the concurrence of members
of the Council, I shall suspend the meeting now. The
Council will, of course, need to resume discussion of
this item at a later date.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

10
