TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 18 APRIL 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 414) . . . , . . . . . . , . , . , . , . . . , . , . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .
Admission of new Members:
Letter dated 12 March 1968 from the Prime Minister of Mauritius addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/8466) . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . : . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1414

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 18 April 1968, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Y. A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

4. Mgy I also take this first opportunity of publicly paying
my respects to you, Sir, as our President. We have already
warmly welcomed you to the Council; even more warmly
we welcome you as our President. We welcomed you as a
player; even more we welcome you as a referee. As a player
you score; as a referee you are the embodiment of
impartiality. Your great gifts could not be.better employed.
We gonfidently wish you every success, and I am even bold
enough to hope that some of the habits of impartiality will
last long after this month is over,

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l414)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

5. We meet today to consider the application of Mauritius
to become the 124th Member of the United Nations. We
congratulate Mauritius on its attainment of independence
on 12 March of this year, when it was welcomed as the
twenty-seventh independent member of the Commonwealth, and we now warmly endorse and commend its
application for membership of the United Nations.

2. Admission of new Members:
Letter dated 12 March 1968 from the Prime Minister
of Mauritius addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/8466).
Adoption of the agenda

6. Mauritius is chiefly famous for two things: outstanding
natural beauty and the rich diversity of its people. From
the earliest days the island attracted navigators of many
nationalities. It is said that the island was first discovered
by the Phoenicians; then came the Malays from Madagascar,
then the Portuguese, then the Dutch, who named the island
after Prince Maurice of Nassau. For nearly a century, from
1715, the French occupied the island, giving it the name of
Ile de France. Consequently, Mauritius now emerges into
independence with the happiest combination of traditions,
the enviable advantages of both French culture and British
administration.

The agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members
Letter dated 12 March 1968 from the Prime Minister
of Mauritius addressed to the Secretary-General (S/8466)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The Security Council will now consider the statement concerning
admission to the United Nations, submitted on 12 March
1968 [S/8466]
by the Prime Minister of Mauritius. The
statement is in letter form.

7. The island’s three quarters of a million people are
drawn from three continents and a score of different
countries. More than ten separate languages are in regular
use, and Europe, Asia and Africa have all contributed to the
history and the life’ of the people. This diversity has
sometimes led to differences and disputes and violent
tensions. It was a bold action, therefore, not to hesitate or
to delay, but to respond to the leadership of the Prime
Minister, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, and advance confidently to independence.

2. In this connexion, I should like lo draw the attention of
the members of the Council to the draft resolution of today
[S/B547/Rev.l
and Add.l/, which is co-sponsored by the
delegations of Algeria, Canada, Ethiopia, India, Pakistan,
Senegal and the United Kingdom.
3. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I
should like, first, to join with you in welcoming Ambassador Boye of Senegal to this Council. He comes to us with
an-enviable reputation gained in many capacities, and most
recently as Chairman of the Human Rights Commission. We
greatly look forward to working with him. At the same
time, I trust that the Ambassador will convey to Ambassador Diop the admiration we all felt for him, particularly
when he was our President last month. I have served in this
Council for some years, but I believe that all wifi agree with
me that we have had no President for whom we had a
greater devotion and a greater affection than we had for
Ambassador Diop.

8. All of us here will welcome and praise that courageous
step into the future and all of us will join, I am sure, in
wishing that the newly independent Mauritius will draw
from its diversity fresh strength and unity. Mauritius will,
we trust, give a lead to us all in showing how people of
different origin and religion and race can live and work
together in peace and brotherhood. The world is in sore
need of such an example.
1

9. In that confidence, and in the belief that Mauritius will
make a distinctive and distinguished contribution in the
United Nations, I join with other members of the Council
in commending the draft resolution /S/8547/Rev.I
and
Add.11 before us for unanimous approval.

17. We are well aware of the difficulties which will
inevitably lie in the path of this nation, but we are certain
that Mauritius will overcome them, affirming its independence and playing a constructive role in our Organization.
18. We wish Mauritius progress and prosperity and express
our good wishes to its people.

10. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): As we meet today on a happy occasion-an
application from a new State I’or admission to membership
in the United Nations-I feel I must express my pleasure at,
and my approval of, everything that has just been said by
Lord Caradon, the United Kingdom representative with
reference to our new colleague from Senegal, Ambassador
Boye, and to the President, Ambassador Malik of the Soviet
Union.

19. Mr. TGNATIEFF (Canada): Mr. President, I should
like to associate myself first of all with your warm welcome
to Ambassador Boye of Senegal and to say to him how
happy the Canadian delegation is to share the privilege of
being elected to membership of this Council together with
Senegal.
20. The Canadian delegation is indeed very happy to
co-sponsor the draft resolution S/8547/Rev.l and Add.1
and we commend it to the unanimous endorsement of the
Council.

11. My delegation has always believed that the advent of a
new State should be regarded as something which increases
our Organization’s chances of fulfilling the great hopes the
world places in it, hopes which will not be realized until the
United Nations achieves what it has recognized to be its
fundamental purpose-universality.

21. Because of the Commonwealth relationship Canada
has special ties with this new State which became independent on 12 March of this year and is now seeking admission
to the United Nations. Indeed, Canada and Mauritius also
share the distinction of being the only two States in the
Commonwealth which are bilingual in English and French,
a fact which constitutes an important cultural tie. We also
share the important historic tradition which Lord Caradon
mentioned-I refer, of course, to the happy marriage of
French culture with British administration.

12. It is because we hold this belief that the people and
Government of Algeria had such great pleasure in welcoming the accession to independence of Mauritius on 12
March last, In regaining its independence, that nation of
course becomes a member of the universal community of
free nations, and also a member of the group of African and
Asian peoples, joining with them to shape the future of
their continents and ensure their emancipation and development.

22. We know that the road to independence is not always
easy and that the responsibilities after independence bring
equally grave or even graver problems. It is after a nation
has assumed the responsibilities and begun to enjoy the
privileges of independence that the even more difficult
choices arise about how that nation is to conduct its
economic, social and political life, both in its own interests
and even more important, the wider interests of the world
community. Some of these choices are dictated by geography and the existing social structure at the time of
independence; but there are others such as the means of
developing a thriving and varied economy and the creation
of an administrative machinery capable of meeting the
changing needs of an evolving society which must weigh
heavily on the leaders of that new nation. My country
recognizes the responsibility of developing countries and of
developed countries to assist those in the process of
development to resolve the difficulties confronting them.
Canada for its part is prepared to continue making
available, through its external aid programme, technical
assistance to help Mauritius in its self-development.

13. Furthermore, we have great pleasure in welcoming this
country because its presence among us signifies the end of a
colonial era for its people and the beginning of an age of
freedom and prosperity. It also indicates that other peoples,
especially Africans, engaged in the struggle for liberation,
will sooner or later, like Mauritius, join the international
community and work for peace in equality and harmony.
Obviously, I am thinking of Southern Rhodesia, which is
still under the colonial yoke, as Mauritius was once, and as
Angola, Mozambique, South West Africa, Guinea (Bissau),
South Africa, etc. are today.
14. We hope that one day, as in the case of Mauritius, the
colonial era will be a thing of the past and that we shall be
able to surmount the obstacles confronting us in Southern
Rhodesia, as in all the other colonies, and lead them
towards the independence and freedom which are their
peoples’ dearest wish. Today, we meet together formally to
admit Mauritius to the United Nations. My delegation finds
this occasion both gratifying and important, and it wishes
warmly to support and recommend the admission of
Mauritius to our Organization.

23. Having welcomed Mauritius into the Commonwealth
of Nations we now are happy to welcome it into the United
Nations and we wish Mauritius every success in the great
task and opportunities that lie before it in the community
of nations.

15. For all these reasons, Algeria has decided to add its
sponsorship to that of the delegations which submitted
draft resolution S/8.547/Rev.l and Add. 1,

24. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): Before I address
myself to the item before us, I should like to associate
myself with you, Mr. President, and other colleagues in
extending a warm welcome to our new colleague, the
distinguished and respected Permanent Representative of

16. My delegation would be grateful, Mr. President, if you
would take the necessary steps to give effect to this request
which we should like to submit as formally as possible.
2

Senegal,Ambassador Boye. My delegation had very friendly
;md close relations with the Senegalese delegation during
Ambassador Diop’s term here at the United Nations. We
look forward to close co-operation with Ambassador Boye
and to have the benefit of his mature wisdom in our
deliberations.

AmbassadorBoye, and to tell him that we look forward to
continuing the close relationshipsand ties which we
enjoyed with the Senegalese
delegationduringthe tenureof
AmbassadorDiop.
30. The Danish Government whole-heartedlywelcomes
the attainment of independenceby Mauritius and my
delegationsupportsthe draft resolution(S/8547/Rev. I and
Add.11 recommendingthe admissionof Mauritius to
membership of the United Nations, presentedto us by
Algeria, Canada,Ethiopia, India, Pakistan,Senegaland the
United Kingdom-the former administeringPower.

25. The Security Council is meeting today to discharge a
very pleasant duty, namely, to consider the request from
the Government of Mauritius for admission to membership
in the United Nations. It is always a matter of great joy and
satisfaction to see a dependent Territory emerge into free
and sovereign nationhood. With every additional Territory
which breaks the chains of colonial bondage and establishes
itself as an independent nation, we come closer to the goal
of complete decolonization which is one of the primary
objectives of our Organization. Today’s occasion is particularly gratifying to us in view of the fact that the United
Nations, throu& the General Assembly and its organs,
principally the Committee of Twenty-Four’
has devoted
considerable time and energy to accelerate the progress of
the people of Mauritius towards their cherished objective.
There has, thus, been a very ciose association between
Mauritius and the United Nations even before the independence of Mauritius. It is, therefore, only natural that
Mauritius should seek membership in the world body. My
delegation has no doubt that as a Member of the United
Nations the Government and the people of Mauritius will
make important contributions towards strengthening and
furthering the universal desire for peace and security.

31. During our membershipin the Committeeof TwentyFour my country had an opportunity to follow closelythe
progresstowardsand the preparationfor the independence
of Mauritius. The processhasnow beencompletedandin a
short while Mauritius, being a full-fledged and sovereign
memberof the community of nations,will take its seatin
this world Organization. In doingso, and in acceptingthe
obligationscontainedin the Charterof the United Nations,
Mauritiushasmadea solemnpledgethat will serveasa basis
for its participationin the internationalco-operationin this
Organization. We wish it well in its endeavoursto participate actively and constructively in that co-operation,
which is aimedat promotingpeaceamongnations,international understandingandmaterialprogress
for the whole of
humanity.
32. Mauritius has becomeindependentas a result of a
democratic processand through an agreementfreely negotiated betweenthe representatives
of the people of Mauritius and the Governmentof the United Kingdom.Wefeel
confident that the problems,internal and external, which
this new State may face in the future will similarly be
solvedin accordancewith democraticprinciplesand on the
basisof agreementandmutual understanding

26. The independence of Mauritius is a matter of particular gratification to my delegation. India and Mauritius are
linked by varied and close ties which go back to hundreds
of years. The similarities in our cultural history and
heritage, the geographic proximity and, most of all, our
nlutually shared values of freedom and peace bind us
closely together. We have followed with great interest and
admiration the steady march of the people of Mauritius
towards their independence under the leadership of their
outstanding Prime Minister, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam.
We have every confidence that the very close and friendly
relations which happily exist between Mauritius and India
will grow from strength to strength in the coming years to
the mutual benefit of our two countries.

33. Today we welcomeMauritius to the United Nations,
and we wish the Governmentand peopleof Mauritius all
the best in their efforts to build their future. Clearly, the
prime goal of any new State is political stability and
economic progress.It is our wish that Mauritius achieve
both, thus creating the strongestpossiblebasisfor its
existenceasa nation andasa State.
34. Mr. BERARD (France) (translatedfrom French): I
need hardly say that it givesmy delegationgreat pleasure
‘andsatisfactionto welcometo our midstthe new representative of Senegal,AmbassadorIbrahimaBoye.Wewelcome
him as the representativeof a State with which my own
country hasparticularly cordialrelations.Wealso greethim
as a colleague on whom we can rely for friendly and
efficient collaboration.Finally, we welcomehim asan able
jurist of vast experience.He hasservedasa lawyer in several
courts of appeal,asa magistrate,asa Justiceof the Peace
with a wide jurisdiction, and finally asAttorney Generalof
the SupremeCourt of Senegal.He hasa backgroundwhich
will be most valuableto our Council aswell asto eachof
us. His professionalqualifications,together with personal
qualitiesof which we are all aware,aresuchthat they can
somewhat mitigate our regret at the departure of his
predecessor,AmbassadorOusmaneSod Diop. Our work in
the United Nationsis often saddened
by the departureof a

27. I take this opportunity of once again extending to the
Government and people of Mauritius our warmest felicitations and best wishes. Having become the master of its own
destiny, I have no doubt that Mauritius will be able to make
rapid progress in all fields of national life and become a
strong, stableand prosperousnation.
28. My delegation whole-heartedly supports the application of Mauritius for admissionto the United Nations and
hopesthat it will be endorsedby the Security Council by
acclamation.
25). Mr. BORCH (Denmark): Mr. President,first, 1want to
associatemyself with the warm welcome that you have
expressedin regard to the new representativeof Senegal,
1 SpecialComnlitteeon the Situationwith regardto the Implementationof the Declarationon the Grantingof Independence
to
Colonial Countries
andI’eoples.
3

colleague whose friendship we cherish, but we are often
also consoled by the arrival of new colleagues whose
friendship soon becomes equally dear. Ambassador
Ibrahima Boye has brought to us in New York not only the
welcome sunshine of his country but also the warmth of his
friendship.

French place names.French is stiIl the languagespokenby
almost250,000 inhabitantsof the island andits dependen.
ties. It is the languagecommonlyusedby cultivated people
of diverse origin and servesasa meansof communication
betweenthe variousethnic groups.Most of the newspapers,
furthermore, arein French.

35. In a vote which we hope will be unanimous, my
delegation will signify its approval of the draft resolution
before the Council recommending that the General Assembly admit the independent State of Mauritius to the United
Nations. We are particularly pleased to be able to do so’
because, since the beginning of the 18th century, political
and later cultural and linguistic ties have linked France to
that great island. For a hundred years-from
1710 to
1810-my country was responsible for the administration
of the island, which was then known as Ile de France.
Memories of the French Indies Company were evoked quite
recently in the inspiredwordsof the Mauritian writer and
poet EdouardJ. Maunick:

39. When the PrimeMinister of Mauritius visited Francein
October 1967, he wasgood enoughto say that his country
would co-operatewith ours,particularly in intellectual and
economic matters, and that he hoped to seeagreements
concluded between the two countries which would
strengthen their cultural and historical ties. We were most
receptive to his remarks.
40. Lying as it does at the crossroadsof Europe, Africa
and Asia and having beenfor centuriesa port of call for all
trading nations, Mauritius is today experiencing an extraordinary population growth. The new independent State
which unites indigenousinhabitants, Europeanswho have
settled there, Africans from the neighbouringcontinent and
Indianswho have contributed their skills,clearly hasa place
in the United Nations. It is, in a way, a microcosmof this
Organization. It hasalready shown us and will continue in
the future to showus an example of that coexistenceand
peacefulco-operation amongpeoplesand raceswhich is the
idealand standardof our Organization.

“The IndiesCompanyremindsme of the gardenof the
samename,a stone’sthrow from the ocean, skirting the
roadsteadof Port Louis, where I served my apprenticeship for manhood. Port Louis, the capital, and the
Company garden full of banyan trees, calabashand
acacia-the garden with its fountains and its Institute
Museum,towardswhich an immenselythick baobabtree
spreadits arms,its bandstandand its old greenbenches 41. To al1 its inhabitants, whatever their origin and
and the little river Pouce flowing past like an endless language,to its Governmentandits leaders,to independent
Mauritius, the French delegationextendsits warmestwishes
caress.”
for happinessand prosperity.
36. France wasfortunate enoughto be represented,at the
head of the island’sadministration,by MahBde la Bourdon- 42. Mr. PEDERSEN,(United States of America): 1should
nais, an outstanding Governor who accomplishedthere
like first to join other membersin welcoming to the
what the Mauritian historianAuguste Toussaint called “a
Council our distinguishednew colleague from Senegal,
veritable creation ex nihilo”. He founded MahBbourg,the
AmbassadorIbrahima Boye. AmbassadorBoye is no strancapital, later abondonedin favour of Port Louis. “Roads ger to the United Nations councils, and we recall with
were built”, EdouardMaunick writes, “and townslaid out.
particular pleasurehis recent outstandingwork asChairman
Coffee, cassava,maize,vegetables,fruit trees, indigo, clove of the Commissionon Human Rights. He brings to the
treesand, aboveall, sugarcanespreadover acresupon acres Security Council a profound understanding and deep
of land.”
experience in this important realm of United Nations
activities. He alsobringsto us a distinguishedbackgroundin
37. Ile de Franceof the 18th century had a considerable law, including the post of Attorney-General of the SenegaleseSupreme Court. III AmbassadorBoye, as in his
influence on the intellectualandliterary Iife of my country.
distinguishedpredecessor,
AmbassadorDiop, who presided
It inspired that great wriler, Bernardin de Saint-Pierre,to
with such dignity and capability last month in both our
write his Voyage ci l’ile cZeFrance and later, after the
sensationalwreck near the Island of Ambre of the ship public sessionsand private consultations,Senegalhassent
Saint G&an on which the young Virginie de la Tour was us another outstanding representative with whom the
travelling, the famousnovelPaul et Virginie which started United States delegationtakes satisfactionin being assothe exotic trend in Frenchliterature. It wasthe sameisland ciated.
which inspired CharlesBaudelaireto write his well-known
lines:
43. It is indeed a pleasureto speak to this Council in
support of the application of Mauritius for membershipin
“Once, in a perfumedcountry, sun-caressed,
the United Nations and to welcomethe Mauritian delega“I knew, under a roof of crimsontrees
tion here today.
“and palmsthat dip their languouron the eyes,
“A creolelady of hiddencharms.”
44. We weIcomethe interest of Mauritius in participating
in efforts at the United Nationsto achievethe goalsof our
38. My country is deeply moved by the fact that the
Charter. The path toward the reconciliation of international
island’sinhabitants are so attached to that part of their
differences and toward world peace is long and arduous.
history. Beau Bassin,Quatre Bernes, Rose Belle, Grande Membershipin the United Nations offers to Mauritius, on
RiviBre, ,%&Antoine, Poudre d’Or, Pamplemousse,
Souilthe one hand, the prospectof hard work in the serviceof
lac, CheminGranier-the entire countryside is dotted with
hopesand idealsasyet only partially realized;on the other
4

hand, membership also offers Mauritius the prospect of
satisfaction in our achievements and a sense of responsible
participation in, and of contribution to, the world community. We are convinced that Mauritius will accept this
challenge with the same spirit of determination, wisdom
and moderation that it demonstrated during the years
leading to its independence.

50. The United Nations offers one great advantage in that
it is a place in which a dialogue can be initiated. We aI1
know that when one has an opportunity to speak, to
express one’s ideas and compare them with those of others,
there is always hope that the problem will be the more
easily solved.
51. I am therefore happy to come here on behalf of my
Government to recommend the admission to the United
Nations of Mauritius, an island which presents a remarkable
example of the harmonious multiracial society which we
should like to see established in certain other countries. My
Government believes that Mauritius is a peace-loving State,
able and willing to carry out the obligations contained in
the Charter.

45. This distant isle has long played a role in world
commercial and political affairs. Among its population of
three quarters of a million persons there are representatives
of many races, rehgions and nationalities. Lord Caradon has
referred to the ten languages spoken in Mauritius. It is of
special interest that among those languages, two working
languages of the Security Council are included. While the
island was a Crown Colony of Great Britain, Mauritian
authorities steadfastly directed their efforts toward economic and social development and increasingly participated
in their own government before Mauritius obtained full
htdependence on 12 March 1968.

52. My Government is therefore in agreement that we
should recommend the General Assembly to admit Mauritius, to which we wish every success.
53. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): Mr. President, before turning to the matter before
us today, I should like to join with you and other members
of the Council in extending a most cordial welcome to the
new representative from Senegal, Mr, Ibrahima Boye.
Knowing as we do his country’s long-standing tradition in
the United Nations, we are sure that in discharging his
duties he will display the brilliance, talent and integrity
which marked his predecessor, our much admired President
during the month of March, Mr. Diop.

46. In crediting their accomplishments and efforts, we
believe also that due acknowledgement should be given to
the Government of the United Kingdom under whose aegis
advances were made toward democratic self-government
and complete independence.
47. The United States believes that the people of Mauritius and their Prime Minister, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, share with us the strong conviction that governments, to be stable and effective, must be representative of,
and based upon the confidence of, those whom they
govern. My Government is well aware of the many obstacles
Mauritius has overcome, and of those that it still faces, in
its praiseworthy
drive to build a nation where a man’s
dignity and worth are not determined by his race, his
religion or his place of origin. In its efforts, Mauritius will
be taking part in a world-wide crusade for the achievement
of erIua1 rights and opportunities for all.

54. This is indeed a day of rejoicing as we meet to
consider the request for admission to membership of the
United Nations submitted on behalf of his country by the
Prime Minister of Mauritius. It will be a real pleasure for my
delegation to vote in favour of the unanimous adoption by
acclamation of the seven-Power draft resolution [S/8547/
Rev. I and Add. I] by which the Council will recommend to
the General AssembIy that Mauritius be admitted to
membership in the United Nations.

48. The United States looks forward to strengthening
relations with Mauritius. Our consular contacts with that
lovely island date back over one hundred years. Our
experiences have convinced us that Mauritius can and will
make continuing and meaningful contributions
toward
solving the problems $hat lie before it and before us all. My
Government
will gladly vote for the draft resolution
(S/8543/Rev.I
and Add I/ before this Cohncil recommending approval of the application of Mauritius for
admission to membership in the United Nations.

55. With this preliminary and necessary step, followed UP
promptly by the approval of the General Assembly, the
doors of the Organization will open to admit one more
member to the great family of free, sovereign and independent nations it comprises.
56. For each and every one of the States striving to hasten
the advent of the final abolition of colonialism, this is
indeed an occasion for justifiable rejoicing.
57. Now that the efforts of Mauritius to achieve independence have reached a happy conclusion, I offer its people
and Government the most cordial and sincere congratulations of the people, Government and delegation of Paraguay, together with our heartfelt wishes for the progress,
prosperity and happiness of the people of Mauritius, now
freed from their former state of dependence and masters, in
their own legitimate right, of their sovereign destiny.

49. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (transluted from French): I
should like to thank my colleagues for their very kind
words of welcome and assure them of my loyal co-operation. On the particular item now before us, I should like to
say, on behalf of my Government, that we are always
pleased to welcome a new Member to this Organization.
Aside from the satisfaction we experience when a country
is decolonized or when a dependent country is granted
independence, my Government takes the view that all
nations should be in a position to put their moral and
intelIectua1 capital to work and to combine their efforts to
settle more readily such conflicts as may arise among them.

58. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): Mr. President, I should like, first of all, to associate my delegation
with the eloquent and much deserved message of welcome
that you and other colleagues have addressed to our new
5

different ethnic and racial origins to live together in
harmony and mutual respect. It is our earnest hope that the
example of -Mauritius as a nation, and of others which have
multiracial populations living in peace, will serve to inspire
misguided advocates of racialism and others of similar
persuasion to have a better and much larger vision of
humanity. It is in such a vision that the hope for the
ultimate security and survival of the whole of mankind lies.

colleague from Senegal, I should like to assure him of the
Ethiopian delegation’s co-operation and goodwill.
59. During the past several months we have spent many
difficult and at times agonizing hours in this Council
chamber deliberating on questions relating to international
peace and security and trying to accomplish what at times
almost seemed the impossible. It is needless for me to
remind members of this Council that although OUT tasks in
those gloomy hours have indeed been very difficult, even
frustrating, our efforts have not always been in vain. We
have had our moments of satisfaction.

66. In conclusion, I wish to convey once again our sincere
congratulations and best wishes to the people and Government of Mauritius.
67. Mr. DE SOUZA E SILVA (Brazil): First of all. 1
should like to extend to Ambassador Boye of Senegalthe
warm welcome of the Brazilian delegation. In the first three
months of 1968, we benefited from the wisdom and
experience that his predecessor, Ambassador Diop, brought
to this Council, especially during this past March. My
delegation is confident that under Ambassador Boye the
delegation of Senegal will continue to give to the Security
Council the co-operation that is expected by all of us front
that great African country, with which my Government and
my country has close ties of friendship and co-operation.

60. This note of optimism on my part is no doubt
prompted and strengthened by our consideration today of
the type of item that we have on our agenda. For today we
are here not to extinguish a fire ignited by tragic human
conflicts or to uphold a threatened principle of the Charter
of the United Nations, but to add new blood to the
Organization. This is indeed the most pleasant and highly
gratifying duty that we have as members of this vital organ.
61. Even as the birth of a child represents the best gift
that nature offers to man, so too the birth of a nation
signifies the highest form of expression of the principIes of
the Charter of our Organization. It is perhaps the best
tribute that can be paid to the United Nations which is
dedicated to, among other things, the reaffirmation of faith
in what the Charter itself underlines as fundamental human
rights, the dignity and worth of the human person, the
equal rights of men and women and of all nations large and
small.

68. On behalf of the Brazilian delegation, allow me to
refer to the draft resolution [S/8547/Rev.l
and Add,l]
before this Council on the admission of Mauritius to the
United Nations.
69. My delegation will vote in favour of the adoption of
this draft, and I wish to take this opportunity to welcome
Mauritius into the United Nations.

62. When a people which has long suffered under the yoke
of colonialism succeeds in breaking the shackles of bondage
and moves to the cherished status of freedom and sovereignty, there is good cause for joy, good reason for
optimism and hope, not onIy for the people directly
concerned but also for humanity as a whole.

70. A new nation born of a rich past, Mauritius, like Brazil
itself, is a multiracial society drawing its cultural values
from many sources and building with them a new human
synthesis and a new world in the tropics. Representing so
many different hopes and dreams, Mauritius is in a special
position to make a vital contribution to the work of this
Organization and to the creation of world order. I express
not only my personal feelings, but also the feelings of the
Brazilian ,Goveynment and people when I say that we will
all profit from that contribution.

63. The independence and admission of Mauritius to
membership of our Organization should be of particular joy
to the United Nations because it is the most recent
crowning of the Organization’s tireless efforts over the past
number of years. Since 1964 the United Nations General
Assembly, the Special Committee of Twenty-Four and its
subsidiary organs have devoted considerable time and effort
working for the independence and self-determination of the
people of Mauritius. The Ethiopian delegation, as a member
of each of these organs of the United Nations, has played
an active role to this end.

71. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): Comrade President,
since today is the first time this month that my delegatiorl
is making a statement in the Council, I wish to express my
hearty congratulations to you on the occasion of your
assumption of the high functions of the Presidency of the
Security Council. Your rich experjence and deep knowledge
of the matters before the Council have already greatly
contributed to the successful discharge of the duties of the
Council. Your skilful and brilliant statesmanlike approach
to the different and very complex and difficult questions
have met with the satisfaction of the members of this
Council.

64. Therefore our sponsorship of this resolution recommending the admission of Mauritius to membership of the
United Nations is a duty which devolves upon us by virtue
of our participation in these historic efforts. We take pride
in the achievements of the people of Mauritius, and we wish
to assure them of our continued co-operation and goodwill
as we welcome them to the family of independent nations.

72. At the same time, with your kind permission, I wish to
express my delegation’s congratulations to the fornicr
President of our Council, Ambassador Diop of Senegal,and
I request the Ambassador of Senegal to convey to him our
congratulations on the tactful, patient and very competent
manner in which he acted as President of our Council. At

65. A multiracial nation such as Mauritius, however small
in territory
and population it may be, can, we are
confident, serve as yet another good example of the.
possibility, I may even add of the need, for a people of
6

the same time, Comrade President, I wish to join you in
greeting our new colleague, Ambassador Boye of Senegal,
and, on behalf of my delegation, I wish to express our
satisfaction at seeing him in our circle. We are convinced
that he will fulfil his duties with great success.

independent State. At the United Nations the Hungarian
delegation is looking forward with great pleasure to
co-operating with the delegation of Mauritius in promoting
the noble ideas and principles set forth in the Charter.

73. The Security Council has before it for consideration
the application of the newly independent State of Mauritius
for admission to the United Nations. We also have before us
the joint draft resolution [S/8547/Reu.I
and Add.I/ of
Algeria, Canada, Ethiopia, India, Pakistan, Senegal and the
United Kingdom requesting the Security Council to recommend to the General Assembly that Mauritius be admitted
to membership in the United Nations. The Hungarian
delegation wishes to state that it supports the application of
Mauritius for membership in the United Nations and is
ready to vote in favour of the draft resolution submitted by
the seven co-sponsors.

78. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, I should like to
associate myself with the warm welcome that you and my
other colleagues have extended to the new and eminent
Ambassador of Senegal, Mr. Boye. Even in the brief period
that has passed since he presented his credentials, Mr. Boye
has shown himself to be endowed with the same high
qualities and of the calibre which marked his distinguished
predecessor, Mr. Diop.
79. Pakistan has great pleasure in supporting the application of Mauritius for admission to the United Nations. The
accession of the island country to independence and
membership in the United Nations marks another step in
the process of decolonization which was initiated with
vision and statesmanship by the United Kingdom after the
Second World War.

74. In its firm determination to eliminate all forms of
colonialism and racial discrimination, the United Nations
has given attention to the problem of Mauritius for a
number of years. Together with the. great majority of
Member States, the Hungarian People’s Republic has given
active support to the people of Mauritius in the achievement of their freedom and independence. We were pleased
to receive leading political personalities of Mauritius in
Hungary last year, and my Government had friendly and
useful talks with them on establishing relations between our
two countries.

80. The Prime Minister of Mauritius, Sir Seewoosagur
Ramgoolam, has pledged that his Government accepts the
obligations incumbent upon Members of the Organization
and solemnly undertakes to fulfil them. That declaration
makes us confident that the Government of Mauritius will
surmount the difficulties that confront new nations and
will do its utmost to promote respect for human rights, a
fundamental principle of the Charter of the United Nations
and one of cardinal importance to the governance of
multiracial societies [see S/8466].

75. In considering the admission of Mauritius to membership in the United Nations, we cannot fait to direct our
attention to the explosive situation existing in the southern
part of Africa. It is the duty of the United Nations and of
all States to prevent the establishment of a hotbed of
racism in Africa. As can be seen from the latest discussions
on South West Africa and Southern Rhodesia in the
Security Council, events on the African continent cause
serious anxiety and require effective measures on behalf of
the world community against all manifestations of colonialism, apartheid and racism.

81. The people of the island are linked to the people of
Pakistan by historical and cultural ties. We extend our
warmest congratulations to the Government and people of
Mauritius and wish them godspeed on the high road of
independence. With admission to membership in the United
Nations, it will be possible for Mauritius to derive in full
measure the benefits of participation in the mainstream of
international life and of the economic and technical
assistance which the United Nations system is able to
provide to developing nations.

76. My delegation felt it necessary to call the attention of
the Council to the dangerous developments in the southern
part of Africa and to the responsibility of the Security
Council for coping with that situation. We feel all the more
happy and satisfied that, in spite of those ominous signs,
another former colonial territory, Mauritius, has won its
independence. It is of particular importance that the newly
independent State of Mauritius had more than ample
experience of colonialism. In fact it had been ruled by no
less than four different colonial Powers. That is one more
reason why my delegation is confident that, after shaking
off the colonial rule, the newly independent nation of
Mauritius will exert all possible efforts to overcome its
present difficulties resulting from that heritage and will
achieve progress in all fields of its national life. We trust
that as a Member of the United Nations Mauritius will make
a useful contribution to our efforts to liquidate all the
remnants of colonialism and racism and preserve international peace and security.

82. It is with great pleasure that I commend to the
Council for unanimous adoption the joint draft resolution
[S/8.547/Rev.l and Add.11 which Pakistan has co.sponsored together with the delegations of Algeria, Canada,
Ethiopia, India, Senegaland the United Kingdom.
83. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): As President of the Security Council, I should like to express my
thanks to those members of the Council who have
associated themselves with the words of welcome and
congratulation which I addressed on their behalf at the
proceeding meeting to our new colleague, the distinguished
representative of Senegal. I should also like to thank those
members of the Security Council who addressed kind words
to me.
84. Now I shall address the Council in my capacity as the
representative of the UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS.

77. In a resolution the Presidential Council of the Hungarian People’s Republic has recognized Mauritius as an
7

8.5. We have heard the statements of the members of the
Security Council on the item of the admission to membership in the United Nations of a new State, Mauritius.
86. Speaking now as the representative of the Soviet
Union, I shouldlike to stressparticularly that theproclamation of independenceby Mauritius is onemore blow to the
colonial system of subjugationand exploitation. We note
with great satisfaction that many peoples of colonial
countries have already broken the chains of foreign
domination and have taken the path of independent
existenceand development.Millions and millionsof people
who were subjugatedin the past have becomefree citizens
of their own national States. Dozens of former colonial
terkitoriesare today sovereignStates,equalMembersof the
United Nations. The fact that Mauritius-a country which
for over 150 yearswasa British colony-has now become
independent providesyet another proof of the invincible
power of the national liberation struggleof the peoples,in
their fight for freedomandindependence.

92. The peoplesof the Soviet Union sincerelywish the
peopleof Mauritius every successin the buildingof a new,
free life and the speedy elimination of the distressing
consequences
of colonialism,as well as strengtheningthe
sovereigntyof their State.
93. Now I shall addressthe Council in my capacity as
PRESIDENTof the Security Council.

94. The list of speakers
hasbeenexhausted.In accordance
with rule 60 of the provisional rules of procedureof the
Security Council I shall now put to the vote the draft
resolution[S/8547fRev.l and Add.11 before the Council.
A vote wastaken by showof hands.
The draft resolutionwasadopted unanimously.~
95. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):In accordancewith rule 60 of the provisional rulesof procedure
of the Security Council, I shallforthwith askthe SecretaryGeneralto transmitto the General Assemblythe text of the
resolution which hasjust been adopted, together with the
record of this meeting.The examination of the item on the
agendahas been concluded. The representativeof the
United Stateshasaskedfor the floor. I now calluponhim.

87. Consistently and invariably guided by the policy of
giving full support to the struggle of peoplesagainst
colonial rule and oppression,the Soviet Union hasalways
supportedand continuesto support the legitimateandjust
demandsof the peoples,including the peopleof Mauritius,
who wish to becomefree and independent. We are very
96. Mr. PEDERSEN(United States of America): Now that
happy to seethat the struggleof the peopleof Mauritiusto
we have completedour favourable action on the specific
achievetheselofty goalsand ideals hasbeen drownedwith
‘item before us for today, I wish to call the Council’s
success.
attention briefly to a separately pending membership
matter.
88. The Security Councilhasreceivedan applicationfrom
the Government of ‘Mauritius to, be admitted to\member97. Members will recall that on 13 December1967
ship of the United Nations.In its application[S/8466,! the
Mr. Goldberg addressedto the President of the Councila
Government of Mauritius declaresits full support for’the
principlesand aimsof the United Nations Charter,accepts letter3 suggestingthat the Council’s Committeeon the
Admissionof New Membersbe convened to considerthe
the obligationsof membershipand solemnlyconir$ts i&elf
matter of “micro-States”, a matter raisedby the Secretaryto fulfilling thoseobligations.
Generalin the introductions to his annualreportsof 1965”
and 1967.5
89. The Soviet Union welcomesthis declaration of the
Governmentof the newindependentState andsupportsthe
98. This is the first meeting at which the Council has
application of Mauritius to be admitted to the United
Nations. The representativeof the Soviet Union hasbeen considereda .membershipmatter sincethat time. We did
authorized to vote in favour of the admissionof Mauritius not suggestthat the Council’sCommittee on the Admission
of New Membe’rsbe reconvened in this instance.I should
to membershipin the United Nations.
like to recall,.however,that our letter of 13 December1967
requestingconsiderationof the problem of “micro-States”
90. We warmly congratulate the Government and the
people of Mauritius upon the attaihment of independence by the Committeeis an outstandingrequest.
and we expressour firm conviction andhope that this new
99. Weall realize that the urgent matterswhich havecome
State, which is locatedin the Indian Ocean, togetherwith
the large family of independentStates of Africa and Asia, before the Council over the past three months have
will make its own worthy and useful contribution to the
precludedour devoting the required time to this matter.We
work of this Organizationand will contribute to ‘the cause do continue,:to look forward, however, to an early
of strengtheningpeaceand developing friendship among convenient reconveningof the Committee on the Admission of New Membersto consider the implicationswith
nations.
6
2 Seeresolution
249(1968).
91. The Governmentof the Soviet Union, in its message
to
the Government of this new State, has warmly congratu3 official Recordsof the SecurityCouncil,Twenty-second
Year,
$uPPlement for October,November and December 1967, document
lated the Government and people of Mauritius upon the
s/a2?6.
attainment of independenceand has stated its desireto
4 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth
establishdiplomatic relatiqns with Mauritius, to exchange Session,
Supplement No. IA, p, 12.
embassiesand to develop relations of friendship and
5 Ibid., Twenty-second
Session,
Supplement
No. IA,
co-operation.
..
paras. 1,63-167.
5.

fish the
Fa new,
tressing
.ing the

regard to membership for what the Secretary-General has
referred to as “micro-States”.

agenda item which the Council was convened to discuss. If
there is no other representative who wishes to speak, the
Council will adjourn.

100. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I have
no further speakers who wish to take the floor on the

The meeting rose at 5.5 p m.

lcity as
ordance
1 of the
IC draft
‘ouncil.

In acxzedure
cretary
t of the
rith the
I on the
of

the

311him.
DWthat
specific
xmcil’s
bership
1 1967
luncil a
on the
der the
xetary
‘i9654
cil has
WC did
nission
should
!r 1967
States”
e come
s have
tcr. We
I early
AdmisIS wiih
D:
rd Year,
vzumcut

9

HOW

TQ OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

moy be obtoined
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
fo: United
Notions,
Sales Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
der Nations
Unier
sont en vente
dons
les libroirier
et let ogences
ddporitoirer
du monde entier.
Informez-vous
oupris
de votre librairie
ou adresser-vour
b:
Notions
Unier, Section $es venter, New York ou Gen&ve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicocioner
de Ias Nociones
Unidar
eslbn
en todas parfes det mundo. Conxdte
o IV librero
Ventas, Nuevo York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

UNIDAS

en vente en librerios
y caras distribuidorar
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidor,
Secci6n

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

de

353624eptember

1972-2.10
