TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 11 SEPTEMBER 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l450)

Page
1
.. . .... .... ,. ....... ........ ..

,.....,.,. . ... . .... ,. .,..... ...,.,.. ..

1

Admission of new Members:
Letter dated 6 September 1968 from the Prime Minister of Swaziland addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/8808) . . . . . . . . , . . ., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

S/PV.1450

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FIFTIETH

Held in New York on Wednesday, 11 September
President: Mr. G. IGNATIEFF

(Canada).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet , Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain a;nd No,@hern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/14501
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Admission of new Members:
Letter dated 6 September 1968 from the Prime
Minister of Swaziland addressed to the Secretary
General (S/8808).
Adoption of the agenda

MEETING
1968, at 10 a.m.

of Parliament, has since 1948 committed over ;E21 million
in Swaziland projects. Other British financial aid has
reached more than $11 million in the five years ending in
1967, and a further c3 million in 1967-68.
5. The celebration of independence in Swaziland last
Friday marked not only the birth of a new African State,
but also the closing of a chapter in British history: the end
of the British colonial era in Africa. That is an event in
which we both rejoice and take pride. I like to reflect, and
to remind my Soviet colleague, that my country has done
more to end imperialism than any other country in the
history of the world.
6. Apart from the special case of Rhodesia-with which we
in this Council are not unfamiliar and which raises a
political and racial challenge rather than a colonial question-Swaziland is the last of the British colonies in Africa
to achieve independence.

The agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members
Letter dated 6 September 1968 from the Prime Minister of
Swaziland addressed to the Secretary-General (S/8808)
1. The PRESIDENT: I should like to draw the attention
of members of the Council to the draft resolution, which is
co-sponsored by the delegations of Algeria, Canada,
Ethiopia, India, Pakistan, Senegal and the United Kingdom
(S/881 o/ 1
2. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I am happy this
morning to put aside for a while the many anxious
preoccupations which beset us in this Council and to
recommend to the Council the application of Swaziland for
membership in the United Nations.
3. Swaziland is a country of outstanding natural beauty
with its spectacular mountain ranges, plentiful rivers and
vast pine forests. It is a comparatively small country of
6,700 square miles, with a population of just under
400,000; but it has a vigorous people, fertile soil and
mineral wealth. It has good cause to look forward with
confidence to growing economic strength and prosperity,
4. My country has contributed to the encouraging start
which Swaziland now makes in independence. In political
development, an honest administration and impartial courts
and a parliamentary system with full adult suffrage have
been built up, In economic advance, the Commonwealth
Development Corporation, established under a British Act

7. It is the seventeenth of those African countries to
advance to independence, and today those countries,
previously under British administration, represent well over
a third of the total population of Africa.
8. Swaziland is the twenty-eighth member of the Commonwealth to apply for membership of the United Nations.
So it is to the Commonwealth that not far short of a
quarter of the United Nations membership now belongs.
9. It is not just the numbers we are proud of, It is the
methods that we have employed; it is the principles in
which we believe; it is the common heritage which we
share. And by the same methods, and in accordance with
the same principles, we shall finish the task now almost
completed of transforming an empire into a free
commonwealth.
10. We have no doubt that Swaziland wiIl faithfully and
loyally fulfil its obligations as a Member of the United
Nations. It is with sincere congratulations and the utmost
good will to the Government and people of Swaziland, and
in the belief that the friendship of their countrymen and
mine will thrive and flourish, that, on behalf of my
country, I join with Commonwealth, African and Asian
countries in recommending this application to the Council.
11. Mr. BOYE (Senegal), (translated from French):
Mr. President, first of all, I should like to reaffirm my
opinion of the eminent qualities of your predecessor,
Mr. de Araujo Castro, Ambassador of Brazil. As for you,
Sir, we already know with what professional conscientious-

,t

1
:I
E

!

ness and ability you have carried out your heavy responsibilities ,

Swaziland to membership of our Organization, we cannal
help being preoccupied with the grave dangers and obstacles
that that country is likely to face, situated as it is in the
heartland of southern Africa where the threat of South
Africa’s racism and expansionism is rampant. However, we
have faith in the equal rights of nations, large and small, as
proclaimed in the United Nations Charter, as well as in the
power of freedom to survive and in the ability of the people
of Swaziland to preserve their unity, territorial integrity
and independence. We are, moreover, confident that under
the wise stewardship of their national leaders the people of
Swaziland will face the future with hope, courage and
determination.

12. Senegal is always pleased to welcome States which
attain international sovereignty, and it is for this reason
that it decided to co-sponsor the application of Swaziland
for admission to the United Nations.
13. Senegal and many French-speaking countries are
proud of having acquired international sovereignty without
bloodshed and in friendship with the former colonial
Power.
14. As regards Swaziland, we know that it is bordered on
three sides by the racist Republic of South Africa and that
it will have to protect itself against the shameful actions of
that State. Senegal, for its part, extends to Swaziland all its
sympathy and all its support regarding the consolidation of
its territorial integrity.

23. On this occasion, when we register a significant
achievement for freedom in southern Africa, I wish to sap
to those in Southern Rhodesia, South Africa and Portugal,
who are still trying to stand against the tide of history ia a
vain effort to arrest the emancipation of the people of
Africa, that they should stop looking backward to the dark
age of tyranny and join the international community
instead in uplifting the human family from the pit of
oppression to the height of freedom and equality. That is
the universal and lasting interest of all mankind. In spite of
the obstinacy of those who, even at this late stage, try to
perpetuate oppressive rules in southern Africa, the torch of
freedom is burning ever brighter and the land that the
prophets of doom once called the Dark Continent is
gradually but surely turning into the Continent of Hope for
mankind. And today, whilst we congratulate Swaziland oa
the attainment of independence and also express our
satisfaction at the co-operative spirit shown by the United
Kingdom in this matter, we cannot accept without chal.
lenge the contention of Lord Caradon that the United
Kingdom’s task in Africa is finished because we consider
that Southern Rhodesia is a colony of the United Kingdonr
for whose freedom the United Kingdom assumes direct
responsibility.

15. On the other side of its territory, Swaziland is
unfortunately still bordered by a country which is strug
gling tenaciously, but with courage and bravery, for its
independence.
16. The example of Swaziland which has just attained
international sovereignty will be an additional reason for
Mozambique to struggle tenaciously against the colonial
domination to which it is subjected.
17. We note the fact that the Government of Swaziland,
which is a small but hard-working country determined to
emerge from under-development, will fulfil all its obligations to the United Nations and will respect the fundamental principles contained in the Charter.
18. As it is convinced of all these facts, the Government of
Senegal warmly recommends the admission of Swaziland to
the United Nations.

24. It is indeed with profound pleasure that my delegation
has co-sponsored the draft resolution before the Council
which we hopewill be adopted unanimously.

19. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): My delegation is delighted at the event which has occasioned this
meeting of the Security Council, convened for the auspicious purpose of admitting to the United Nations yet
another independent African State.

25. On behalf of the Government andpeople of Ethiopia I
once again expressour sincerefelicitations and our best
wishesfor the prosperity and well-beingof the people of
Swaziland.

20. On 6 September of this year we rejoiced at the birth
of a new African sister State, and today we reiterate the
same sentiments of joy and gratification and welcome the
communication from the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of
Swaziland whereby he expresses the desire of his country to
be admitted to membership of our world Organization.

26. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translatedfrom Fknch,b The
admissionof a new independentState to our Organizatiotr
hasalways been regardedby Algeria as strengtheningthe
great hopes placed by mankind in the United Nations:
hopes which will assumea more concrete form as the
universal role of the United Nations becomesmore corn
plete.

21. As a founding Member of the United Nations and as a
member of the Special Committee charged with the task of
following the situation with regard to the implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, Ethiopia has every cause to
be both proud and gratified by Swaziland’s attainment of
independent status and by the fact that it now assumes its
rightful place in the family of free nations.

27. In recovering its national independence,this nation,
Swaziland,joins not only the international community of
free peoples,but alsothe community of sovereignAfrican
peoples, whose headsof State are holding, at this very
moment, their annual summit meeting in the Algerian
capital in order to build together the future of their
continent and to speedits emancipationand devehp:r!rdrrt

22. While we thus rejoice at this happy and historic event
and warmly support and recommend the admission of

28. To greet this African country is for us an additional
sourceof joy becauseits attainment of independencemeans
2

\‘-

the end of the colonial era for its people and the beginning
of an era of freedom and prosperity; it also means that
other African peoples engaged in the liberation struggle will
sooner or later, like Swaziland, come to take part in the
efforts of the international community to establish peace in
equality and harmony. We think of Southern Rhodesia,
which is still a British colony-as was Swaziland-of Angola,
Mozambique, South West Africa, Guinea (Bissau), South
Africa and other countries still under the colonial yoke.

are convinced that, under the able guidance of its great
king, His Majesty Sobhuza II, Swaziland will make rapid
strides in this direction. We are confident that Swaziland, as
a new and dynamic member of the community of nations,
will make a positive and significant contribution to furthering international co-operation and understanding and to
upholding the purposes and principles of this world
Organization.
36. My delegation wholeheartedly welcomes Swaziland to
its rightful place in the United Nations and wishes the
people of Swaziland every success in the immense tasks of
consolidating freedom and laying the foundations for
greater well-being and prosperity.

29, While we are aware of the difficulties which, inevitably, this new nation will encounter, we are convinced that
Swaziland will overcome the difficulties common to all
young States, and will assert its independence and play a
constructive role in our Organization.

37. We are happy to see in this hall, Dr. Sukati, the
permanent representative-designate of Swaziland to the
United Nations. We offer him our congratulations and wish
him a most successful tenure.

30. We wish that country progress and prosperity, and its
people joy and happiness.
31. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): Mr. President, I
should like at the outset to offer a word of welcome to
you, Sir, as President of the Council for the month of
September and to express our full confidence that, under
your wise leadership, the Council will discharge its functions during this month effectively and expeditiously.

38. Mr. PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of India
for the remarks which he addressed to me.
39. Mr. YUNUS (Pakistan): Mr. President, as I speak in
the Security Council for the first time this month, allow
me, first of all, to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of September.
We are confident that the Council will discharge its
responsibilities with notable success under your wise
leadership.

32. I should also like to take this opportunity to express
my delegation’s sincere admiration for the great qualities of
impartiality, wisdom and tact of your predecessor, Ambassador de Araujo Castro of Brazil. During his presidency last
month Ambassador de Araujo Castro presided over the
informal consultations and meetings of the Security Council with consummate skill and statesmanlike leadership
which enabled it to deal effectively with the difficult
problems with which it was faced.

40. We should also like to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador de Araujo Castro of Brazil, for the
consummate skill with which he conducted the Council’s
proceedings last month.

33. My delegation feels privileged to co-sponsor the draft
resolution recommending Swaziland’s application for membership in the United Nations which, we have no doubt,
will be adopted unanimously. The independence of Swaziland on 6 September was acclaimed the world over as a
further milestone in the extension of the frontiers of
freedom. The valiant people of Swaziland have waited long
in the ranks of dependent territories to obtain their
freedom and to join the community of nations. For the
people of Swaziland this is the beginning of a new era. TO
use the words of His Majesty King Sobhuza II, “the Swazi
tribe will be like a nation being born again”.

41. Pakistan has great pleasure in supporting Swaziland’s
application for admission to the United Nations, Swaziland’s accession to independence and membership of the
Commonwealth is an important step in the process of
decolonialization which the United Kingdom initiated, with
foresight and wisdom, after the end of the Second World
War. This process has not come to an end yet, as has been
pointed out by other speakers before me.
42. My delegation warmly welcomes Swaziland to the
community of nations and extends on behalf of the
President, the Government and the people of Pakistan
sincere congratulations to His Majesty the King, the
Government and the people of Swaziland. We wish them
Godspeed in the great task of construction and develop
ment. A free, strong and prosperous Swaziland, will, we are
confident, make a significant contribution to the promotion of world peace and respect for fundamental human
rights.

34. Swaziland’s attainment of independence is a manifestation of the new life that is pulsating through Africa. The
battle for decolonization in Africa has been long and
arduous and, inevitably, a great deal remains to be done.
However, the independence of Swaziland brings the great
continent of Africa a step closer to the ideal of complete
freedom. My delegation earnestly hopes that Swaziland’s
independence will be a precursor of the speedy liquidation
of colonialism in Angola, Mozambique, Namibia, Rhodesia
and elsewhere in Africa.

43. with its admission to membership in the United
Nations, Swaziland will, we hope, participate in full
measure in the activities of the family of international
organizations and benefit from international economic and
technical co-operation under the United Nations system.

35. India and Swaziland have shared a common experience
in the struggle for freedom; we now look forward to sharing
with the people of Swaziland the common goal of peaceful
economic development and prosperity for our peoples. We

44. It is with much pleasure that the delegation of
Pakistan recommends to the Council, for unanimous
3

,,

.,,a,

safeguard its own interests and play a constructive
the development of Africa in the years to come.

adoption, draft resolution S/S810 which Pakistan has the
honour to co-sponsor along with six other members of the
Council.

54. We wholeheartedly hope and indeed believe that the
Government and the people of Swaziland will succeed in
these endeavours and that their future will be one of
prosperity, stability and peace.

45. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Pakistan for the kind remarks he addressed to the Chair.

iI
/
,I

.<:

:,,
’i

role ia

46. Speaking now as the representative of CANADA, a
co-sponsor of the draft resolution contained in document
S/8810, submitted on 10 September 1968, I am pleased to
join in sponsoring that draft resolution, which is now
before us, recommending to the General Assembly that
Swaziland be admitted as a Member of the United Nations,
and which I hope will be adopted unanimously. We are
particularly happy to co-sponsor this draft resolution
because Swaziland and Canada, in spite of the distance
which separates our two countries, share the common
heritage on which the Commonwealth of Nations is based.

55. Mr. CHANG (China): May I, Mr. President, on behalf
of my delegation say, rather belatedly, how happy we aE
to see you in the Chair. I should also like to associate my
delegation with the well-deserved tribute paid to your
distinguished predecessor, Ambassador de Araujo Castro of
Brazil, who presided over the Council during the eventful
month of August with so much skill and wisdom,
56. The admission of a pew Member to the world
community is, to us, always an auspicious occasion, It
therefore gives my delegation great satisfaction to welcome
to membership in the United Nations another new11
independent State from Africa, the Kingdom of Swaziland.
Only a few days ago, on 6 September, a special envoy from
my country was privileged to participate in the indepen.
dence celebrations with the happy people of Swaziland in
the capital city of Mbabane, bringing with him the greetinge
and good wishes of the Chinese people and Government.

47. In place of the former High Commission Territories,
there are now three independent countries-Botswana,
Lesotho and, as of 6 September last, Swaziland.
48. With the independence of Swaziland, yet another
State has taken its place as a free and independent member
of the Commonwealth. Our welcome of Swaziland into the
Commonwealth is as warm and sincere as is our recommendation to the General Assembly that Swaziland become the
125th Member of the United Nations. My Government is
convinced that Swaziland will live up to the high ideals of
our Charter and will actively contribute to the accomplishment of our goals;
49. Speaking again as PRESIDENT, may I add that I
consider myself particularly fortunate, as a representative
of one CohmonweaIth nation, to preside over the Council’s
deliberations on the request for admission to the United
Nations by ano,ther member of the Commonwealth.

57. Few countries have emerged from colonialism to
independent statehood in happier circumstances or with
greater promise for the future. Under the inspired leadership of its monarch and Prime Minister, the Kingdom of
Swaziland has enjoyed economic prosperity, social progrcu
and political stability. Swaziland, of course, is not a vet
large country, but it is endowed with a variety of valuable
mineral resources and rich agricultural land. It thus ofre’ers
great potentials for development. The Government arld
peoples of this newly independent State can look Forward
to the future with confidence.

50. Mr. MELLBIN (Denmark): Denmark also wishes to let
its voice be heard today and to congratulate His Majesty the
King of Swaziland, its Government and its people, on their
newly attained independence, and to welcome yet another
free African State to the community of nations.

58. In voting for the draft resolution contained in docv.
ment S/8810, my delegation anticipates a happy arid
fruitful co-operation with the representatives of Swazilaild
in: the United Nations in the common search for a just and
peaceful world.

51. We direct these words of congratulation and welcome
to Dr. Sukati, the distinguished Ambassador-designate of
Swaziland to the United Nations, whom we are most
gratified to greet in our midst today. Denmark certainly
supports the application of Swaziland for membership of
the United Nations.

59. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from hwclz):
The
French delegation, together with the community
of
nations, welcomes the attainment of independence by the
Kingdom of Swaziland. It greets this happy event and will
vote in favour of the admission of this new State te
membership of the United Natiqns, as has been proposed.
in particular, by the delegation of the United Kingdom.
which has successfully guided the people of Swaziland to
international sovereignty.

52. We are convinced that the future participation of
Swaziland in the work of this Organization will be to our
mutual advantage.

60. Swaziland, which is a fertile and well-irrigated COUP
try, enjoys a prosperous agriculture. In addition to than
resources there are the resources which it derives from
timber industry and the exploitation of large asbestos and
iron ore mines. This means that nature has generously
endowed Swaziland, whose exports are rapidly increasing.

53. The benefits and privileges of independence are, as we
all know, accompanied by many problems, external and
internal. Swaziland is no exception to that ruIe. This is not
the day or the occasion for going into the details of such
questions. Suffice it to say that we all are aware of their
existence and we trust that, as an independent nation and
as a Member of this Organization, Swaziland will be able to
cope with its problems in the future and, in so doing, to

61. Swaziland, which has enjoyed a long period of peace
under the wise administration of its sovereign, His Majesty

4

Sobhuza II, thus acquires its independence under auspicious
circumstances in spite of its small size and relative isolation,
deprived as it is of direct access to the sea. We do not doubt
that its people will be able to make the best use of the
valuable assets at its disposal, not only to carry out the
essential task of economic and social development, but also
to ensure its effective participation in international life, in
particular in the work of our Organization; participation
which, as we know, invoIves considerabIe burdens.

uted to the work of the Organization, Indeed, it is one
more reason for Brazil to rejoice, for the marks of the
African heritage in Brazilian history are extensive and deep
and constitute an inescapable and definite element in
Brazilian culture; one of which we are very proud.
70. We are certain that Swaziland will measure up to its
new responsibilities and challenges and will bring its own
contribution to the United Nations. For these reasons we
hope that the draft resolution before us [S/8810] will be
adopted unanimously.

62. To the Kingdom of Swaziland and to Dr. Sukati who
will become our colleague, the French delegation is pleased
to extend a welcome among the United Nations. To the
leaders and inhabitants of that country, we extend our best
wishes for happiness and prosperity.

71. I take this opportunity to convey to the people and
Government of Swaziland the warmest congratulations of
the people and Government of Brazil and our cordial wishes
for their prosperity and well-being in the new path they
have chosen.

63. Mr. JARA RECALDE (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): Mr. President, first of all I should like to express
my delegation’s pleasure at seeing you as President of the
council for this month. Your experience, your ability and
your tact assure us that the Council will perform its tasks
effectively.

72. Mr. BALL (United States of America): Within the last
quarter-century about one billion people-perhaps one-third
of the whole human race-have made the perilous passage
from some form of colonial dependence to political and
juridical independence. This, I submit, is one of the
brightest achievements in the long annals of our human
society, and the role of the United Nations in facilitating
this achievement has, it seems to me, by itself justified the
high hopes and the great foresight of the drafters of the
Charter. Today, marking a further heartening event in that
epic development, we have before us the application of
Swaziland for membership in the United Nations. It is an
application that my Government heartily endorses, for we
believe that Swaziland can and will play a constructive role
in this Organization.

64. The delegation of Paraguay associates itself with the
other delegations that have paid tribute to the outgoing
President of the Council, Ambassador de Araujo Castro, for
the ability and wisdom with which he guided our deliberations in a difficult debate which aroused intense feelings.
65. The independence of Swaziland constitutes a further
stage in the process of decolonization which is being carried
out and which is one of the aims of our Organization. The
Council has now under consideration the application for
the admission of this new country to membership of the
United Nations, which is the subject of the draft resolution
contained in document S/8810. My delegation will vote in
favour and, in so doing, expresses its best wishes for the
progress and happiness of the people of Swaziland.
66. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative
Paraguay for the remarks he addressed to me.

73. In the peaceful and successful progress of the Swazis
towards independence and the progressive establishment of
democratic institutions, we have already witnessed the
dedication of gifted leaders and the determination of a
steadfast people. In this same peaceful evolution we have
also again seen the sense of responsibility and the resolute
good faith of the United Kingdom. It is a good omen for
the future, as well as a tribute to the peoples and the
leaders of both countries, that the co-operative relationship
forged during a sixty-five year period of guidance will
continue into the period of independence. The pledge to
that effect made by King Sobhuza during the independence
ceremonies held earlier this month is only the most recent
example of the wise leadership he has given his people for
nearly half a century.

of

67. Mr. DE ARAUJO CASTRO (Brazil): There is no more
gratifying a task for a delegation in the Security Council
than to address itself to a request such as that submitted by
Swaziland, which is before the Council in document
S/8808. It is not that we underrate our responsibilities. On
the contrary, we are aware of the seriousness of our task in
recommending’ the admission of a new Member to the
United Nations under Article 4 of the Charter. We do,
however, deem it a privilege to witness the birth of a new
State and we feel very much encouraged by the pledges
made by a young State on joining the community of
nations in its efforts towards peace and mutual understanding.

74. A nation of some 400,000 inhabitants in an area of
6,700 square miles, Swaziland is fortunate indeed in its rich
endowment of mineral, agricultural and human resources.
Much has been done already to develop these assets, and
there is good reason for confidence that further development will not lag. Indeed, with its natural and human
resources and its favourable balance of trade and with a
continuation of the wise and progressive leadership it has
enjoyed, the economic prospects of Swaziland at the outset
of independence are truly bright. While my Government has
had direct relations with Swaziland only since August 1964,
we have long followed its progress with admiration and
with great interest, and we look forward to broadening and
deepening our relations.

68. Brazil warmly welcomes the independence of Swaziland and its admission to the United Nations as its 125th
Member. The independence of any country is, in every case,
an enlargement of the area of freedom in the world, and
this is always an encouraging event. We wish to congratulate
the Government of the United Kingdom on the positive
steps taken to that effect.
69. Swaziland will be one more country to join the
African family of nations which has so positively contrib5

Podgorny, to the King of Swaziland. The text of this
telegram reads as follows:

75. We believe that Swaziland meets the requirements for
admission to the United Nations, including-and this is the
most important requirement of all-the will. and capacity to
fulfil the obligations entailed in membership. Therefore we
urge, with the same enthusiasm as that with which we
welcomed its achievement of independence, that Swaziland
be recommended for membership in the United Nations.

“On the occasion of the proclamation of the indepea.
dence of Swaziland, may I request Your Majesty
to
accept our sincere congratulations and best wishes for the
well-being and progress of the people of Swaziland on
their road to independent development. The Soviet Union
declares that it recognizes Swaziland as an independent
and sovereign State and expresses its readiness to establish
diplomatic relations with it.

76. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The Security Council has before
it the application of a newly independent African State, the
Kingdom of Swaziland, for admission to membership of the
United Nations, and also a declaration by that State that it
accepts the obligations contained in the Charter of the
United Nations and solemnly undertakes to fulfil them.

“With the highest respect,
N. V. Podgorny,
Chairman of the Presidium
of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics”

77. The Soviet delegation greets with great satisfaction the
birth of a new sovereign State on the African continent,
where many millions of Africans are still continuing their
sacred and heroic struggle against colonial and racist
oppression and slavery, for their freedom and national
independence.

83. Guided by the lofty principles of equality, self”
determination and independence of peoples proclaimed by
the great Lenin upon the creation of the Soviet State, and
unswervingly pursuing its policy of developing and strength.
ening relations of friendship and co-operation with the
States of Africa, the Soviet Union supports the application
of Swaziland and will vote in favour of its admission to the
United Nations.

78. For us, the people of the Soviet Union, the appearance
of yet another independent country on the map of Africa is
the resuit of the relentless struggle of the people of
Swaziland, which it waged together with other peace-loving
peoples and with their support, for the liquidation of the
shameful system of imperialism and colonialism.

84. My statement would not be complete if I did not react
to the remarks addressed to me by the United Kingdom
representative, Lord Caradon. I deem it essential to make
some corrections to his somewhat, to put it mildly, boastful
statements.

79. The Soviet Union has constantly spoken out in United
Nations bodies in favour of the independence of Swaziland
and a limitation of the activities of foreign imperialist
monopolies which exploit the population and plunder the
natural resources of that rich country. The USSR has
always supported United Nations decisions aimed at
creating the most propitious conditions for the attainment
of independence by Swaziland; in particular it has advocated a just solution of the problem of land tenure in that
country so that the land, which is a basic possession of the
Swazi people, should belong to the indigenous population,
and not to foreigners and imperialist monopolies.

85. He said that the United Kingdom had done more to
end imperialism than any other country. However, he who
takes most from other people’s property should do most to
return it. That is quite logical. But in making such historical
corrections, I must emphasize most strongly that the era of
the collapse and decline of imperialism began against the
will and wishes of the imperialists and imperialism. It began
on 7 November 1917 with the Great October Socialist
Revolution in Russia. It was precisely the lofty, noble
principles proclaimed by the great Lenin-freedom, equal.
ity, independence, the self-determination of all peoples,
great or small-that gave a start to the downfall of the era
of imperialism.

80. In greeting Swaziland today as a new sovereign State,
we express the hope that, upon becoming a Member of this
international Organization, this State will make its contribution in the struggle for the national liberation of other
peoples, for the strengthening of international peace and
security and for the development of friendship and cooperation among peoples.

86. The facts of history show that even so outstanding a
leader of Great Britain as the late Sir Winston Churchill
declared, even during the Second World War-I am quoting
from memory and therefore may be inaccurate, but I well
remember the sense-“1 am not Prime Minister in order to
preside over the liquidation of the British Empire”.

81. We should also like to extend to this new independent
African State and to its people our sincere wishes for
success on the road to independent development, progress
and prosperity.

87. To this it should be added that Lord Caradon did
much to preserve the integrity of the British Empire. But
history pursued its course, despite the will and wishes of
imperialism.

82. The feelings of the people of the Soviet Union towards
the Swazi people in connexion with the proclamation of
the independence of Swaziland were recently expressed in a
telegram of congratulations addressed, on 5 September this
year, by the Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, N. V.

88. As a result of the Second World War, when the Soviet
Union and the Soviet people bore, on their own shoulders,
the main burden of the struggle against Hitlerite imperial.
ism which was threatening to enslave the whole world, aad
6

not only the peoples of Africa and Asia. As a result the
Soviet Union lost over twenty million people in the struggle
for its freedom and independence and for the freedom and
independence of other peoples. From then on the imperialist system collapsed at an ever-increasing pace,

allowed to interfere in this matter. The United Nations and
its bodies have been created and exist, not in order to
inflame an atmosphere of hostility and mistrust between
States. Any further attempts to drag this Organization into
a discussion on such a question can only cause serious
detriment to its authority and interfere with its normal
activity.

89. You will recall that one of the outstanding leaders of
Africa, stated that freedom and independence were not
being handed to the peoples of Africa on a plate. They had
to be fought for and won. It was as a result of the
development and strengthening of the national liberation
struggle and the national liberation revolutions in Africa
and Asia after the October Revolution, and even more so
after the Second World War, that imperialism had to yield,
as a consequence of which over a thousand million people
who were under the yoke of imperialism and colonialism
gained independence.

98. The fact that today Lord Caradon-because of a lack
of arguments against everything I have said on the subject
of why the colonial system of imperialism collapsed, why
the era of the decline and collapse of imperialism came in,
from what time this decline and collapse started, and why
over a thousand million people have become free and
independent; and that all this has happened against the will
and the wishes of the imperialists-the fact, I repeat, that
Lord Caradon, finding no arguments to refute these
commonly known historical facts, should attempt to
mention Czechoslovakia, shows that it is the imperialist
countries whose aim it is to inflame the international
situation and to drag the United Nations into discussion of
a question which has absolutely nothing to do with the
United Nations.

90. That.is the real reason, not what Lord Caradon has
stated here.
91. I thought it necessary to make this small correction to
the phrase which Lord Caradon especially addressed to me
in his statement.
92. The PRESIDENT: I recognize the representative of
the United Kingdom on a point of order.

99. The PRESIDENT: A few minutes ago I recognized the
representative of the United Kingdom on a point of order,
and then the representative of the Soviet Union. Roth
representatives indicated, however, that they were speaking
in exercise of their right of reply. I must point out to the
members that I still have the representative of Hungary
inscribed on my list to speak on the.item which we have
met to discuss, namely, the recommendation of the
Security Council to the Assembly on the question of the
admission of Swaziland as a Member of the United Nations.

93. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): No, Mr. President, merely for a word of reply. I have no wish or
desire to enter into any historical dissertation with the
representative of the Soviet Union but I would merely say,
having heard his words today, that when .he spoke of
independence and self-determination I was happy to hear
what he said. And when he says that he who takes most
from others must do most to return it, I would merely add
that I think his words will be heard with happiness in
Czechoslovakia.

100. I would suggest, unless a point of order is being
raised, that we should finish hearing the speakers on the list
on this question before I entertain further requests for the
exercise of right of reply, it being understood that I will of
course provide an opportunity for these rights of reply
before I put the resolution before us to the vote.

94. The PRESIDENT: I recognize the representative of
the Soviet Union to exercise his right of reply.
95. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I categorically protest against
the mention by Lord Caradon of a question that has
absolutely nothing to do with the item of the Security
Council agenda which we are discussing, or with the United
Nations as a whole. Lord Caradon, among others who, as is
well known, regardless of the Charter of the United Nations
have forcibly dragged the question of Czechoslovakia into
the Security Council, has already been given a deserved
rebuff in the Czechoslovak Mission’s official letter, which,
upon instructions of the Czechoslovak Government, requested the removal of this question from discussion in the
Security Council.

101. With the consent of the members who have asked to
exercise their right of reply, I would ask the representative
of Hungary, who has been very patient in waiting his turn,
to speak, after which I shall call on those representatives
who wish to exercise their right of reply before I put the
resolution to the vote.
102. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): On the occasion of the
accession to independence of Swaziland, we should like to
welcome its people and to extend our best wishes for the
welfare and prosperity of this country. Our delegation
greets also the wish of the newly independent Swaziland to
be admitted to membership of the United Nations.

96. Imperialist propaganda in Britain, the United States
and a number of other countries is trying to divert
attention from the imperialist aggression in various parts of
the world-in
Viet-Nam and in the Middle East-and from
the crimes of colonialism and imperialism in southern
Africa and to draw attention to Czechoslovakia and the
events taking place there.

103. The Hungarian delegation wishes to state that it
supports the application of Swaziland, contained in document S/8808, and is ready to vote in its favour.
104. In considering the admission of Swaziland to membership of the United Nations, we should direct our
attention to the dangerous situation existing in the southern part of Africa.

97. But this question is entirely a matter for Czechoslovakia itself and the socialist countries, and nobody is
7

105. Events in the African continent, as can be seen from
the latest discussions on Namibia and Southern Rhodesia in
the Security Council, cause serious anxiety and require
efficient measures on behalf of the world community
against all manifestationsof colonialism, apartheid and
racism.

of recent events, which he regardsas unmentionable ia
theseprecincts, I would suggestthat his Government take
his own dark prophecy very much to heart.

106. We feel all the more contented and satisfiedthat
another former colonialterritory, Swaziland,hasgainedits
independence.It is of particularimportancethat the newly
independentSwazilandhad morethan amplebitter experience of colonialism.That is the reasonwhy my delegation
is confident that, as an independentState, Swazilandwill
exert all possible efforts to overcome the difficulties
resulting from its colonial inheritance, and will achieve
progressin every field of its nationallife. Wehopethat asa
Member of the United Nations,Swazilandwill contribute
to our efforts to liquidate all remnantsof colonialismand
to preserveinternationalpeaceandsecurity.

114. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President,I
have no wish that we should prolong this discussionand
indeed I wish to respond to your appeal that we should
limit it andfinish it. I would say only two things.

113. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof the
UnitedKingdomin exerciseof his right of reply.

107. The Hungarian delegationis looking forward with
pleasureto co-operatingwith the Swazilanddelegationat
the United Nations in promoting the noble ideas and
principlesset forth in the Charter.
108. The PRESIDENT: I now have on my list the names
of two representativeswho wishto speakin exerciseof the
right of reply. It is, of course,recognizedthat it isthe right
of reply to points which were raisedearlier but which are
not strictly relevant to the item on the agendaof the
Council at this meeting. I would ask membersto try to
confine their remarksasclosely aspossibleto the subject
that we arediscussing
at this meeting.
109. I call on the representativeof the United Statesin
exerciseof the right of reply.
110. Mr. BALL (United Statesof America): I want to
exercisemy right of reply only very briefly to respondto
the comments made by the Soviet representative.The
representativeof the United Kingdom hassaidvery much
what I had intended to sayandsaidit probably better than
I could. But in atiy event, thereare one or two pointswhich
I think areworth making.

115. When the representativeof the Soviet Union makes
accusationsof imperialism, he surely cannot hope that
discussion
will be limited to chargesagainstothers,
116. Secondly, I should like to take up the main point
which he madeto us just now when he suggestedthat the
advanceof peoplespreviously under British adrninistraiioa
to independencehad beendoneand undertakendespitethe
efforts of the United Kingdom. I would like to give him my
personalevidence that ,this advancehas been undertaken
with the full encouragement,assistance
and co-operationof
my country and my countrymen. Having spent the greater
part of my life in that task, I hope that he will accept that
evidenceasjustified.
117. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof tfle
Soviet Union in exerciseof his right of reply.
118. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I shall be brief. It is very
touchingto seehow the representativeof the United States
hascomeout in support of the representativeof the United
Kingdom on the question of imperialism,of who started
destroying it and when the downfall of the era of
imperialismbegan.
119. With regard to the question of Czechoslovakia,
Mr. Ball, it is not before the Security Council asyou assert,
but is suspended,
precisely that, suspended;it is not before
the Council, becausethe CzechoslovakGovernment officially requested the Security Council to remove the
questionfrom its agenda.And this is alsoa slapat you and
the United Kingdom representative, becauseyou together
illegally draggedthis question into the Security Council.
That is all there is to be said. So stop interfering in other
people’saffairs. I have already given you this advice in one
of my statements: do not poke your nose into other
people’saffairs. The socialistcountriesand socialistCzecho.
Slovakiawill look after their own affairs themselves,

111. First, I am always fascinated by the concept of
germanenesswhich exists in the mind of the Soviet
representative. It appearsto be that this Council should
discussonly what he can discusscomfortably. I would
remind him that this Councilhasvoted 13 to 2 to keepthe
situation of Czechoslovakiaon the agenda,andlet there be
no doubt about the fact that this Council’rcmainsseizedof
the inatter.

120. There were negotiations at a high level in Moscow
and normalization of the situation is continuing. Mr. Ball
and Lord Caradon,do not hinder the normalization ofthe
situation. Give this advice also to the propagandaorgans
of
your countries which, day in and day out, are slandering
the Czechoslovakpeople, that socialistcountry and all the
socialistcountries, and which are hindering normalization.
This is understandable,becausethe imperialist plansand
conspiracy have been smashed-their aim has not bees
achievedand that is why there is somuch spite, enmity and
hatred and somuch slanderin the propagandaorgansof the
United States and Britain and even in the statements
of

112. I find it regrettableindeedthat on anoccasionwhich
should be an event for rejoicing and congratulationto a
brave and admirablepeoplethat are on the point ofjoining
this Organization, the representativeof the Soviet Union
has taken the occasionto deliver one of his all too familiar
political diatribes.While there is very little in what he said
that I canagreewith I did find, happily, onestatementthat
he madewhich seemed
to meprophetic andimportant, and
that washis statementthat the downfall of imperialismhas
begun in spite of the efforts of the imperialists.In the light
8

officials. The sooner this hostile campaign in the United
States and Britain cease the sooner the situation in
Czechoslovakia will be normalized.

123. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with rule 60 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, I
shall immediately request the Secretary-General to transmit
to the General Assembly the text of the resolution just
adopted, together with the verbatim record of this meeting.

121. As for replying to the remarks of Lord Caradon, I
said everything in my first reply and there is no need to
repeat it.

124. With the consent of the Council, I should like on
behalf of the Council as a whole to extend warm greetings
to Dr. Sukati, the Ambassador-designate of Swaziland to
the United Nations, who is with us in this chamber today,
as a number of representatives have mentioned, and
through him to convey the good wishes of this Council to
the people and Government of Swaziland on the occasion
of their independence and on the occasion of the favourable recommendation of the Council on their membership.
in the United Nations.

122. The PRESIDENT: No motion, of course, has been
placed before the Council today on the subject of Czechoslovakia. There is a motion before the Council on the
subject of the recommendation of the Security Council on
the admission of Swaziland. That motion is before representatives in document S/8810, of 10 September, in the name
of Algeria, Canada, Ethiopia, India, Pakistan, Senegal, and
the United Kingdom. Representatives have heard the
statements made by members of the Council. If no other
member wishes to speak at this stage we shall proceed to
the vote on the seven-Power draft resolution in the usual
manner.

125. As the Security Council has now completed its
consideration of this item, I propose that we adjourn this
meeting, on the understanding that the Council will
reconvene in ten minutes to take up a separate item on the
situation in the Middle East, for which I have a number of
speakers on my list.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Senegal, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America.

126. If I hear no objection, it will be so decided.
It was so decided.

The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 1
1 See resolution 2.57 (1968).

The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

9

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS
moy
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be obloined
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Sales
Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT
Les

SE PROCURER

publications

der

LES PUBLICATIONS
Notions

Unies

rant

DES NATIONS
en

vente

UNIES

danr

les

d&posit&es
du monde
entier.
Informer-vous
oupr&s
Nations
Unier, Section
der ventes, New York ou Get&e.

de votre

KAK

IlOIlYqMTb

M3fiAtlIIfl

06bEAMHEHHblX

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUELICACIONES

OPrAHM3AL(MH

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicociones
de IGS Nociones
Unidar
est6n
en todas porter
del mundo.
Conrulte
o su librero
Ventor,
Nuevo
York o Ginebro.

Litho in United Nations, New York

librairier

librairie

et
ou

les

cqences

adresser-vow

61

tiAL(tlR

UNIDAS

en vcnto en librerior
o dirijose
o: Nocioner

y colas
distribuidoror
Unidos,
Seccibn

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

de

35645-October

1972-2,050
