S/2015/113

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 February 2015
Original: English

Special report of the Secretary-General on the strategic
assessment of the United Nations presence in Libya
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted following my report of 5 September 2014
(S/2014/653), in which I informed the Security Council of my request that the
United Nations Secretariat conduct a review of the United Nations presence in
Libya, in close partnership with the Libyan authorities and in consultation with
regional and international partners. The present report covers the main findings of
that exercise, as well as recommendations for the reconfiguration of the United
Nations presence in Libya to adjust to the new realities on the ground.
2.
In preparing the present report, the Department of Political Affairs, in
coordination with the inter-agency task force for Libya, initiated a strategic
assessment of the United Nations presence in Libya. The assessment focused on the
current and anticipated challenges faced by the United N ations in the consolidation
of peace. A strategic assessment mission, comprising representatives from the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department of Field Support, the Department
for Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of the United Nations High Co mmissioner
for Human Rights, the United Nations Development Programme and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (representing the agencies, funds and
programmes), visited Tunisia from 7 to 13 January 2015. In developing
recommendations, consideration was given to the priorities of key Libyan parties, as
well as the concerns of regional and international partners.

II. Context and factors of instability
3.
Since early July 2014, Libya has witnessed the most serious outbreak of armed
conflict since the 2011 revolution. The fighting in Tripoli, Benghazi and elsewhere
in the country has been characterized by serious violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law. Indiscriminate firing of heavy weaponry by all sides in
densely populated areas has resulted in significant civilian casualties. The
internationally recognized authorities are no longer in Tripoli and parallel legislative
and executive bodies have been put in place. The political division and the fighting
have led to an upsurge in internal displacement and tangible worsening in the
provision of and access to essential services. Imports of commodities and
movements across the country have been severely curtailed. Women have been

15-01966 (E)

190215

*1501966*

S/2015/113

particularly affected by the escalation of the conflict, and those visibly engaging in
public affairs have been increasingly targeted. It has also gravely affected the lives
of cultural groups (namely, the Tabu, Tuareg and Amazigh communities), as well as
refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants, which is already a vulnerable population.
4.
At the heart of the current political impasse and rapidly deteriorating security
situation is a stark deficiency in the area of political and human rights resulting from
decades-old policies of systematic disenfranchisement of the population and the
undermining of State institutions, which effectively created a culture characterized
by lack of accountability, absence of transparency and denial of civil rights and
liberties. Libyans have therefore experienced difficulty in forging a national
consensus or a shared vision regarding how to address the Qadhafi legacy and
manage the transition, which has had serious consequences for the nascent political
process.
5.
This is compounded by the fact that emerging political, societal and security
actors in Libya remain heavily fragmented. There are divisions not only between
former regime opponents, including those who participated in the revolution and
those who had held positions with the regime, but also along ideologic al, regional,
local, tribal and ethnic lines. Many of these categories overlap, and the distinctions
commonly used to define the various political camps have little explanatory value as
concerns political positioning and behaviour. As a result, security an d political
actors have become embroiled in battles aimed at safeguarding factional and other
particular interests.
6.
The political transition of Libya was predicated on the assumption that
popularly elected institutions, namely the legislative and execu tive branches, would
take the lead in putting in place the necessary foundations for a modern democratic
State. These institutions were also intended to take forward crucial reforms to allow
for effective national security decision-making, the reform of State security
institutions, including those responsible for governance, building the capacity of the
courts, the judiciary, the prison service and prosecution, and establishing transitional
justice mechanisms. However, effective decision-making structures have not been
put in place and the responsibilities of each branch of government were not properly
clarified in the constitutional declaration. As a result, relations between the
transitional legislature and the executive branch have been marked by strong
competition and rivalry, preventing them from designing and implementing the
required policies to ensure a successful transition process. In addition, the poor
quality of services provided to the population, particularly in the fields of security,
health and education, has undermined public trust in the State.
7.
Furthermore, the successive Governments of Libya have not been able to
establish control over the use of force. Libyan security forces remain weak and lack
proper command and control, cohesion and morale, while armed groups have
proliferated. The sanctioning of the armed brigades by the State in 2012, including
by giving them law enforcement and custodial functions, and the comparatively high
salaries paid to their members resulted in the establishment of security structures
parallel to those of the State. Arms control, disarmament and the integration of
revolutionary fighters into State structures, or their reintegration into civilian life,
remain key to national efforts and international assistance to reform the security
sector.

2/12

15-01966

S/2015/113

8.
Many armed groups have increased their capabilities and armaments,
becoming more powerful than the national army and police forces, while remaining
on the payroll of the Government. The vast amounts of arms and ammunitio n
stockpiled around the country under the Qadhafi regime remained, for the most part,
intact or partially destroyed and unstable, unsecured and easily accessible to armed
groups and radical elements. Large quantities of arms were also imported by legal
and illegal means, providing a steady supply of heavy weaponry and ammunition.
While efforts have been made to tighten the arms embargo, the flow of weapons into
the country continues. The gradual erosion of the public ’s trust in its elected
institutions has provided space for these armed groups to broaden their scope of
influence, with many operating with impunity.
9.
Little progress has been achieved in confronting the legacy of crimes
committed by the former regime. Thousands remain in custody without tria l, missing
persons issues have been addressed only partially and in a discriminatory manner,
and little attention has been given to the claims of victims of the former regime. A
fact-finding and reconciliation commission has been established by law but is not
yet operational. While some of the officials of the Qadhafi regime are now being
prosecuted, there are increasing concerns about the fairness of such proceedings and
no measures have been taken against those allegedly responsible for human rights
violations committed after the revolution. Political activists, human rights defenders
and media professionals of both genders have increasingly been threatened and
killed. Attacks on courthouses and the judiciary, as well as the recent fighting, have
halted the work of the judiciary in Benghazi, Derna, Sirte and Tripoli.
10. The absence of an effective justice system amid the ongoing power struggle
has been accompanied by a breakdown of law and order. Both ordinary and
politically motivated crimes have been on the rise since 2013. In Tripoli and
Benghazi especially, the number of kidnappings, carjackings, improvised explosive
device attacks and robberies has increased significantly, undermining the
population’s safety and security. Benghazi has been plagued by a wave of
assassinations of former regime officials and members of the judiciary, as well as
armed and security forces and activists.
11. Meanwhile, the southern cities of Sabha, Kufra and Awbari have seen large scale clashes along tribal and ethnic lines, with many killed and the State unable to
contain the violence or pursue those responsible without relying on armed groups.
Moreover, porous borders have enabled continued smuggling and provide easy
passage for criminal elements into and out of the countr y. Vast unpopulated areas of
the relatively less developed and poorer southern parts of the country allow these
criminal and extremist groups to continue their activities outside the reach of the
State.
12. The economy of Libya remains heavily dependent on oil revenues and no
significant progress towards diversification has been made. Oil revenues make up
90 per cent of the annual budget, which has led control of the fields, pipelines and
ports to become a goal of the fighting in itself, and their blockage a tool for political
leverage. In addition, the lack of a transparent revenue collection and distribution
process not only provides ample opportunities for graft and corruption but also
exacerbates subregional and local conflicts.
13. There have been significant delays in the development of the new constitution,
which has not only impeded the effective functioning of the nascent institutional

15-01966

3/12

S/2015/113

framework but has also prolonged and possibly exacerbated the power struggle
among the political actors. While the Constitution Drafting Assembly has been
careful not to be drawn into the ongoing political struggle, the situation may become
untenable once the body begins its work on controversial issues, such as the role of
Islam in the new State, resource distribution, federalism and rights of cultural groups.
14. While the lack of a United Nations presence inside Libya and limited access
due to insecurity limit the availability of verified information, it is estimated that
360,000 people have been internally displaced as the result of recent fighting. Most
of them live with relatives or host communities or in public buildings, but the lack
of cash and skyrocketing prices for food and non-food items may decrease their
ability to support themselves. Frequent fuel shortages and electricity cuts are
impacting people’s livelihoods. Owing to ongoing fighting, the Government’s lack
of access to resources and the location of warehouses in conflict zones, the supply
chain for food and medical supplies has been broken. Furthermore, with the departure
of foreign doctors and nurses, many hospitals have stopped functioning. There is
very low capacity to deal with the increasing number of trauma -related cases inside
Libya, and emergency medical services have collapsed in some areas. After
humanitarian activities were largely phased out in 2012, most key donors, Libyan
partners and United Nations agencies now anticipate that humanitarian needs will
increase in the course of 2015, even under the most positive scenario of a successful
political dialogue. Meanwhile, there is a strong feeling of neglect and abandonment
in the east and south of the country, in particular in terms of assistance.

III. Priority areas for Libya
15. Drawing from the analysis of the conflict and possible scenarios for the next
12 to 18 months, as well as the priorities expressed by national actors, four priorities
have been identified for Libya for the next two years to resume its democratic
transition and set the basis for long-term stability.
1.

Ending the conflict
16. An initial agreement on addressing the immediate crisis will be needed. This
requires the main parties to reach agreements on ceasefire, security and interim
political arrangements. In addition to reducing the impact of the fighting on the
population, ending the conflict would pave the way for the restoration of security
and the resumption of the transitional process. It would also reduce the obstacles to
the delivery of essential services and to freedom of movement for the population. I n
that context, stopping abuses of human rights and serious violations of international
humanitarian law should be a priority.

2.

Completing the transitional process
17. For the process to move forward, an agreement must be reached on a political
framework that lays the foundations for a stable Libya based on legitimate and
inclusive institutions and respect for the rule of law, including arrangements for the
remainder of the transition. This will need to be underpinned by the adoption of a
constitution and a clear road map to address issues related to the proliferation of
arms and of armed groups operating outside State authority, as well as the
implementation of an effective process of transitional justice.

4/12

15-01966

S/2015/113

3.

Maintaining or restoring essential services
18. At a time when Libya is undergoing considerable stress, it is important,
including for the success of the political process, that essential services to the
population be maintained or restored throughout the country.

4.

Moving towards a stable and democratic State
19. The longer-term stability of Libya will depend upon visible progress towards
the establishment of legitimate, inclusive and effective institutions based on the rule
of law, good governance and respect for human rights. This inc ludes a public
financing and budget system that is transparent and accountable. Independent media
and active civil society are essential to achieving these goals.
20. The first three priorities would bring Libya back to a state of relative
normalcy, in which the democratic transition continues and people are able to live
their lives without fear of abduction, assassination or being caught in combat zones,
and with some access to essential services. The fourth priority will require
immediate, robust and sustained engagement by the international community to
support the realization of the aspirations of the people of Libya to live in a
functioning State with representative institutions.
21. The success of the transition will require consultative, inclusive a nd
transparent processes in compliance with the obligations of Libya under
international law. Throughout, special attention will need to be paid to the rights and
particular needs of women and vulnerable groups, such as internally displaced
persons, cultural groups, persons with disabilities, children, refugees, asylum seekers and migrants, including through the development of legislation and
mechanisms to ensure compliance by Libya with its obligations under international
human rights, humanitarian and refugee law.

IV. United Nations strategic priorities in Libya
22. The establishment of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
in 2011 signalled the strategic investment by the United Nations in the
transformation of Libya into a viable, stable and democratic State. Despite recent
setbacks in attaining that goal, the Organization continues to enjoy the strong
support of Libyan stakeholders and the international community to lead and
coordinate international efforts in support of Libya. Howe ver, the circumstances
under which UNSMIL was created have changed. The resumption of fighting and
the political divisions have prevented the United Nations from implementing some
critical mandated tasks aimed at building the capacity of national instituti ons.
23. While the above analysis shows the broad array of challenges faced by Libya,
the current situation requires the United Nations to focus its efforts. Based on the
priorities for Libya identified above, as well as on an analysis of the United Natio ns
capacity and comparative advantages, the priorities set out below are recommended
for United Nations engagement in Libya.
1.

Support to the political process
24. The immediate priority of the United Nations is to support Libyans in reaching
a political agreement on the way forward for the transition, thereby bringing an end

15-01966

5/12

S/2015/113

to the semblance of parallel State institutions, and reaching an agreement on basic
security arrangements in the major towns and cities, including a ceasefire.
25. Reaching these agreements, however, will not end the demand for facilitation
and mediation by the United Nations. An agreement that ends the fighting, political
crisis and institutional division would create the conditions for the next step, which
is a broad political framework and national vision. This would take place within the
context of a long-term, formal, multi-pronged dialogue process facilitated by the
United Nations that engages political parties, civil society, tribal forces,
municipalities and armed groups with the objective of reaching a broad consensus
that bolsters support for a political agreement and provides a more conducive
environment for the pursuit of national reconciliation. It is therefore expected that
facilitation by the United Nations of dialogue at various levels will not decrease
once the political process resumes. The United Nations will have to continue to
provide good offices to ensure that the agreements are implemented and that the
transition is as smooth as possible to prevent the resumption of conflict.
26. In order to provide mediation and good offices, the United Nations will need
to maintain expertise on a variety of issues, including in the areas of political
affairs, mediation processes, human rights, transitional justice, gender i ssues, arms
and ammunition management, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reform, rule of law, and support to key State institutions and
governance. The United Nations will need to be in a position to provide strategic
advice, including to support the negotiation, implementation and monitoring of any
ceasefire and to assist with realistic and practical arrangements for interim security.
It will be necessary to maintain constant engagement with Libyan security forces
and armed groups to reduce the effect of fighting on the civilian population and to
encourage behaviour by all armed parties that is in accordance with international
norms, including the transfer of custodial and law enforcement functions to central
authorities. Such engagement with formal and informal security structures will also
be an important part of the broader political dialogue, as interaction with the armed
groups will be key to obtaining ceasefires and negotiating interim security
arrangements utilizing the trust that has been built up over a period of time.
2.

Protection
27. Regardless of the evolution of the political situation, the United Nations will
continue to give high priority to human rights monitoring, reporting and advocacy,
given the scale of ongoing violations of international human rights and humanitarian
law, the need for impartial and accurate reporting in a heightened context of
politically motivated claims and counter-claims, and the demands for justice and
accountability originating from within Libyan society.
28. Given the presence of large caches of arms and ammunition, as well as
explosive remnants of war, which have a serious impact on the security of the
population and its freedom of movement, the United Nations should also continue
its task of securing weapons, combating improvised explosive device s attacks and
clearing explosive remnants of war in close coordination with, and in support of, the
Libyan Mine Action Centre and security institutions as they become established.

6/12

15-01966

S/2015/113

3.

Support to key institutions
29. Competition among institutions makes the identification of Libyan interlocutors
for the United Nations contentious. Divided institutions are weak and have a limited
absorptive capacity; however, the few remaining functioning and neutral institutions
have to be supported, as their success or failure will have a considerable impact on
the future of the country. For these reasons, the United Nations should continue to
provide support to the Constitution Drafting Assembly, the Hig h National Electoral
Commission and the National Council on Civil Liberties and Human Rights. The
United Nations should also be ready to support a Government of national unity once
it is established.
30. Given the need to protect the wealth and financial assets of Libya in order to
safeguard the social, economic and political aspirations of the Libyan people, the
United Nations should work with international partners to ensure support to the
Central Bank. The international community has a responsibility to support Libya in
using and distributing its resources through the Central Bank and public finance
mechanisms during the transition phase in a transparent, effective and inclusive
manner that benefits the population as a whole.

4.

Support for the provision of essential services
31. The United Nations should support the restoration of such essential services as
health and education on an emergency basis and help maintain the access of
vulnerable groups to food, electricity, water and sanitation, as well as justice.
Support to ensure the restoration of law and order will also be required. This will
imply working with national institutions, but also, and perhaps primarily at the local
level, with municipalities and other local groups.
32. In so doing, the United Nations will need to factor in the potential for a rapid
increase in humanitarian needs and the serious deterioration in the provision of
essential services across the country. These risks will be especially acute if the
political crisis deepens or the country faces an extended negotiation process and the
conflict causes further destruction of critical civilian infrastructure.

5.

Coordination
33. Given the broad support it enjoys from Libyan interlocutors, as well as
international and local partners, the United Nations remains uniquely placed to
coordinate international engagement on Libya. This involves coordination at the
political level, including through the various international special envoys to Libya
and others involved in Libyan affairs, as well as at the strategic and operational
levels. However, the effectiveness of the United Nations coordination role will
depend not only on the Organization but also on the willingness of its partners to
participate in coordination arrangements and to contribute resources.
34. Coordination will also be necessary for the continuation of humanitarian
assistance. The provision of such assistance should remain a priority for the United
Nations system in Libya. Principled, needs-based assistance must be expanded to
meet the growing needs of the population. The United Nations and Libya ’s partners
must also stand ready to intervene rapidly after the end of hostilities to help restore
some State authority, implement priority institution-building measures for key

15-01966

7/12

S/2015/113

institutions and resume essential services. This is essential to create an environment
conducive to the success of longer-term institution-building and stabilization efforts.

V. Risks
35. In planning for future United Nations engagement in Libya, there are a number
of risks to take into consideration that could undermine the Organization ’s efforts
and limit its impact. The risks include the following:
(a) The critical first step of ending the conflict does not materialize and
Libya collapses further into a complete civil war;
(b) One or several of the parties refuse dialogue and call for foreign military
intervention, which might be supported by some external actors;
(c) The ability of the United Nations to work is contingent on basic security
conditions which the Libyan authorities prove unwilling or unable to provide;
(d) Security conditions prohibit deployments inside Libya, limiting the
Organization’s ability to deal with day-to-day issues and reduce tensions in a timely
manner;
(e) The United Nations is perceived as losing its impartiality, thereby
becoming part of the conflict dynamic;
(f) Support from international actors that encourages and/or enables the
parties to pursue military victory, thus undermining the work of the United N ations;
(g)

The United Nations is not ready to scale up its engagement when needed.

VI. Recommendations on the United Nations configuration
36. To maximize the chances of success, it will be critical for the future United
Nations presence to focus on a clear and limited list of tasks based on the priorities
identified above. Aligning the mandate of the Mission and the relevant work of the
United Nations country team with the identified priorities will ensure increased
capacity to focus on a few critical tasks, while other activities are put on hold until
the circumstances become more auspicious. It is also important to ensure that the
presence of the United Nations is structured in the most efficient manner and is
adequately resourced.
37. The change of focus would entail a considerable reduction in the size of
UNSMIL. Given the new environment in which it operates and based on a realistic
assessment of what it will be able to achieve in this context, the Mission should be
reduced substantially, while it refocuses its capacity on the tasks described above.
38. Most Libyan interlocutors have noted the need for the United Nations to return
to Libya as soon as possible. However, the logistical and security resources required
for the Organization to be able to operate from secured premises and move around
safely render a full return unrealistic until conditions change. In addition, the added
value of a full return would be limited in the current circumstances and the United
Nations presence on the ground while conditions are not conducive would devalue
the currency of its presence. Therefore, the full return of the United Nations to

8/12

15-01966

S/2015/113

Libya is not recommended at this stage. The presence and mobility of United
Nations staff in Libya will be reviewed regularl y through the existing security
coordination mechanism.
39. However, the Organization should be able to operate in Libya to complete
critical tasks in support of its strategic priorities, including maintaining a link and
active engagement with its local counterparts in anticipation of a full return when
conditions permit. The best option would be a limited but continuous footprint in
Libya, with a rotation of 15 to 20 substantive staff from across the United Nations
system according to needs and strategic and operational priorities, with an
appropriate logistical and security support component. Tripoli would be considered
the forward base of the United Nations operations, with a temporary headquarters in
Tunis until it is assessed that a larger United Natio ns presence can safely and
productively return to Libya. Mission support services would continue to be derived
from the Global Service Centre in Brindisi.
40. Such an approach would require UNSMIL to relinquish existing facilities in
Tripoli since they are unsustainable from a security perspective. This, in turn, will
have an impact on the ability of the Mission to rapidly establish larger permanent
facilities that comply with minimum operating security standards to accommodate a
full return once the decision is made.
41. In order to remain operational and efficient with a limited presence in the
country, the support concept for the Mission should be designed to enable the
mobility of my Special Representative and personnel of UNSMIL and the United
Nations country team. The goal should be a nimble, flexible United Nations presence
able to go quickly where it is needed and adapt to evolving tasks. This would entail
travel in and out of Libya as needed, but also within the country to handle priorities
in the east, west and south of the country. It would require dedicated aviation
support for the mediation effort and a robust air bridge between Tunis and Tripoli
for operational and security purposes pending the resumption of commercial
alternatives or the full return of the United Nations to Libya. This would be
supplemented by travel by road from Tunisia and Egypt, as well as from Tripoli.
42. Even with a limited presence in Libya, it will be necessary to re -evaluate the
types of protection provided to UNSMIL and the country team so that staff can
move around and engage with key partners and beneficiaries. Future United Nations
operations in Libya will therefore require a considerably enhanced security presence
(not in real terms but in proportion to the numbers to be deployed inside Libya at
any given time), with the ability to cope with direct and determined threats,
including from extremist groups. The deployment of staff to Libya and the
allocation of resources to enable United Nations operations must be pri oritized
based on programme criticality and reflective of the urgent priorities of the United
Nations system as a whole. At the same time, the United Nations will have to
constantly reassess the risks related to its presence in Libya to determine whether
the arrangements in place need to be revised.
43. While the current political and security situation limits the scope of United
Nations engagement in Libya, it is essential that the progress made by the
Organization so far is sustained and that the Organiz ation maintains readiness to be
able to re-engage at short notice. This will require continuing knowledge of the
situation and contacts on the ground, as well as an understanding of the needs of the
population. UNSMIL will require capacity to monitor, asse ss and plan for a larger

15-01966

9/12

S/2015/113

United Nations engagement in support of building national capacity once the
political and security situation permits.
44. Part of maintaining readiness is the ability to scale up quickly to support Libya
in implementing agreements and confidence-building measures or respond to a
prioritized need. This may involve, for example, assistance in the monitoring or
supervision of ceasefires, assistance to key institutions and facilities or assistance in
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to places where reliable guarantees of safe
access have been provided. Towards this end, it will be important to put in place
mechanisms with the necessary flexibility to increase staffing and operations at
short notice. An integrated planning cell should be established, tasked with
maintaining awareness and preparedness for possible scale-ups, with the ability to
mobilize expertise across the United Nations system and from key partners,
including the management of up-to-date rosters in specialized areas.
45. However, readiness and the ability to scale up should not entail resuming
previous activities and returning to business as usual. There is a need to “press the
reset button” for both UNSMIL and the United Nations country team and recalibrate
activities in order to increase the relevance of the United Nations and the pace with
which it responds to the new realities in Libya. The transition from long -term
capacity-building to providing an immediate response will be critical on all fronts.
In addition, it will be essential for the United Nations system as a whole to work
under a common strategy to deliver collectively on the above priorities. This will
require common understanding and analysis of the situation and better information sharing, not least to ensure the situational awareness necessary to operate in a volatile
environment. For this purpose, a joint mission analysis cell should be established.
46. With revised priorities, there is a need to review the division of labour between
UNSMIL and the country team based on their comparative advantages and
mandates. UNSMIL should operate at the strategic level, in close consultation and
coordination with the country team, with a focus on the aforementioned critical
priorities. This would necessitate keeping broad expertise to support my Special
Representative in his mediation efforts. It will also be important to ensure that his
mediation team includes planners to advise on the technical aspects of implementing
any agreements to enable step-by-step progress in the political dialogue process to
be accompanied by step-by-step planning for implementation. At the same time,
programmatic and operational tasks should be delivered chiefly by United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes (as and when conditions permit), working in
partnership with the Mission, as well as by qualified international and national
partners. In the area of rule of law, the global focal point arrangements would be
used. Whatever specific distribution of tasks will be agreed, it will be critical to
establish strong coordination mechanisms within the United Nations at all levels.
47. Continuation of the existing integration arrangements (Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General (Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian
Coordinator)) is useful at this point because of shared security assets; shared analysis
and context awareness; and mutually reinforcing support to access and engagement.
However, regular review of the shifting realities on the ground and their impact on
the perception of the Mission, and the United Nations as a whole, will be necessary,
taking into account the need for a clear distinction between the political process and
humanitarian/development responses and the resulting required support structure. In

10/12

15-01966

S/2015/113

this respect, complementary capacity may be needed to support the effective
undertaking of the resident coordinator/humanitarian coordinator functions.
48. If the situation of competing institutions continues to exist, the United Nations
should engage with its counterparts on all sides, as required, for operational
purposes. This is true not only for mediation and facilitation but also for
humanitarian and development work. This does not entail any formal recognition by
the United Nations.

VII. Observations
49. Four years after the revolution, Libya’s transition process hangs in the balance.
The aspirations of the revolution remain largely unfulfilled. The road map for a
democratic transition has not been completed and a coherent vision for the future of
the country, including the use of its considerable financial assets, does not exist. A
dangerous power struggle within Libya has deepened the political, social, economic
and geographic divisions. The control of much of the country by heavily armed
militias, the indiscriminate use of heavy weaponry in civilian areas, the curtailment
of fundamental freedoms and rights, and disregard for the institutions and services
built so far, have left Libyans with a deep sense of frustration, a longing for security
and stability and waning confidence in the political process.
50. The situation in Libya has fundamentally changed since the establishment of
UNSMIL in 2011 and it has considerably deteriorated over the past six months. On
the basis of the findings of the strategic assessment, it is recommended that the
United Nations adapt to this new reality by establishing a nimble, flexible presence
focused on a clear and limited list of tasks. The recommendation to reduce the size
of UNSMIL does not mean the United Nations is disengaging from Libya. On the
contrary, I believe that by refocusing our priorities we will be able to maximize our
impact on the most urgent priorities, while progress in those areas will in turn pave
the way for increased engagement in the future. I therefore recommend that
members of the Security Council consider giving UNSMIL a mandate focused on
support to the political process, protection, support to key institutions, support for
the provision of essential services and coordination. In support of these p riorities,
the division of labour between UNSMIL and the United Nations country team
should be based on their respective comparative advantages.
51. At the same time, it will be critical for the United Nations to remain prepared
to increase engagement in other areas when the circumstances permit and in
response to the expressed needs of Libyans. This ability to respond quickly to
developments on the ground will be challenging for the Organization, but I am
committed to finding ways for the United Nations to be more flexible and
responsive. In order to maintain preparedness, I recommend a capacity within
UNSMIL dedicated to ensuring that we are able to respond promptly to demands
from Libyan parties.
52. While I am recommending a limited footprint in Libya, it is critical to ensure
that the Organization becomes more mobile and can travel in and out of the country,
as well as within Libya where the needs are. This will require dedicated aviation
support for the mediation effort and a robust air bridge between Tunis and Tripoli.
In addition, the United Nations will only be able to have an impact on the ground if
we are able to operate with adequate security. In this regard, I call on all Libyan

15-01966

11/12

S/2015/113

parties to enable the work of the United Nations by ensuring that i ts personnel can
move around freely and securely.
53. These recommendations assume that the situation will improve or remain as it
is. However, if mediation efforts fail and the situation further deteriorates, the
Security Council has options at its disposal, in the framework of current resolutions,
for other actions that may be considered appropriate.
54. The building of the Libyan State will only succeed if the Libyan authorities
take full ownership. In this regard, I encourage them to take full advanta ge of the
work of the United Nations and partners by identifying clear and reliable focal
points and capacities for each institution, accepted across the Government, as the
entry point for international assistance. United Nations and international efforts
require predictable and committed Libyan interlocutors.
55. The challenges facing Libya need to be confronted with a heightened sense of
urgency, first and foremost by the Libyans, but also by the United Nations and by
the regional and international partners of Libya. The stability and security of Libya
will not only affect Libya, but also neighbouring countries and regions, as well as
international peace and security. Assisting the Libyans in getting the democratic
process back on track should therefore remain a priority for the international
community. The United Nations will be prepared to play its role, but Member States
must also revisit their commitments to Libya. All of those who helped Libyans to
overcome the Qadhafi regime now have a continued resp onsibility to help complete
the transition and also be ready for “the day after” a political agreement is attained.
In this regard, ensuring sufficient resources will be critical.
56. I wish to thank my Special Representative, Mr. Bernardino León, as well as
the staff of UNSMIL and the United Nations country team for their continued hard
work in uncertain and sometimes dangerous circumstances, as well as for their
support to the strategic assessment process. I also thank all Libyan stakeholders who
shared their views with the United Nations during this review process and
international partners for their continued support.

12/12

15-01966
