S/PV.7806

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7806th meeting

Wednesday, 9 November 2016, 3.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Seck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Akahori
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Vitrenko
Ms. Mulvein
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-37193 (E)
*1637193*

S/PV.7806

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

I am hopeful that in my next report in May 2017,
I will be able to report tangible results of that positive
engagement. I am confident that the Arab Republic
of Egypt will be a leading example by building on
the existing level of cooperation and continuing and
strengthening its voluntary cooperation with the Court.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: I welcome the opportunity to once
again engage with this body as I present my Office’s
twelfth report on the situation in Libya, pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1970 (2011).
Allow me at the outset to emphasize that the
Office of the Prosecutor is grateful for the support it
received during the reporting period in conducting its
work on the situation in Libya. My Office has received
that critical support from an increasing number of
both States parties and non-States parties to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
including members of the Council. That cooperation
has greatly facilitated our work vis-à-vis Libya and
must be recognized.
To cite one example, the Council will recall that
during my last briefing on 26 May (see S/PV.7698), I
reported on my official visit to Cairo and on the positive
dialogue and engagement between my Office and the
Egyptian authorities on several matters. In conformity
with its mandate, my Office continued to pursue
issues of mutual interest with the Egyptian authorities,
including in relation to the situation in Libya and the
challenges facing the region of North Africa, such
as the security and destabilizing threats posed by
terrorism and extremist groups, such as the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, or Da’esh. Since
my visit, my Office has continued to liaise with the
Arab Republic of Egypt in order to advance our shared
goals of bringing justice to the victims of grave crimes.
2/17

09/11/2016

Let me provide a brief update on the Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah al-Senussi cases. Following
that update, I will discuss the current situation in Libya
and my Office’s plans for further investigations.
As the Council will recall, on 26 April, my Office
filed a request with the Pre-Trial Chamber of the Court
for an order directing the Registry to transmit a request
to Mr. Al-’Ajami Al-’Atiri for the arrest and surrender
of Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the ICC. Mr Al-’Atiri commands
the Abu-Bakr al-Siddiq Battalion in Zintan, Libya,
and has control of Mr. Al-Qadhafi. On 2 June, the
Pre-Trial Chamber ordered the Registry of the Court to
communicate with the Libyan authorities as to whether
the request for arrest and surrender of Mr. Al-Qadhafi
could be served directly on Mr. Al-’Atiri either by the
Libyan authorities or the Court. Recently, on 28 October,
the Registry filed an update on the progress of the
Pre-Trial Chamber’s order. That update contained in a
confidential annex a reply from the Libyan AttorneyGeneral’s Office, dated 29 September. In the update,
the Registry sought guidance on what further course of
action it should take to communicate with the relevant
Libyan authorities. My Office is awaiting the Pre-Trial
Chamber’s decision on the next steps in relation to
that matter.
Also in relation to the Al-Qadhafi case, in July
media reports suggested that Mr. Al-Qadhafi had been
released from detention in Zintan on the basis of a
grant of amnesty. I must report that reliable sources,
including the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s Office,
have confirmed that information to be incorrect. From
the information available to the Office, it is clear that
Mr. Al-Qadhafi remains in Zintan and is still outside
the custody and control of the Presidency Council of
the Government of National Accord. My Office again
calls on the Libyan authorities to ensure that they do
everything possible to have Mr. Al-Qadhafi transferred
to the ICC without any further delay, in keeping with
their obligations under the Rome Statute.
Regarding the Al-Senussi case, my Office awaits
the full report of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya on the conduct of the domestic trial and will study
16-37193

09/11/2016

The situation in Libya

it carefully when it is available. At this stage, my Office
remains of the view that no new facts have arisen that
negate the basis on which the Pre-Trial Chamber found
Mr. Al-Senussi’s case inadmissible before the Court. As
I have repeatedly stated, including before the Council,
my Office will continue to review its assessment on the
matter as and when new information becomes available
in accordance with article 19 (10) of the Rome Statute.
Allow me to offer a few words about the current
challenging situation in Libya. In short, the situation
continues to deteriorate and innocent civilians continue
to bear the brunt of the fighting between the warring
factions vying for control of Libyan territory. The
current state of affairs in which civilians are victimized
is completely unacceptable. As stated in my Office’s
twelfth report to the Council, multiple conflicts across
Libya consume the country and parties to the conflict
allegedly continue to commit serious crimes.
The Council has repeatedly condemned crimes
allegedly committed by Da’esh, Ansar Al-Sharia and
other parties to the conflict in Libya. Executions,
including allegedly by Da’esh, reportedly account for the
largest numbers of killings during the reporting period.
Reports of mass graves are on the rise. There are also
multiple reports of civilian deaths from indiscriminate
air strikes, shelling and gunfire. Abductions and
unlawful detentions continue. The number of internally
displaced persons in Libya is believed to number
approximately 350,000. Finally, Libya is a major hub
for the illegal migration trade, which I will discuss in
more detail shortly.
I must also take this opportunity to join the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and
others in strongly condemning the attempt in October
to seize the headquarters of the High Council of State
in Tripoli. I share the view reflected in the 25 October
joint communiqué issued by the League of Arab States,
the African Union and UNSMIL that such actions are
detrimental to the stability and security of the country.
The persistent instability and armed conflict prevent my
Office from conducting investigations within Libyan
territory in relation to both existing and potential new
cases. Nevertheless, my Office continuously analyses
the security situation through a variety of sources in
order to identify opportunities to investigate in situ in
Libya. The Office will continue to work in partnership
with the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s office to find a
solution to safely conduct investigations in Libya as
soon as possible.

S/PV.7806

In relation to those efforts, my Office notes
resolution 2291 (2016), and in particular the Council’s
request to all parties to cooperate with UNSMIL and
ensure the security of United Nations and associated
personnel in Libya. I urge the Council to expressly
extend the request to include ICC personnel conducting
investigations in Libya. Doing so will help facilitate
one of my Office’s major goals of ensuring that our
investigators return to their work inside Libya as soon
as possible. My Office is committed to intensifying
its efforts to deter the current climate of impunity in
Libya. Notwithstanding the many difficulties posed by
the investigations of the Libya situation, including in
particular resource challenges, my Office will do all it
can to significantly expand investigations in 2017. The
new investigations will consider bringing charges for
recent and current instances of alleged serious criminal
activity falling under the Court’s jurisdiction, which
could potentially include alleged crimes committed by
Da’esh and affiliated groups.
My commitment to making Libya a priority situation
in 2017 is compelled by a number of factors, including
the widespread violence, lawlessness and impunity
that currently prevail in many parts of the country; a
desire to provide justice for victims of Rome Statute
crimes and alleviate the suffering of those civilians
who continue to endure the tragic consequences of
the conflict in Libya; and, finally, the opportunities
for further investigation that the Office has identified.
Furthermore, my Office’s ongoing efforts in regard
to the arrest of an additional suspect or suspects have
advanced significantly. I can report to the Council that
my Office intends to apply for new warrants of arrest
under seal as soon as practicable and hopes to have new
arrest warrants served in the near future. The timely
execution of the new arrest warrants will be crucial,
require coordinated efforts by States and may also
require support from the Council.
My Office cannot accomplish its goals in Libya
acting alone. Addressing the widespread criminal
activity that continues to beset Libya requires a
coordinated approach and joint efforts by all concerned.
It is with that in mind that my Office continues its efforts
of working with our partners to develop coordinated
investigative and prosecutorial strategies to close the
impunity gap for ICC crimes in Libya. Pursuant to
its Strategic Goal 9, the Office convened a two-day
operational level meeting in The Hague in October,
bringing together judicial and investigative agencies

16-371933/17

S/PV.7806

The situation in Libya

from several States. The productive meeting resulted
in agreement in principle that the Office would work
collectively with the States with a view to augmenting
their respective, independent investigative efforts.
In particular, the Office is engaging with
those agencies investigating individuals involved
in organized crime and facilitating and financing
illegal migration through Libya. The importance of
investigating alleged crimes related to illegal migration
is reflected in resolution 2312 (2016), adopted by the
Council on 6 October. In 2017, my Office intends to step
up its cooperation with States in relation to that issue
and will continue to study the feasibility of opening
an investigation into alleged criminal acts against
refugees and migrants in Libya, including any alleged
acts of sexual violence or crimes against children that
fall under the Court’s jurisdiction.
In discussing collaboration, I must also acknowledge
with gratitude that the Office’s investigative
efforts have greatly benefitted from the operational
investigative support and cooperation that it continues
to receive from the Libyan Prosecutor-General’s office.
Regional States, including in particular the Republic
of Tunisia and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
have also continued to cooperate with my Office in
its investigations in Libya, for which my Office is
grateful. Exceptionally, certain States have proved far
less cooperative, and I take this opportunity to urge
all States that have not responded to our requests for
assistance to do so without further delay.
Despite the challenges Libya that currently
faces, certain initiatives demonstrate that peaceful
negotiated outcomes to conflicts are achievable and
must be supported. One commendable example is the
31 August Misrata-Tawergha Agreement on the Return
of the Displaced and Compensation of those Affected.
My Office encourages other such initiatives aimed at
improving the lives of the people of Libya. My Office
continues to receive many delegations from various
parts of Libya, who represent civilians adversely
affected by the conflict. I welcome the opportunity
to meet with those delegations and hear directly
about the experiences of the Libyan civilians whom
they represent.
In the same vein, the Office also continues to
receive, from nongovernmental organizations, private
citizens and other sources, information and potential
evidence of acts that have allegedly caused grave
4/17

09/11/2016

harm to civilian populations. In particular, those
include attacks that may adversely impact the civilian
population, preventing them from fleeing violence and
obtaining access to food, medicine and other basic
needs. As a case in point, my Office followed with
concern the recent 6 October statement regarding the
residential district of Ganfouda in Benghazi, made
by Martin Kobler, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of UNSMIL. In particular,
Special Representative Kobler indicated that he is
deeply disturbed by reports that civilians in Benghazi’s
Ganfouda neighbourhood continue to be caught in the
cross-fire of fighting and suffer shortages of food,
water and medicines. Special Representative Kobler
indicated that UNSMIL has been working to support
the Libyan mediation process in order to minimize the
suffering in Ganfouda. I understand that an evacuation
plan has been discussed. My Office welcomes that
important development and will continue to closely
scrutinize the situation in Ganfouda and the actions of
all parties to the conflict in accordance with the Rome
Statute criteria.
To conclude, the Council referred the situation in
Libya to my Office. By definition, the referral carries
great responsibility to seek justice for the countless
civilians who have been victims of the widespread
crimes in Libya since 15 February 2011. Compelled by
this responsibility, I have decided to allocate additional
resources from within my Office’s overall budget to
the Libya situation. I have no choice if further concrete
progress is to be made in our investigations. Without
the Council’s support, that allocation will necessarily
come at the expense of investigations of other crimes
in other situations. I appeal to the Council to recognize
the collective responsibility arising out of its referral
and to support United Nations financial assistance for
my Office’s Libya investigations in 2017. The Libyan
people deserve no less.
Atrocity crimes demand unequivocal and universal
condemnation and accountability. In adopting the Rome
Statute, States recognized not only that reality but also
the intrinsic link between accountability for atrocity
crimes and sustainable peace and security. The Court
remains fully committed to its mandate to help end
impunity for the world’s gravest crimes, and in doing
so to contribute to preventing future atrocities. In that
essential mission, we count on the principled support of
this body and the States parties and non-State parties
to the Rome Statute — indeed, of the international
16-37193

09/11/2016

The situation in Libya

community writ large — to realize the full potential
of the Rome Statute system in Libya and elsewhere.
That is a must if we are to fully respond to the plight
of victims by dispensing justice and to strengthen the
international rule of law.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by welcoming the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) back to the Council and thanking
her for her briefing today. The United Kingdom is
grateful for her twelfth report, and I thank her and her
Office for their continuing investigation of the situation
in Libya.
Whether in Libya or any other country, the ICC
has a vital role to play in challenging impunity and
ensuring the accountability of those who bear the
greatest responsibility for the most serious crimes of
international concern. Sadly, such crimes continue to
this day in Libya. We are deeply concerned about the
fact that civilians continue to suffer inexcusably from
the conflict and are subjected to violations and abuses
perpetrated by the parties to it. Civilian and residential
areas have been besieged, restricting people’s access
to food, medical supplies and sometimes water and
electricity. More than 400,000 people have been
displaced by the conflict.
The spread of Da’esh is further exacerbating the
crisis. The group poses a serious threat to all Libyans
and the wider region. We condemn its barbaric crimes
and call for their perpetrators to be held to account. The
global campaign to bring Da’esh to justice — launched
during the general debate of the General Assembly
in September by the Foreign Secretary of the United
Kingdom, Mr. Ibrahim Al-Jaafari, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq and Mr. Didier Reynders, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Belgium — will help to ensure that
there is no impunity for those responsible.
We fully understand the Office of the Prosecutor’s
determination to prioritize her investigations in Libya
in 2017, but we remain concerned about the possibility
that the security situation will continue to prevent
her from undertaking full investigative activities at
this time. Without a unified and accountable security
structure across the country to enforce law and order

S/PV.7806

and protect civilians, supported by an independent
judiciary, crimes falling within the Court’s jurisdiction
may continue to occur. The rule of law must apply
throughout Libya and, ultimately, all perpetrators must
be held to account and tried in court in a transparent
and open manner. The United Kingdom will continue
to work with international partners to provide Libya
with the support it needs to meet the challenges it faces.
We have taken note of the Office of the Prosecutor’s
request for assistance through the Security Council
regarding applications for new arrest warrants for
additional suspects. We thank the Prosecutor for her
briefing on the cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. The United Kingdom calls
on Libya to take steps to enable the handover of Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the ICC without delay, and to
consult with the Court in order to address any problems
that might impede his transfer to The Hague.
We thank the Prosecutor’s Office for continuing
to monitor allegations of torture and similar abuses
in Al-Hadba prison, and we note with concern the
unconfirmed report that an individual previously
suspected of torture has returned to the prison and
holds a position of authority there. We support the
steps that the Prosecutor’s Office has taken to enhance
cooperation with additional national law-enforcement
agencies that are also working on Libya-related
investigations. We commend the Libyan Prosecutor
General and Libya’s representative to the Court for
their continued positive and constructive engagement
with the Office of the Prosecutor. Cooperation
between the Office and the Libyan authorities is vital
if they are to tackle impunity for atrocity crimes. We
would also like to take this opportunity to thank the
Tunisian and Jordanian authorities for facilitating the
Prosecutor’s investigations.
In conclusion, we recognize the additional financial
constraints that the Office of the Prosecutor faces. We
respect her independence in deciding on the best use
of those resources. As the United Kingdom, we are
working for a budget outcome that both meets the needs
of the Court and is aligned with the means available.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her twelfth report and
her briefing. I would like to reaffirm France’s support
for the Prosecutor and the International Criminal
Court as a whole, and also to commend her on her
successful implementation of resolution 1970 (2011),

16-371935/17

S/PV.7806

The situation in Libya

which referred the situation in Libya to the Court. The
resolution also reflects the Council’s support of an
institution with the most important of missions — to
ensure that the most serious crimes of concern to the
international community, as the preamble to the Rome
Statute has it, do not go unpunished.
Thanks to the reports, we are pleased to note the
efforts made by the Office of the Prosecutor, working
closely with the Libyan judicial authorities. Once
again, we are well aware that insecurity and instability
make the task of conducting ongoing and future
investigations a particularly delicate one. The security
threats must be carefully evaluated in order to decide
whether investigations on the ground are possible. In
view of the fact that the security conditions required
for conducting investigations on the ground cannot
always be met, France backs the Office’s efforts to do
so remotely to the extent possible. In that regard, we
fully support initiatives and programmes designed to
facilitate the collection of evidence and testimony via
secure channels.
There can be no question that much remains to
be done to end impunity in Libya. That is why we
believe it is more essential than ever to ensure that the
Council continues to support the Court and mediation
under the auspices of the United Nations, including by
Mr. Martin Kobler, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. We also offer our full support to
the Presidential Council, led by Mr. Fayez Al-Sarraj, in
order to help him deal with the challenges he is facing.
Besides those general comments, I would like to
make three more specific ones.
First, France recalls that the Office’s ability to
conduct investigations requires the full cooperation
of all stakeholders. And for that cooperation to be
effective, it must take an integrated approach and
function at various levels, giving priority to the
principle of complementarity.
Secondly, France supports the assertion in
paragraphs 13 and 14 of the report that close cooperation
with the Libyan authorities is essential to conducting
investigations securely, as mandated by Rome Statute
of the Court and by the Council. The memorandum of
understanding of November 2013, on the sharing of
responsibilities with the Libyan authorities, provides
a framework for that. Similarly, we welcome the
valuable document transmission and operational
support provided by the Office of the Prosecutor
6/17

09/11/2016

General of Libya, which is also working in particularly
difficult conditions. We are pleased that the meetings
that took place in October explored new opportunities
for mutual support.
With regard to the adoption of resolution 2291
(2016), of 13 June, which extended the mandate of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya to
15 December, France notes the appeal of the Office of
the Prosecutor for all parties to cooperate and ensure
the security of United Nations and associated personnel
to also apply to officials of the International Criminal
Court who are leading investigations in Libya.
Furthermore, as recalled in the report, the Security
Council, in paragraph 5 of resolution 1970 (2011),
urged all States and concerned regional and other
international organizations to cooperate fully with the
Court and the Prosecutor. France therefore considers
it crucial to strengthen cooperation with all States,
whether or not they are parties to the Rome Statute,
so that requests made by the Office be responded to
in the most efficient and timely manner. This required
collaboration with the States of the region and beyond
is all the more essential in the case of highly complex
and transnational investigations, which require a
coordinated strategy. The cooperation of the Jordanian
and Tunisian authorities is particularly appreciated in
this regard.
Our second comment concerns the elements of
the report relating to ongoing investigations. France
considers it crucial that Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi be
delivered promptly to the Court, pursuant to the request
of its judges. France urges Libya to do everything it can
to honour this obligation and put an end to the breach it
is committing. Furthermore, in the case brought against
Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi, France notes that the Office,
pending the full report of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya on the trial proceedings before a
national court, continues to believe that no new facts
cripple the evidence on which the Pre-Trial Chamber I
relied to declare the inadmissibility of the case before
the Court. Finally, France notes the Office’s intention to
file applications for additional arrest warrants shortly.
Thirdly and finally, France would like to review the
future plans outlined by the Office of the Prosecutor
in the report. We note the Office’s wish to make
Libya a priority in 2017 and significantly expand its
investigations into crimes committed in Libya since
16-37193

09/11/2016

The situation in Libya

S/PV.7806

2011, including crimes alleged committed in Libya by
Da’esh, Ansar Al-Sharia and other terrorist groups.

to justice and guaranteeing their accountability for the
crimes they have perpetrated.

What we see in Libya shows how the absence
of justice breeds violence and makes reconciliation
more difficult. This is reality that we must keep in
mind. It forces us all to find ways to arrive at concrete
responses. France, which cooperates with the Court
without reservation, considers that this requirement
can be met only with the Court’s effective functioning
and the support of the Security Council in the event of
non-cooperation.

Fourthly, we emphasize the need for all States
as well as the relevant regional and international
organizations to cooperate with the Court and the
Prosecutor to the greatest extent possible.

Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my thanks to Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing today and for introducing
her twelfth report pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
The report sets out a number of important observations
and challenges relating to the performance of the Court
in relation to the situation in Libya. In this regard, I
would like to emphasize the following points.
First, the Libyan Government needs to consult with
the Court with respect to the application to surrender
Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the Court. We
emphasize the need to extend all forms of assistance to
the Libyan Government in a manner that enables it to
fulfil its obligations to the Court on this matter.
Secondly, all crimes of torture and inhuman
acts perpetrated in Libya need to be stopped, and
the international community should support the
Government of National Accord in the preparation of
a comprehensive strategy to tackle the brutal crimes
committed in the country. In addition, assistance
should be extended to the Libyan authorities to help
them administer justice to the defendants, including
by supplying the Government with the weapons it has
requested and implementing relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2214 (2015).
Thirdly, we underline the importance stated in
the report of the Office of the Prosecutor undertaking
investigations in Libya during 2017 as a matter of priority,
in particular in the light of the crimes perpetrated by
Da’esh and Ansar Al-Sharia. Accordingly, the Court
must abide by international law and the principle of
complementarity between national jurisdictions and
that of the ICC, taking into account the fact that the
work of the Court is part of a broader action of the
international community aimed at bringing terrorists

Fifthly, there is a need to welcome cooperation and
assistance received by the Prosecutor’s Office from the
Office of the Libyan Prosecutor General, particularly
with regard to the submission of information and
evidence, continuing the implementation of the
memorandum of understanding concluded in November
2013 on burden-sharing in the investigation of former
Al-Qadhafi officials and their prosecution.
In conclusion, I would like to voice our appreciation
for the important work and great efforts deployed
by Ms. Bensouda, the International Criminal Court
Prosecutor, and her Office, in pursuit of justice and
accountability. We are determined to continue our
cooperation with her in that regard.
Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): It
is an honour for us to see Ms. Bensouda in the Security
Council once again. I am very grateful for the updated
information she has given us.
In my statement, I shall focus first on two specific
aspects of Ms. Bensouda’s briefing, namely, the
situation of Mr. Al-Qadhafi and on the situation of
torture in the prison of Al-Hadba, before continuing
with some reflections on the limitations of the Court in
the performance of its work.
First, we note that the warrant for the arrest and
surrender of Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi has not been
executed. Spain fully understands that the instability
prevailing in the country makes it difficult for Libya to
deliver the accused. But it should not be forgotten that
it still has the obligation to cooperate with the Court
and the Prosecution. It is an obligation imposed by
the Security Council in resolution 1970 (2011) and it
remains fully in force. This obligation therefore requires
the Government of National Accord to proceed, at the
moment where circumstances allow it, to the immediate
arrest of the accused and to turn him over to the Court
without further delay.
Secondly, we would like to thank Ms. Bensouda for
the information she has provided about the investigation
into allegations of torture in Al-Hadba prison. We
would echo what was said by the representative of the

16-371937/17

S/PV.7806

The situation in Libya

United Kingdom and state our concern at the fact that
one of the alleged perpetrators has been able to take up
his post once again. We are waiting for this information
to be confirmed and in the meantime wish to remind the
Libyan authorities of the responsibility to investigate
and prosecute such actions, which cannot be tolerated.
We deplore the fact that the continuing insecurity
in Libya is still hampering the Court in carrying out
its investigations in the field. We encourage it, despite
the circumstances, to pursue its task. It is necessary to
create conditions conducive to allowing the Prosecutor
to visit Libyan territory in complete safety. We therefore
support Ms. Bensouda’s request that the Security
Council call on all parties in Libya to cooperate fully
with the ICC and to guarantee the safety of its staff.
Furthermore, we would like to recall that the work
carried out in Libya by the Office of the Prosecutor,
which was mandated by the Security Council, has a
financial cost that continues to be borne exclusively by
the States parties and which requires that resources be
diverted from other investigations or prosecutions.
In Libya, as in other situations with which it is
concerned, the ICC depends on the cooperation of all,
first and foremost that of the Security Council, but also
on that of all States, whether or not they are parties to
the Rome Statute. We are encouraged by the information
that Ms. Bensouda has provided us about the support
given by many of those countries, particularly Tunisia
and Jordan, as she noted in her report, and by Egypt, as
she mentioned in her briefing. Spain calls on all those
countries that have not yet responded to her request to
do so as quickly as possible.
The requests made touch also on the work of the
Libyan judicial institutions. We reiterate once again our
appreciation to the Office of the Prosecutor-General,
which, despite the serious situation prevailing in the
country, has maintained an active level of cooperation
with the Court, which is proof of its commitment to the
cause of justice.
Nonetheless, this is not enough. An unacceptable
climate of impunity continues to prevail in Libya,
with persistent allegations of extrajudicial executions,
kidnappings, torture, attacks on journalists and other
activists, and attacks on immigrants. Of course, the
political circumstances do not help things. The ongoing
fragmentation of the country is an increasing source of
concern. We take this opportunity to reiterate our appeal
to all political actors in Libya to join the dialogue and
8/17

09/11/2016

support the efforts of the Presidency Council as it seeks
to establish the Government of National Accord. We
also call upon the Governments in the region to continue
working together so as to facilitate the reunification of
the country and the advent of peace.
Finally, I should like to make a very brief comment,
taking advantage of Ms. Bensouda’s presence with us
today, that is more general in scope with respect to the
ICC and not focusing just on Libya. For several weeks
now, the ICC has found itself treading on delicate
ground following the decision of a handful of African
States to begin the process of withdrawing from the
Rome Statute. This is not good news. I should like to
take the opportunity of Ms. Bensouda’s presence here
to reiterate to her my country’s resolute support for the
Court. Spain stands ready to contribute in a constructive
manner and in a spirit of dialogue to the quest for
solutions that, with due respect for the independence of
the Court and the integrity of the Rome Statute, would
allow us to overcome the differences cited by those
countries in communicating their decision to withdraw
from the Rome Statute.
In any case, we should not give in to defeatism.
There are grounds for optimism. This year may be the
most fruitful year yet for the ICC, and it is important
that we remember this. The Court keeps alive the hopes
of thousands of victims, demonstrating that with the
requisite will and resources, justice is possible. On that
note, I convey to Ms. Bensouda the full support and
gratitude of Spain.
Mr. Akahori (Japan) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and
her briefing.
Japan emphasizes its belief that the perpetrators
of serious crimes must be held accountable for their
actions. Japan also commends the accomplishments of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) to date. Japan
has consistently supported the ICC so that it can function
effectively and sustainably in promoting the rule of law,
with the support of the international community.
Japan strongly believes that more States should join
the ICC so as to ensure that the Court can effectively
promote the rule of law. In the long run, the ICC should
aim to become a truly universal criminal Court and
gain stronger support for its work. In this regard, we
are worried, as is Spain, by the recent decisions taken
by some African States to withdraw from the ICC. In
order to secure support and cooperation from a greater
16-37193

09/11/2016

The situation in Libya

number of States, the ICC and its States parties should
listen to the concerns expressed by some as to its role.
Allow me now to turn to the issue of Libya.
Japan welcomes the fact that the Libyan ProsecutorGeneral’s Office has been cooperative with the ICC on
many issues. We encourage the Libyan Government
of National Accord and all countries concerned to
cooperate with the Court pursuant to resolutions 1970
(2011) and 2259 (2015). We are aware of the current
political and security situation in Libya and the serious
difficulties that its authorities are facing. Under these
circumstances, Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi has not yet
been handed over to the Court.
Japan hopes that with the improvement of
the situation, the cooperation between the Libyan
authorities and the Court will be strengthened and that
this will enable the ICC to play a greater role in the
fight against impunity.
With regard to violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law in Libya, Japan
notes with particular interest that the Prosecutor’s
report mentions her hope that additional arrest warrants
will be obtained. We hope to hear detailed updates on
this matter.
Japan reiterates the importance of forming a
representative, united Libyan Government. The
Presidency Council should work swiftly to submit
a revised list of Cabinet members to the House of
Representatives. The House of Representative should
in turn give due consideration to the list. It is essential
that all parties uphold their obligations under the Libyan
Political Agreement.
Japan continues to support the ongoing efforts made
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Martin Kobler; the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya; and the Government of National Accord to
promote the political process.
Japan fully supports the activities of the ICC,
including those of the Office of the Prosecutor. My
delegation looks forward to hearing of tangible progress
on the issue we are considering today.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her presentation of the twelfth report,
as mandated by resolution 1970 (2011).

S/PV.7806

The political and security situation in Libya
remained critical during the reporting period despite the
efforts of the Presidential Council of the Government of
National Accord. We reiterate our appeal to all political
actors in Libya to pool their efforts in a constructive
fashion with determination, courage and goodwill
in connection with the efforts being made by the
Government of National Accord. The political impasse
has weakened the efforts of the Government to face
the chaotic security situation, the economic crisis and
the growing impunity of terrorist groups and armed
militias against the civilian population.
We take note with concern of the information
regarding Libya presented on 27 September by the
Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Kate Gilmore, during the thirty-third session of the
Human Rights Council, in which she outlined that heavy
weapons continued to be transferred to residential areas
throughout the country, armed groups were acting
with total impunity and thousands of people were
brutally being kept in detention centres. Furthermore,
migrants, refugees and asylum seekers are arbitrarily
being detained, with various reports indicating abuse
perpetrated against those groups — such as summary
executions, torture and other mistreatment, sexual
abuse, extortion and forced labour. That situation
constitutes a flagrant violation of human rights and
international humanitarian law.
However, the institutional and political context
of Libya does not offer the necessary conditions to
investigate and persecute the authors of those atrocious
crimes, which, according to the Statute of the ICC, fall
under national jurisdiction. We believe that conditions
in Libya to apply the necessary judicial process are
currently non-existent. In that regard, we consider the
ICC to be highly important in Libya.
We welcome the information contained in the report
of the Ombudsperson of the ICC, by which on 31 August
the Misrata-Tawergha accord was signed. That led to
the return of displaced people and compensation for
affected communities. It is highly commendable that
the signatories to the accord expressed their desire to
achieve peace, justice and reparations and to establish
the rule of law and contribute to efforts that seek to avoid
the repetition of past mistakes for future generations.
We strongly encourage other initiatives of the kind to
improve the lives of the population of Libya.

16-371939/17

S/PV.7806

The situation in Libya

To conclude, we reiterate our view that only in an
environment of peace and stability can a functioning
judicial system and institutions be established.
Therefore, we reiterate our support for the United
Nations and the international community in the
implementation, together with the relevant actors, of
Libya’s Government of National Accord for the sake
of establishing lasting peace as well as accountability
for all those responsible for perpetrating violent crimes
and human rights violations.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In the six months since the previous briefing
(see S/PV.7698), significant changes for the better in the
political-military situation in Libya have not occurred.
The main issue remains the fragmentation of the country
and its governmental institutions, despite attempts
by the Presidency Council in Tripoli to consolidate
its authority. The composition of the Government
of National Accord has not yet been confirmed by
the House of Representatives in accordance with the
procedure set out by the Skhirat Agreement. We see
no alternative to continuing the intra-Libyan dialogue
under the auspices of the United Nations, and with the
participation of all active political forces in the country.
The continuing terrorist threat emanating from
Libya continues to keep tensions high for its neighbours.
Fighting this threat, in particular against the backdrop
of a failure to unite security structures, has been done
haphazardly. Localized successes are not a substitute
for a large-scale counter-terrorist campaign under
unified command. Possible foreign assistance in that
respect should not contribute to preserving internal
divisions in Libya, as otherwise the tragic mistakes
of the 2011 intervention will continue to weigh on this
long-suffering country.
We take note of the twelfth report of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) regarding
the situation in Libya. We note that it was submitted to
the Security Council on the eve of today’s meeting. For
reasons we cannot fathom, that seems to be becoming
the standard practice. We believe that a full-fledged
discussion of a document by delegations requires
preparation. That is why such a late circulation of the
report raises doubts regarding the ICC’s desire for
serious dialogue with the Security Council.
On the basis of the report, we are forced to note
the lack of progress on the main issues of the Libyan
dossier, such as the forced displacement of the Tuareg
10/17

09/11/2016

people, torture, illegal detentions and abductions. The
Office of the Prosecutor continues to remove itself from
consideration of the issue of civilian deaths resulting
from NATO’s 2011 bombings. We see no real steps
towards organizing the prosecution of the insurgents
for their alleged crimes: not a single case was initiated
in five years. The Office of the Prosecutor has adopted
a similar stance regarding Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant terrorists, who, by the way, for some reason
are referred to simply as “Islamists” in the report. In
that context, once again, there is nothing more than
an abstract intention to revisit possible proceedings in
the future.
In the light of repeated attempts to present the
Libyan dossier as a type of burden dropped upon the
Security Council, I should like to remind members that
in 2011 the main proponents of the idea of referring the
situation in Libya to the ICC were certain States parties
to the Rome Statute and the Office of the Prosecutor.
They should have recognized the financial and other
consequences of that step for the Court. That is why the
report’s requests for the ICC to be materially supported
by the United Nations appears to be illogical.
By way of conclusion, we would like to again note
that the ICC’s experience in Libya cannot in any way be
qualified as successful, whether in the administration
of justice and the prevention of new crimes or in terms
of contributing to national reconciliation. The situation
and the process of withdrawal from the Rome Statute
by a number of States deepens our doubts regarding the
usefulness of involving the ICC in any new cases.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for presenting her twelfth report to the
Security Council as requested under resolution 1970
(2011).
The current political and security situation in
Libya continues to present tremendous challenges and
hampers ongoing efforts by the Presidency Council of
the Government of National Accord to restore peace
and stability to the country, including ending impunity
for crimes of serious concern to the international
community. Malaysia continues to believe that the
formation of an effective and credible Government
of National Accord is crucial in bolstering Libya’s
commitment and capabnility to promote and restore
the rule of law, to address impunity and to bring all
perpetrators of such crimes to justice. We call upon
16-37193

09/11/2016

The situation in Libya

all parties in Libya to redouble their efforts to bridge
differences, find common ground and work closely
together towards the swift and full implementation of
the Libyan political agreement.
Despite the significant security challenges in the
country, we are encouraged by the continuing efforts
and commitment of the Libyan authorities to comply
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, as well
as the ongoing cooperation rendered by the Libyan
Prosecutor-General’s Office. That is a good foundation
on which to further build upon.
The widespread violence and impunity in Libya,
particularly by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
which continues to be the most prolific perpetrator
of grave crimes and violations of international law in
the country, alongside other violent extremist groups,
remains of concern. We reaffirm the Security Council’s
strong condemnation of such atrocities and reassert the
call for accountability. At the same time, allegations
of such crimes being perpetrated against civilians by
other parties to the conflict should also be a matter
of concern. Those allegations must be thoroughly
investigated and accountability must be pursued so
that impunity is addressed, with a view to building
trust and confidence and towards promoting national
reconciliation.
This will be Malaysia’s last opportunity to engage
on the important issue of addressing impunity and
accountability for the most serious crimes in Libya
before ending our term as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council. Since joining the Council
some 22 months ago, we have been fully invested in
the United Nations-led facilitation efforts for a Libyanowned and Libyan-led process to restore peace, stability
and security to the country. Despite the enormous
challenges that continue to plague the country, there
have been some positive developments and milestones
achieved in that regard. Those gains must be preserved
and built upon if Libya and its people are to progress
beyond the current situation.
In concluding, I wish to reaffirm Malaysia’s full
support for the efforts of the United Nations and the
international community to assist Libya to prevail over
adversity and achieve a lasting political settlement and
stability. Looking beyond our term in the Council, we
wish to also reaffirm our continuing support for the
people and the Government of Libya.

S/PV.7806

Mr. Xu Zhongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.
China has been closely following the developments
in Libya and supports its process of political transition
that is being mediated by the United Nations. We
welcome the Libyan political dialogue meeting that will
be used as a forum for Libyan political dialogue, to be
held in Malta, and we hope that it will facilitate the
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement by
all parties.
We also hope that all parties in Libya will remain
committed to an inclusive, Libyan-led political process,
put their national interests before any other matter,
abide by Security Council resolutions, effectively
implement the Libyan Political Agreement and resolve
their differences through negotiation and consultation,
so as to restore security and stability in the country.
That is the prerequisite and basis for Libya to achieve
judicial justice.
China’s position on the international judicial organ
remains unchanged.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her report and for her continued engagement with the
Security Council on the importance of accountability
for atrocity crimes committed in Libya.
Libya’s ongoing crisis provides a climate of
impunity for such crimes. More broadly, it has impeded
the ability of the Libyan people to see the hope of
their country’s revolution translated into an enduring
foundation for peace, stability and prosperity. The next
step towards a solution is a stable, unified and inclusive
Government. The international community must
therefore help Prime Minister Serraj to consolidate
progress towards implementing the Libyan Political
Agreement and strengthen Libya’s institutions.
To that end, we urge Libyans on all sides to
make progress towards national reconciliation. The
Presidency Council should present an inclusive new
Cabinet proposal, and the House of Representatives
must fulfil its duty to allow a free and fair vote on that
Cabinet. The Libyan Political Agreement is of course
a transitional framework. We urge the constitutional
drafting assembly to complete its work as quickly as
possible and, in 2017, Libya should hold a referendum
on a new Constitution and elect a new Government.

16-3719311/17

S/PV.7806

The situation in Libya

Nothing could more clearly emphasize the
human stakes of making political progress than the
reports of civilian suffering that the Security Council
continues to receive. Violations and abuses continue
to be committed against people from a broad range of
vulnerable populations, ranging from civilians who are
subject to indiscriminate or even deliberate attacks, to
captured combatants who have been tortured and killed,
to migrants who have sought to pass through Libya and
have been inhumanely detained, extorted, sexually
assaulted and otherwise exploited by smugglers and
traffickers. The United Nations Support Mission in
Libya has reported that there is “total impunity” for
serious abuses that are committed by armed groups.
Those violations and abuses are appalling in their own
right. Furthermore, they create grievances that sustain
the broader political crisis, and therefore work against
our common efforts to achieve a lasting peace. We
call on all parties to refrain from unlawfully targeting
civilians, and we urge that those responsible for serious
crimes be held accountable. Much more must be done
to establish a functioning justice system that is capable
of addressing that problem.
We are encouraged by the progress of the forces
aligned with the Government of National Accord in
retaking the city of Sirte. We look forward to seeing
that progress further consolidated in the coming days
and weeks.
The presence of Da’esh is a threat to Libya’s
future and to regional security. Its eventual military
defeat must be reinforced with progress towards
reconciliation, dialogue and the rule of law. In that vein,
the atrocities allegedly committed in the last days of the
Al-Qadhafi regime may seem far removed from today’s
conflict, but we believe that promoting accountability
for those acts remains a key element of the broader
effort to re-establish the rule of law in Libya. The ICC
investigation has helped to ensure that the Al-Qadhafi
regime’s acts in early 2011 were seen as the crimes that
they are, and that those responsible for such acts could
not count on impunity.
We remain encouraged by the reports of continued
cooperation between Libya’s judicial authorities and the
Office of the Prosecutor. While we recognize that Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi is not in the Libyan Government’s
custody, we continue to urge the Government of
National Accord to take the appropriate steps to seek his
transfer to the International Criminal Court, consistent
with Libya’s obligations under resolution 1970 (2011)
12/17

09/11/2016

and the repeated calls of the Security Council for Libya
to cooperate fully with the ICC and the Prosecutor. To
the extent that other actors continue to frustrate that
process, we encourage the Council to add its voice to the
call for Mr. Al-Qadhafi to be transferred to The Hague
and face charges there for the crimes against humanity
that he has alleged to have committed. We appreciate
the Prosecutor’s efforts to help ensure that the victims
of such atrocities do not escape our continued focus.
The Libyan people face an array of challenges,
and only they can take the steps needed to resolve
their country’s crisis. However, they should know that
they do not stand alone. We are encouraged by the
agreement reached in August between representatives
from Misrata and Tawergha, cities that fought bitterly in
2011 but have now agreed to compensate the victims of
abuses and allow the return of the internally displaced,
a process that was assisted by the good offices of the
United Nations Mission. We appreciate the continued
work of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Martin Kobler and the attention of the Council
and of the Human Rights Council to the situation. The
United States will continue to work with our partners in
pursuit of a lasting peace for Libya.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her briefing.
Our experience on the Council over the past two
years has reinforced to us the need for an effective
international
accountability
framework.
The
International Criminal Court (ICC) plays an important
role in that framework. Its existence sends a clear
message that the international community has the
tools to ensure that serious international crimes will
not go unpunished. The Security Council’s ability to
make referrals to the ICC is an important part of that
framework. However, as we have stressed numerous
times, the Council must remain scrupulous in avoiding
perceptions that it is using referrals as a political tool,
particularly in the midst of a conflict. Such actions
risk politicizing the Court and can prolong both
the conflicts concerned and the process of seeking
accountability. Furthermore, the Council should not
make referrals unless it is also prepared to follow up on
their implementation. Sustained non-compliance with
resolutions under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations calls into question the very credibility
of the Council and the authority of its resolutions.
16-37193

09/11/2016

The situation in Libya

In our view, costs incurred by the ICC as a result
of decisions by United Nations organs should be
attributed to, and accounted from, the United Nations
budget. At the very least, Council members should not
obstruct open discussions on the issue, but should defer
to the General Assembly, which has the prerogative and
mandate to determine funding issues.
Developments in Libya have not yet paved the way
for re-establishing effective Government authority,
restoring the rule of law, protecting basic human rights
and providing justice for past violations. The situation
remains extremely fragile. As a result, the environment
for the ICC in taking forward the Council’s Libya
referral remains extremely challenging.
The current security environment makes it almost
impossible for ICC staff to undertake investigations
on the ground. Moreover, Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
remains in detention in an area outside the custody
and control of the Government of National Accord. We
nevertheless commend the Office of the Prosecutor
for its continued efforts, and we welcome the
ongoing cooperation provided by Libyan ProsecutorGeneral’s Office.
The ICC is of course a court of last resort. It was never
intended to take the place of national justice systems,
but rather to complement them. However, Libya’s
current domestic judicial options remain significantly
constrained, especially its investigative and judicial
capacities. We believe the international community,
including the ICC, has a role to play in helping to build
Libyan capacities in this area. The ICC’s interactions
with Libya have given it useful practical knowledge of
Libya’s circumstances and needs in that regard.
We note the Prosecutor’s active efforts to encourage
the development of coordinated investigative and
prosecutorial strategies with regard to Libya-related
cases in order to help to close the impunity gap for ICC
crimes. We welcome the agreement in principle at the
recent meeting convened by the ICC with judicial and
investigative agencies from Libya and various interested
States to work collectively and in a coordinated manner.
While we remain supportive of the Prosecutor’s
efforts in Libya, we cannot pretend that this referral
is currently the most pressing issue facing either
Libya or the Court. Moreover, we must be cognizant
of the broader political context in which this work is
being undertaken. The ICC is currently facing an
unprecedented situation in its relationships with some

S/PV.7806

of its African members. None of us should be surprised.
That situation has been brewing for some time. There
are genuine substantive concerns, and they need to be
thoroughly discussed. But we also need to get much
better at listening to, and engaging with, African States
on issues of concern to them.
New Zealand has tried to play its part in facilitating
such a dialogue in the ICC context as well as in the
General Assembly and here in the Security Council.
We were disappointed that the meeting between the
Council and the African Union ministerial committee
on the ICC, which we scheduled during our September
presidency, did not proceed. We need to see greater
willingness to prioritize such engagement. The recent
announcement by three African States that they intend
to withdraw from the Rome Statute should concern us
all. African States were among the earliest and strongest
ICC supporters, and we do not believe it is in anybody’s
interests to now see them walk away.
Now is the time for an open, honest and respectful
dialogue between the Council, the ICC and its African
members, aimed at finding a way through the current
crisis that best serves our common goal of ending
impunity. As a friend of both the Court and of Africa,
New Zealand is committed to playing its part.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
again welcome the presence of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and
express our appreciation for her briefing on the twelfth
annual report on the situation in Libya in accordance
with resolution 1970 (2011).
We reiterate the full support of Uruguay for the work
of the Prosecutor and for the role of the International
Criminal Court in strengthening the rule of law at the
international level by the establishment of judicial
processes for those responsible for serious crimes
against humanity as defined in article 5 of the Rome
Statute. In order to make that work more effective, we
call on all Member States that are not yet parties to
the Rome Statute to adhere to it with the objective of
fighting impunity and defending all inhabitants of the
planet against atrocity crimes that pose a serious threat
to the peace and security of humankind.
On the other hand, my delegation’s message will
not be directed solely to those that are not parties to
the Rome Statute, but also to those States that recently
decided to reject it. It is important to safeguard and
strengthen the International Criminal Court, which has

16-3719313/17

S/PV.7806

The situation in Libya

shown itself to be an effective instrument in providing
justice when when national courts are incapable of
doing so.
With regard to Libya, the latest report does not
provide very encouraging signs. The authority of the
Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord continues to be challenged at the national
level, and the blockade imposed by the Tobruk House
of Representatives has not allowed for the Cabinet to
be established. The multiple challenges facing Libya
five years after the civil war require swift and efficient
responses from its new authorities, who face the threat
of Islamist terrorism, a persistent migrant crisis and a
severe economic crisis, among other problems.
It is necessary to achieve progress in the
reunification and reconciliation of the country, while
avoiding further bloodshed among the population and
putting end the institutional crisis and the military
conflict that has ravaged the country during the past
five years. It is necessary to advance towards the goal of
a genuine democratic transition and lasting peace and
stability, as a basis for more effectively investigating
the atrocities committed in the country and to avoid
a continuation of the situation of widespread violence
and impunity.
We trust the new Libyan authorities will fulfil
their commitment to bring justice to the victims of
these crimes, in cooperation with the Prosecutor of the
Court in order to identify the perpetrators, no matter
who they are. In particular, we encourage the new
Libyan Government to make Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
available to the Court and to ensure that Abdullah
Al-Senussi and other individuals receive trials that
include full international safeguards.
We are concerned that the Prosecutor will have
to face budgetary limitations next year in order to be
able to expand her investigation into the crimes taking
place in Libya, which the report identifies as one of
the Prosecutor’s priorities for 2017. For that reason, we
support her request to access the necessary resources to
be able to comply with her, and we call on States parties
able to provide the necessary financing to do so.
Finally, we reiterate our recognition of the work
of the Prosecutor in her investigations into crimes
committed in Libya, which will undoubtedly contribute
to strengthening the rule of law and the establishment
in Libya of a more just and inclusive society where there
14/17

09/11/2016

is full respect for basic rights and guarantees for all
citizens, who have seen those rights violated for years.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to start
by joining other Council members in thanking the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing.
We must acknowledge that, since our last discussion
in the Council on this matter (see S/PV.7698), the overall
picture fundamentally remains the same. More than
five years after the adoption of resolution 1970 (2011),
the perpetrators of the major crimes against humanity
referred to the ICC have not been held accountable.
However, it is not a result of the unwillingness of the
Libyan authorities to cooperate with the Court. On the
contrary, as highlighted in the twelfth report of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), the
Government of National Accord is truly committed to
implementing the 2013 memorandum of understanding
on burden-sharing and the Libyan General Prosecutor’s
Office continues to cooperate with the ICC.
We take note of the continuation of the Court’s
examination of crimes committed in the territory of
Libya and the collection of respective evidence. In our
view, a particular focus during such activities should be
given to atrocities committed by Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Ansar Al-Sharia and other non-State
actors in Libya. In that respect, Ukraine strongly
condemns attacks against civilians, abductions and
assassinations of Government officials and judges, as
well as the shelling of hospitals and looting of property,
which, regrettably, are still a common occurrence
across the country.
We consider that much more could be done to
ensure accountability for such crimes if the ICC
personnel were able to conduct investigations within
the territory of Libya. We fully agree that this will
require the stabilization of the security situation as well
as the provision of meaningful financial resources and
assurances with regard to the security of ICC staff. In
conclusion, I would like to stress that the Court will
be able to deliver justice to victims, only with the full
backing of the Council and the relevant United Nations
entities, including the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya and the States parties to the Rome Statute.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
16-37193

09/11/2016

The situation in Libya

Bensouda, for her briefing, and once again express full
support for her work.
As a State party to this legal instrument, our
country fully supports strengthening the Court’s
institutional structure and enhancing the effective work
of the International Criminal Court. In that regard,
we encourage the countries that are not parties to the
Rome Statute to accede to that instrument with a view
to achieving its universality. The fight against impunity
for internationally defined atrocity crimes, such as
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
inter alia, can be achieved only with international
cooperation. That is a key aspect in achieving the
Court’s objectives. The Court requires the full support
of all States in order to enforce its rulings and to carry
out its work. The strengthening of the international
criminal system established through the creation of the
ICC requires States parties to abstain from measures
that would weaken the important functions of the ICC
as it combats impunity. With that understanding, it is
essential for us to preserve and uphold the independence
and impartiality of the Court and free it from the
meddling of specific interests that would only hamper
its effectiveness.
The unstable political situation following the
collapse of the Libyan regime’s institutions, caused
by the NATO military intervention in 2011, continues
to have an adverse impact on the rule of law, and in
particular on the legal system in Libya. The aftermath
of that intervention is still being felt today. The
institutional collapse and the clashes between the
various factions seeking to wrest control of the country,
make it difficult for the State and its institutions to
function properly. In the light of that situation, Libya
must be supported in crafting a robust legal system
that would guarantee due process and respect for the
human rights of perpetrators of atrocity crimes. Libya
is a country that is submerged in widespread chaos and
violence, which Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
Al-Qaida and Ansar Al-Sharia have exploited in order
to carry out their terrorist activities.
Violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law perpetrated by those
groups should also be investigated by the International
Criminal Court in order to determine the persons
responsible for such abuses. We welcome the ongoing
cooperation between the Libyan Public Prosecutor
and the ICC, as mentioned in the twelfth report of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court

S/PV.7806

to the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011). Nonetheless, we urge the Libyan authorities to
coordinate efforts to a greater extent with the Office
of the Prosecutor and to engage in the consultations to
properly address issues such as the handing over of Saif
al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, so that he can be tried fairly and
in accordance with due process, in line with resolution
1970 (2011). His transfer to the ICC should be facilitated
by the militia in Zintan.
We are also concerned that individuals who have
been accused of engaging in acts of torture against
members of the Qaddafi family and members of the
Government of former President Muammar Al-Qadhafi
have not been detained or properly tried by the Libyan
justice system. We have also heard reports that one
individual accused of torture in a prison in Libya was
not only discharged but allowed to return to the same
prison, in which he had carried out those human rights
violations.
Finally, the Libyan Government is currently
facing various major challenges. We urge the Libyan
authorities not to lose heart in their struggle to establish
the rule of law with robust legal institutions which would
serve as a bedrock for the promotion of human rights
and the respect thereof, including the international
principles of due process, the right to defence and the
presumption of innocence, as judicial guarantees that
are deeply entrenched.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Senegal.
First of all, I would like to sincerely thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her briefing on the twelfth report of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) and to warmly
commend the dedication and the professionalism with
which she discharges her duty. That duty, we should
recall, is to dispense justice for the millions of innocent
victims of mass atrocities. I take this opportunity to
reiterate Senegal’s support for the Rome Statute and
reaffirm my country’s commitment to the effective
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011), unanimously
adopted on 26 February 2011.
The review of the twelfth report allows us to
affirm that, despite an unstable international security
environment and ongoing budgetary constraints,
the Office of the Prosecutor has managed to make

16-3719315/17

S/PV.7806

The situation in Libya

progress on investigations in the cases involving Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senoussi. In
addition, it was able to provide judicious follow-up to
the proceedings regarding allegations of torture and illtreatment in the Al-Hadba prison and issue additional
arrest warrants to apprehend other suspects. That is an
eloquent expression of the desire of the Prosecutor to
conduct criminal investigations under the November
2013 memorandum of understanding on burden-sharing
with the Libyan authorities through sound cooperation
and exemplary understanding with the Office.
My delegation encourages the Prosecutor to continue
along that path and encourages the Libyan authorities
to continue sharing information and cooperating with
the Office of the Prosecutor, with a view to building a
credible and effective judicial system. After all, it is up
to the Libyan authorities to guarantee respect for the
rule of law in their own country. To that end, the support
of the international community for Libya, through its
Presidency Council, remains vital to restoring stability
and security throughout the country. Such stability and
security require the unification and reconstruction of
all national institutions, including political institutions
and security and defence forces. That is why my
delegation would like to reiterate its support for United
Nations mediation, led by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, Mr. Martin Kobler.
This is an issue around which we must forge a
strong consensus. When the Security Council refers a
situation to the Court, it is simple logic that it should
ensure that the Court has the necessary cooperation
of Member States, and in particular it must grant the
Court the means necessaryto the success of its mission.
The perfect convergence between the values and ideals
of the Rome Statute, on the one hand, and the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, on
the other, demand that the Security Council and the
ICC cooperate increasingly closely in their common
fight against impunity for a world of justice, peace and
security.
It was not only to put an end to impunity and
prevent major crimes, but also to respond to the feelings
of frustration and outrage evoked by humanitarian
tragedies that have caused so much suffering to the
peoples of the world, that 120 States met in Rome 18 years
ago to set up the ICC, whose jurisdiction encompasses
the crimes considered to be the most serious by the
international community. Unfortunately, we are forced
16/17

09/11/2016

to note that atrocities continue to be perpetrated against
innocent victims on a daily basis, and the overwhelming
majority of them still await justice. That is why my
delegation urges the international community to step
up its work to promote the successful functioning of the
ICC and the universality of the Rome Statute.
We must recall that the ICC remains today the only
recourse for victims where the right to justice is not
upheld in situ. That is why the Senegalese delegation
cherishes the hope that the States that have withdrawn
from the Rome Statute will heed the call of the President
of the Assembly of States Parties and reconsider their
positions, and that those States that have not yet
withdrawn from the Rome Statute will adhere to it.
We firmly believe that a positive perception of
the Court and the promotion of peaceful relations
marked by mutual trust between Africa and the ICC,
as well as the efficient and effective addressing of
everyone’s concerns, necessarily require dialogue and
cooperation. We therefore invite all States parties to
commit themselves to a unified policy of consensus
and solidarity to restore the confidence and enthusiasm
that people and Governments demonstrated during
the creation of the Court. Given the gravity of certain
crimes that shock our collective conscience, we have a
moral duty to remain united and act together.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I wish you luck and success in your endeavours.
I would also like to thank the Russian Federation for
presiding over the Council during the past month.
I would like to express our thanks and appreciation
to Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for her briefing on the twelfth report
on the situation in Libya. I would also like to commend
her efforts in carrying out her task in my country,
pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolution. In
that regard, I would like to stress that the Government
of National Accord will continue to cooperate with her
and with her Office, through the Libyan ProsecutorGeneral’s office, in order to put an end to impunity,
establish justice and protect civilians in Libya from
violations and crimes. Ms. Fatou Bensouda spoke
about the cooperation and coordination of the Libyan
16-37193

09/11/2016

The situation in Libya

S/PV.7806

Prosecutor-General’s office with the national focal
point in her report.

the Libyan authorities so that it can pursue its work,

In conclusion, we hope that the security situation
in Libya will improve in a way that would allow the
Prosecutor’s Office to communicate directly with

in my country.

establish justice and ensure that the rule of law prevails

The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

16-3719317/17
