t

copy

? cr •> - ! r ^ ! ' '^r u i uj,:;:- j

UNITED N A T I O N S

I
i

• L ' i ; , •) r f
t

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
T H I R T Y - F I R S T

1908

Y E A R

OCT T o 'S3-'.

th
MEETING: 12 APRIL 1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1908)

1

Adoption of the agenda

1

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of Security Council resolu­
tion 384 (1975) (S/12011)

1

S/PV.1908

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters com­
bined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/...) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which infor­
mation about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1908th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 12 April 1976, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. HUANG Hua (China).

to take the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber, on the usual understanding that he
will be invited to take a place at the Council table
when he wishes to speak.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
ofGreat Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Harry
(Australia) took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1908)
1.

Adoption of the agenda

2.

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (S/12011)

4. The PRESIDENT: (translation front Chinese):
I should like at this stage to draw the attention of
members of the Council to documents S/12043 and
S/12045, which reproduce the texts of letters from the
representative of Indonesia and from the representa­
tive of Guinea-Bissau requesting that the Council
extend invitations under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure.

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
5. In the course of informal consultations, the
members of the Council took note of those requests
and agreed that, in the light of the procedures followed
during the Council's consideration of this question last
December, they favoured extending the invitations as
requested in the letters I have just cited. Therefore
if I hear no objection I shall take it that the Council
decides to extend the invitations in question.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (S/I2011)

It was so decided.

1. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
Letters have been addressed to the President of the
Council by the representatives of Australia, Indonesia
and Portugal which contain requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the question on the
agenda in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure. Pursuant to the usual practice, I propose,
if I hear no objection, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote.

6. The PRESIDENT (translation front Chinese):
At the appropriate moment, I shall invite those persons
mentioned in documents S/12043 and S/12045 to take
places at the Council table and make their statements.
7. In addition, I should like to inform members of the
Council that I have received this afternoon a letter
from the representative of Mozambique in which he
requests that the Council extend an invitation under
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. That letter
has been reproduced in document S/12047. I propose,
if no member of the Council raises any objection,
that the Council agree to this request.

2- In conformity with the procedure followed during
the Council's consideration of this question last
December, I invite the representatives of Indonesia and
Portugal to take seats at the Council table.

It was so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Anwar Sani
(Indonesia) and Mr. Galvdo Teles (Portugal) took
places at the Council table.

8. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
I shall invite that person to take a place at the Council
table and make his statement.

2- The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
Because of the limited number of places available at
the Council table I invite the representative of Australia

9. It may be recalled that after having discussed the
item entitled "The situation in Timor" in the course of
1

five meetings, the Council on 22 December 1975
adopted resolution 384 (1975). In pursuance of that
resolution, the Secretary-General submitted a report
on 12 March this year [S/I20II].

17. East Timor, which was a colony, became ar. I
independent State on 28 November 1975. Less thar.
20 per cent of the territory is under abusive military
occupation by Indonesian military forces. An inde­
pendent country is under military aggression. The
people are subjected to repression and massacre by
an invading army. Who is committing the crime? Who
has broken and abused the principles of non­
interference? Would it be the aggressor or the victim
of the aggression? We believe that those are questions
that are easy to answer. Nevertheless, there are still
those who intend to legalize and legitimate the
aggression. When it is demanded that an independent
and sovereign nation should return to the condition of
a colony in order to satisfy the expansionist and neocolonialist aggressor, that is no less than demanding
the acceptance of aggression and legalizing it as a force
to intimidate and to persuade a people to accept a
situation of new slavery and to remain in such a situa­
tion forever. When it is recognized that the aggressor
has the right to intervene militarily and decimate tens
of thousands of East Timorese patriots or those of
any othercountry, that is a blatant attempt to legitimize
aggression, repression, domination and violation. It
is an attempt to accept and legitimate genocide and
neo-colonialism.

10. In accordance with the procedure agreed upon
during prior consultations, the first speakers will be
those to whom the Council has just agreed to extend
invitations to address it in conformity with the provi­
sions of rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.
11. The first speaker is Mr. Jose Ramos Horta,
whose invitation was requested in document S/12045.
I request him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
12. Mr. HORTA: On behalf of my delegation, I wish
to thank the Council for giving us this opportunity to
present our views.
13. Our statement comprises two parts. The first
part I shall deliver now; the second will be delivered
if we are forced to do so by circumstances.
14. Our message is the voice of a whole nation,
60,000 of whose people have just been slaughtered by
the Javanese troops. The Chairman of UDT, the
ex-Uniao Democratica de Timor—also known as the
anti-communist movement—Francisco Lopes da
Cruz, said in Djakarta that more than 60,000 people,
mainly women and children, had been killed in the
six months of war in East Timor. Francisco Lopes
da Cruz, Vice-Chairman of the puppet Provisional
Government set up by the fascist Javanese generals
in Dili, may be expected to minimize rather than
exaggerate the toll. His statement merely confirms
long-standing reports of FRETILIN [Frente Revoluciondria Timor Leste Imiepemlente] indiscrimi­
nate pillaging, shooting and outright massacring of the
population of Dili by Javanese troops. In fact, the
Indonesian invasion stands revealed as a concerted
act of genocide against the East Timorese people.
One tenth of the population has been slaughtered in
six months—more than the total number killed during
the entire Japanese occupation during the Second
World War.

18. We are well aware that because of our physical
isolation, because of the great difficulties of our
struggle, and also because of the speed of events in
the revolutionary process of our movement, many
brotherly countries have been cautious about sup­
porting the cause of the people of East Timor under
the correct leadership of FRETILIN. Our struggle is
not only a military one; it is also a political and
diplomatic struggle. It is a war of resistance and of
liberation of a whole nation. Ours is not a war of
aggression, domination and violation. Therefore, we
are sure that the success of our struggle will widen
along with the march of history, since the balance of
power in the international political arena is in our
favour.
19. Indonesia has spat upon the United Nations. It
was on 22 December 1975 that the Security Council,
at its 1869th meeting, unanimously adopted resolu­
tion 384 (1975)'. In paragraphs 1 and 2 the Council
clearly:

15. The people of the Democratic Republic of East
Timor are conscious that their only crime, for which
they have been sentenced by the fascist regime of
Djakarta and its allies, is their desire to be free and to
build a new society in which everybody shares
responsibility, rights and benefits, without a privileged
minority exploiting the majority.

"Calls upon all States to respect the territorial
integrity of East Timor as well as the inalienable
right of its people to self-determination in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)"
and

16. The people of East Timor have shown their
unshakable will to continue the struggle against the
invading forces of the Suharto Government and for
the defence of the territorial integrity of their father­
land. In spite of that, there are still certain countries
and organizations that intend to propose Utopian
resolutions for the conflict for which the Democratic
Republic of East Timor is the stage.

"Calls upon the Government of Indonesia to with­
draw without delay all its forces from the Territory."
In paragraph 5 the Council
"Requests the Secretary-General to send urgently
a special representative to East Timor...".
2

20. In our letter of 2 January 1976 we welcomed the
appointment of Mr. Vittorio Winspeare Guicciardi.
We warned the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General that he would meet a number of
difficulties and obstacles to his mission. Our letter
read as follows:

courageously and correctly leading the people of East
Timor in the struggle for national liberation, were
led to believe that the only alternative was to con­
tinue the armed struggle.
24. The unanimous Security Council resolution
reflected the strong condemnation by the third world
countries and other progressive forces of Indonesian
criminal aggression and Indonesia's attempt to annex
the territory of the Democratic Republic of East
Timor. In spite of this unanimous vote, the fascist
military junta of Djakarta spat at the resolution and
intensified the armed aggression against the people of
East Timor. It was just three days after the adoption
of the Council resolution that the Nazi Javanese
generals launched another monstrous wave of assault
against East Timor. Desperate because of the heavy
losses of their forces since 7 December, the Javanese
military junta intensified the war. It was on Christmas
day that more than 20,000 paratroops and marines
were dropped in East Timor. The Indonesian military
presence in the Democratic Republic of East Timor
numbers 30,000 at this moment.

"(a) The Indonesian forces, who occupy the main
part of the city of Dili, are likely to do whatever
they can to delay your arrival in Dili.
"(b) After arriving in Dili, the Indonesians will
try to restrict your movements. You may not be
driven to many places in the countryside or be
able to talk to the people in the mountains, where,
without the presence of Indonesian forces, the
people can feel free to express themselves.
"(c) The Indonesians are likely to organize a
rally in places under military occupation, where
people will be forced to show their 'support' for
integration in Indonesia."
21. In his report to the Secretary-General Mr. Win­
speare Guicciardi stated that he went to certain places
only and was unable to travel widely. Indeed, he
visited only the enclave of Ocussi, the little island of
Atauro, Dili, the capital of East Timor, and Manatuto
and Baucau. He travelled only by helicopter and
aircraft. It is quite clear that the Javanese colonialist
authorities and their lackeys did not want the United
Nations mission to travel further into the countryside,
where the large masses of the people live, to meet
leaders and members of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of East Timor.

25. The types of weapons being employed by the
Javanese troops in themselves constitute evidence of
war crimes. Desperate because of the failure of the
invasion to crush the Democratic Republic of East
Timor, the fascist Javanese generals have resorted
to the use of chemical and biological warfare against
the heroic people of East Timor, with the intention
of immobilizing the population and destroying the
food base. The Air Force has dropped napalm on
villages and cultivated areas, killing women and
children and destroying crops. Hundreds of people
have died in the region of Los Palos as a consequence
of the deployment of biological bombs which cause
intense diarrhoea and diseases as yet unidentified by
FRETILIN health authorities. There have also been
reports of the calculated decimation of the remaining
male population in the Indonesian occupied towns. A
former Australian Consul to East Timor, currently a
director of a foreign affairs group in the Parliamentary
Library of Australia, Mr. James Dunn, has stated
publicly:

22. For our part, we insisted that the representative
of the Secretary-General should have direct contact
with our leaders and our Government in East Timor.
We suggested that the United Nations mission could
fly in a lighter craft from Darwin, Australia to any of
the four airstrips in areas under the control of our
patriotic forces. But the Australian Government
refused to allow any aircraft to take off from Australia.
The Indonesian air force also launched bombing raids
against those airstrips.

"The admission by the Timorese leader that
60,000 people have died in the civil war needs to
be viewed in its full horrifying perspective.

23. The Portuguese Government made available
some corvettes to carry the United Nations mission
to any landing place in East Timor. The fascist military
junta of Java, which has made a mockery of the United
Nations, imposed some conditions: "the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General would notify
in advance the 'Provisional Government of East Timor'
of the time and place of landing" [S/I20II, annex,
para. 30]. In a vicious manoeuvre to capture FRELITIN
leaders, the colonialist Javanese were trying to get
United Nations connivance. The Portuguese Govern­
ment, the mysterious administering Power of nothing,
very humbly bowed to the conditions imposed by
the Javanese generals. Faced with this ridiculous
and unacceptable game, FRELITIN leaders, who are

"In fact, the civil war, as such, ended in September
and, according to the estimates of the International
Red Cross and the Australian Council for Overseas
Aid team, it accounted for between 2,000 and
3,000 deaths."
Mr. Dunn went on:
"FRETILIN authorities treated their captives
and political opponents, including APODETI
[Associa^ao Popular Deniocrdtica Tiinoren.se] sup­
porters, surprisingly well."
3

Mr. Dunn, who visited East Timor in November 1975,
during FRETILIN control of the capital, visited many
parts of the territory and contacted countless people.
He also said in his statement to the press:

Nazi army of Java does not withdraw from the territon
of the Democratic Republic of East Timor, as has been
demanded by the United Nations. This is a people's
war of resistance. In the face of Indonesian naval
bombardment, aerial bombing with napalm and
biological weapons and the slaughter of one tenth of
the population, the nationalist forces of the Democratic
Republic of East Timor still control more than
80 per cent of the territory. Ninety-five per cent of the
population is within unoccupied territory. Javanese
forces control only town centres, the small permanent
populations of which have either fled from the invaders
or been massacred.

"One can only conclude therefore that the
appalling casualty list mentioned by da Cruz (and
one would expect him to minimize it, not exaggerate
it) is nothing less than an indiscriminate killing of
10 per cent of the entire population of East Timor by
Indonesian troops."
Mr. Dunn concluded:
"It must be condemned for what it is—an atrocity
against a people, ranking with such crimes as the
rape of Nanking and the wanton killings by Nazis
in the occupied States of Europe during the Second
World War.

29. Following the invasion of Dili on 7 December,
some leading members of FRETILIN were killed,
though most of the Government is safe in East Timor.
The President of the East Timor Popular Women's
Organization, Rosa Bonaparte, was captured and later
executed by a firing squad. Before the execution, she
was taken to the Indonesian warship and violated for
two days by Indonesian naval officers. Isabel Barreto,
27 years old, also a member of the East Timor Popular
Women's Organization and wife of our beloved Prime
Minister, Nicolau Lobato, was executed by a firing
squad in Dili on 10 December.

"It is one thing to understand and even accept the
Indonesian objective of bringing about the integra­
tion of East Timor, and perhaps, for the pragmatists, to accede to the pursuit of this objective
by military means. It is another to remain silent, as
compliant witnesses, while the worst atrocity in the
recent history of South East Asia is being com­
mitted."

30. In December 1975, the Indonesian military junta
brought here an unknown man, Jose Martins, as leader
of an unknown party. Jose Martins never saw East
Timor in his life, but he came here as a Timorese
representative. The Indonesia military junta also
brought a film, a film of their own atrocities. After
killing hundreds of people and throwing them in
common graves, they made a film of it and presented
it as a FRETILIN atrocity.

26. It also brings to our minds the barbarous
massacre of more than half a million Indonesians in
the first six months of the Suharto regime in 19651966. Such atrocities will never be forgotten by the
people of Indonesia. Thousands of entire families in
East Timor were slaughtered too. The years 1965 and
1966 were those in which the Indonesian people came
to be dominated and oppressed by a military fascist
and expansionist Government which incarcerated in
subhuman conditions in concentration camps nearly
100,000 political prisoners and kept them waiting
indefinitely for thir trials.

31. It is very strange that FRETILIN should have
executed all the prisoners but saved the most important
one—the leader, Arnaldo Araujo. Araujo has been in
gaol since the abortive coup on 11 August. He was not
killed. Would it not be logical that the Government
of the Democratic Republic of East Timor should
execute the main figure? After all, who is Arnaldo
Araujo? An Australian journalist, Ken White, on
5 February wrote:

27. Before the invasion of Dili on 7 December, many
foreign observers representing the International Red
Cross, aid organizations, religious groups, the press
and the Australian Parliament, witnessed and con­
firmed the moderation, responsibility and effective­
ness of the FRETILIN administration of East Timor.
Since the invasion, under threat of death and following
the execution of six foreign journalists by Javanese
troops, all foreign observers have been removed from
East Timor, and none has been allowed to return in
spite of repeated appeals by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of East Timor and international
aid organizations. The Indonesian blockade has
prevented any medical help, food-stuff or other
humanitariafl assistance from reaching our people.

"In 1946 a catequista, or religious teacher, was
brought before a civilian court in Dili and accused
of war crimes against the Timorese people.
"Evidence was given that he had collaborated
with the Japanese... against Australia's 2/2
Commando Squadron and Timorese sympathetic
to the Allied cause.
"At the end of the trial Arnaldo dos Reis Araujo
was sentenced to nine years' exile on the island of
Atauro."

28. The world cannot remain silent while the worst
atrocity in the recent history of South East Asia is
taking place. Sixty thousand people have been
slaughtered: many more thousands will follow if the

That report appeared in the Northern Territory News
of Darwin, Australia.
4

32. The Permanent Mission of Indonesia to the
United Nations has been very active over the past
week, handing out a pamphlet publicizing what
they classify as FRETILIN atrocities, together with
photographs. Surely this pamphlet and these
photographs can only remind us of the barbarous
massacres committed by the fascist regime of Djakarta
in 1965 and 1966. The Indonesians have on page 22
of the pamphlet asked us to believe that the skeleton
photographed is that of a Timorese patriot who died in
the last few weeks. Perhaps, in fact, this is the skeleton
of an Indonesian murdered in 1966 by the specialists
in massacre. On page 12 of this pamphlet, the Indo­
nesians report that "an automatic Seiko watch was
also found" in a grave. It is really very strange that
the so-called FRETILIN terrorists did not take the
belongings of the victims—as, for instance, a valuable
Seiko watch. Surely people who are desperate enough
to kill and terrorize their own people, as the Indone­
sians would have us believe, would not hesitate to
take the possessions of their victims?

who were in Dili at that time. A tape of that broad­
cast was sent to the Australian Department of Foreign
Affairs. According to the Australian press, Australian
intelligence, monitoring Indonesian communications,
confirmed the murder of those journalists. Another
Australian journalist, Roger East, my Press Secretary,
was killed in Dili, on 7 December by Indonesian troops.
35. Knowing the criminal record of the fascist regime
of Djakarta, one can hardly doubt that the Indonesian
invasion of East Timor was followed by a horrifying
atrocity paralleled only by the massacres in Indonesia
itself in 1965-1966. But we challenge the Indonesian
military junta to give free entry into East Timor to
foreign observers, journalists, the International Red
Cross and diplomats. They will assess the situation and
will tell what they have seen. Why does the Indonesian
Government stop press people and other independent
observers from visiting the country? If truth and justice
are on their side—well, why are they so worried about
bringing outside witnesses to East Timor?
36. When the Portuguese empire fell as a result of
the heroic struggle of the people of Mozambique,
Angola, Guinea-Bissau, Cape Verde, Sao Tome and
Principe and East Timor, the Nazi military junta of
Java tried to impose another colonialism on the heroic
people of East Timor. But following the path of the
people of Indonesia, who also heroically struggled for
their own independence 30 years ago, the people of
East Timor are determined never to surrender their
independence, which was proclaimed on 28 November
1975 by the Central Committee of FRETILIN, the
only nationalist movement of East Timor. While the
progressive forces throughout the world accepted and
declared their unconditional support for the legitimate
aspirations of the heroic people of East Timor, the
fascist military junta of Java refused to accept this
declaration of independence. Portugal, up to that time
the administering Power, also refused to accept the
declaration of independence by the people of East
Timor
through
their
revolutionary
vanguard,
FRETILIN. After 500 years of colonialism, oppression
and exploitation of the people of the colonies, the
Portuguese Government had an opportunity to free
itself from a shameful past. But instead, it connived
with the neo-colonialist and imperialist forces in a
criminal attempt to suffocate the will of the people of
East Timor to be free and independent.

33. The same pamphlet refers to the death of some
APODETI leaders—Casimiro Araujo and Osorio
Soares, but elsewhere in the pamphlet these two men
are listed among "victims who have still not been
found and who are still being searched for". It is very
odd that one of the lists includes the name of a young
man called Arsenio Horta. He happens to be my
brother, and he is in the mountains operating the radio
station of the patriotic forces of the Democratic
Republic of East Timor. It is also very interesting to
note that many of the names listed are those of people
who fled to Australia as refugees back in August
1975.
34. It is also mentioned in the same pamphlet that a
certain Syddell has reported that "about thirty white
people were executed by FRETILIN last December".
It is very interesting to note that the only white
Portuguese under arrest by FRETILIN was a
lieutenant colonel who engineered the attempted UDT
coup d'etat in August. Back in September 1975, the
FRETILIN Central Committee handed over to the
International Red Cross 28 Portuguese military men
who were detained after the abortive coup by the UDT.
Those men reached Australia safely under the auspices
of the International Red Cross and are now in Portugal.
However, the anti-communist movement kept in
detention 23 Portuguese citizens who have not been
heard of since. I wish to remind the Council that in
October 1975 five Australian and British newsmen
were captured and executed by Indonesian forces in
an invasion of the village of Balibo that resembled
that of My Lai. The following day the Indonesian
Government-operated Radio Kupang, in the voice of
the president of the so-called anti-communist
movement, Lopes da Cruz, announced very proudly
that the anti-communist forces "had taught a lesson
to five Australian communist journalists". These
broadcasts were heard by several foreigners,
journalists, aid officers and an Australian diplomat,

37. The people of East Timor, after defeating the
internal enemies, proclaimed their political inde­
pendence. Therefore, the Central Committee of
FRETILIN and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of East Timor reject strongly any suggestion
of East Timor's being a colony. Further, any suggestion
by the United Nations that Portugal is still "the
administering Power" is a blatant contradiction of all
United Nations principles. Indeed, it is a unique
situation, in which the people of a colony courageously
declared their political independence and the United
Nations still recognized the legality of colonial power
5

over the territory and the people. The Central Com­
mittee of FRETILIN no longer recognizes Portuguese
sovereignty over East Timor but is willing to establish
bilateral dialogue as between Government and Govern­
ment, State and State.

the archipleago succumbed to this influence—the
history of the culture of this area has been the histor.
of syncretist adaptation to external powers.
43. Anthropologists and sociologists generally agree
that there are over 300 different ethnic groups iIndonesia, each with its own cultural identity, which
speak more than 250 distinct languages. This diversity
of ethnic origins and cultural identity is particular!;,
evident in the eastern part of the archipelago, in the area
known as Nusatenggara, which includes Timor. Here,
the separate islands have different cultures. The
people come from different ethnic stocks, speak
different languages and express themselves in different
cultures. In fact, there is good reason to think of
these islands as having more ethnic and cultural affinity
not with Java to the west, but with Papua and New
Guinea to the east, while their natural ecology—their
climate, vegetation, flora and fauna—has a pattern
more akin to that of northernmost Australasia and
New Guinea. This eastern section of the archipelago
is a distinct area, an area unlike the Javanese axis.
The languages of these islands reflect this difference:
they are considered more Papuan than MalayoPolynesian, and this is particularly true of Timor.

38. I come to the question of ethnic and cultural
origins. In my first statement in this chamber on
15 December 1975 [1864th meeting], I referred very
briefly to the question of the ethnic and cultural origins
of the people of East Timor. Since it is an equation
of extreme importance, I ought to give a deeper
consideration to this subject. I say extreme importance
for one fundamental reason: the Javanese leaders, in
their attempts to mislead the less informed people
and divert their attention from their real expansionist
intentions, claim constantly that the people of East
Timor have the same cultural and ethnic origins as
the people of the whole archipelago; therefore, East
Timor must be integrated into Indonesia.
39. Before referring specifically to the question of the
cultural and ethnic origins of the people of East Timor,
I should make reference at some length to this matter
as far as Indonesia itself is concerned.
40. The Secretary of State of the United States has
written:

44. Timor was undoubtedly peopled in successive
migrations from the Asian continent, from Melanesia
and, subsequently, by proto-Malays from the west.
As such, it manifests an ethnic heterogeneity that
characterizes the entire region, from the Philippines
to Australia and from the islands east of Papua New
Guinea to the Malagasy Republic. Early IndoJavanese and Islamic influences can be barely noted,
except in so far as Dutch hegemony later spread some
ideas, particularly in the political domain, to western,
now Indonesian, Timor. East Timor, under Portuguese
rule, was largely exempt from these influences.

"Indonesia... was nothing but a geographic
expression until the Dutch found it more efficient to
unite the islands of the Indies under a single
administration." 1
He went on:
"The collection of islands called Indonesia is
meaningful only in terms of the history of Dutch
rule; its frontiers follow precisely the frontiers of
empire and so does its national consciousness.
Because West New Guinea was part of the Dutch
East Indies, Indonesia has laid claim to it although it
is inhabited by people as different from the
Polynesian stock of Indonesia as the Dutch them­
selves." 2

45. Linguistically, too, East Timor differentiates
itself from Indonesian Timor, while manifesting some
of the same complexity that marks some of the islands
to the north. There are 32 distinct dialect groups in
East Timor, which can be reduced to two dominant
language families, Malayo-Polynesian, or Austronesian, and Papuan, or non-Austronesian. Until adequate
glottochronological research is undertaken, the exact
precedence of these languages and their relationship
to others in the region can only be speculative. Aside
from some word borrowing, there is little direct
connexion between the Austronesian languages spoken
in East Timor and Indonesian. The degree of cognation
between those and related languages in Indonesian
Timor is not precisely known; however, except for one
or two idioms, it does not appear to be particular^
close.

41. Indonesia as it exists today was spawned by
Dutch, Portuguese, French and English colonialism;
Indonesian nationalism was finally forged in the years
of Japanese imperialism in South East Asia.
42. The early history of the archipelago over which
the Javanese now claim hegemony in the name of
Indonesia is one of external invasion and imperialism.
In the first 700 years A.D. the Hindu cultural, religious
and political influence spread south into the archi­
pelago. This influence is still a major part of the
cultural and religious life of the peoples of this area
today. The next cultural and religious invasion of the
archipelago was that of Islam; around 1290 A.D. the
first town in the island of Sumatra, Perlak, was
converted to Islam. Many of the existing kingdoms in

46. Traditionally, the general phenomenon of
ethno-linguistic diversity has been heightened in East
Timor, where groups were further differentiated into
atomistic political units comprising lineages and clans.
Alliance and warfare characterized the relationships
6

between these groups. Such super-local unity as
existed probably resulted from the establishment over
time of trade partnerships. Certainly, no general unity
among these peoples was achieved before the coming
of the European Powers, when two overarching
"kingdoms" were created largely in the interest of
Dutch and Portuguese political expediency. It is
interesting to note that these two kingdoms, Belu and
Serviao, correspond to the post-colonial division of
Timor into East and West.

51. With regard to concepts of self-determination,
the historic Declaration on the Granting of Indepen­
dence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, adopted by
the General Assembly on 14 December 1960 [resolu­
tion 1514 (XV)], states:
"1. The subjection of peoples to alien subjuga­
tion, domination and exploitation constitutes a
denial of fundamental human rights, is contrary to
the Charter of the United Nations and is an impedi­
ment to the promotion of world peace and co­
operation.

47. In brief, the geo-political boundaries of our
modern era have been imposed upon areas of tre­
mendous historical diversity. Contemporary national
configurations cannot mask the extraordinary ethnolinguistic differences that mark them. Certain cultural
similarities can, of course, be found among the diverse
groups, but these in no way justify the superimposition
of a political unity over the region as a whole. If
anything, the unity imposed in the colonial era has
provided for a somewhat different form of demarcation
which distinguishes, historically, one micro-region
from another, as for example, the former Dutch
colonies from the Portuguese. It is, in fact, this cultural
overlay which now more than anything else marks the
East Timorese quest for self-determination. It is
time, after centuries of interference, that the right
to that self-determination be restored.

"5. Immediate steps shall be taken, in Trust and
Non-Self-Governing Territories or all other terri­
tories which have not yet attained independence, to
transfer all powers to the peoples of those territories,
without any conditions or reservations, in accor­
dance with their freely expressed will and desire,
without any distinction as to race, creed or colour,
in order to enable them to enjoy complete inde­
pendence and freedom."
In recent decisions concerning the implementation of
the Declaration, the General Assembly has reaffirmed
its recognition of the legitimacy of the struggle of
colonial peoples and peoples under alien domination
to exercise their right to self-determination and inde­
pendence by all the necessary means at their disposal.

48. How can such an artificial nation, a babel of such
various ethnic origins, claim that the people of East
Timor have the same cultural and ethnic origins as the
people of Indonesia? It is necessary also to draw your
attention to the fact that 500 years of Portuguese
colonialism separated the people of East Timor
physically, socially, economically and politically
from the rest of the archipelago. Therefore, the culture
of the people of East Timor experienced an inde­
pendent development, particularly over the last
200 years. Above all, we cannot turn back the wheel
of history, neither can we deny the law of social
dynamism.

52. The final communique of the Asian-African Con­
ference held at Bandung from 18 to 24 April 1955,
and sponsored by Burma, Ceylon, India, Indonesia
and Pakistan, stated that
"The right of self-determination must be enjoyed
by all peoples, and freedom and independence
must be granted, with the least possible delay, to
those who were still dependent peoples. Indeed, all
nations should have the right freely to choose their
own political and economic systems and their own
way of life in conformity with the purposes and
the principles of the Charterofthe United Nations."'

49. Therefore, the attempt to annex East Timor can
only be explained in the light of Javanese expansionism
and Stone Age imperialism. But if all Governments
throughout the world followed the logic of the Javanese
leaders, we would have most countries trying to annex
each other. For instance, the newly independent
Papua New Guinea would claim West Irian—and,
surely, President Suharto would not like it; Spain
would attempt to annex Portugal, as it in fact did in
the fifteenth century; and the Italian Government
would annex the Vatican.

53. The declaration adopted at the First Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, heldfrom 1 to6September 1961 at Belgrade,
stated, in section III, item 2:
"The participants in the Conference demand that
an immediate stop be put to armed action and
repressive measures of any kind directed against
dependent peoples to enable them to exercise
peacefully and freely their right to complete inde­
pendence and that the integrity of their national
territory should be respected. Any aid given by any
country to a colonial power in such suppression is
contrary to the Charter of the United Nations.

50. The boundaries of the countries around the world
have been imposed upon the people by centuries of a
dramatic political process. It is a gross mistake to try
to change the course of history according to our own
caprices. This would inevitably cause other dramatic
developments. It is more positive and realistic if we
learn to live in peace and love with our neighbours.

"The participating countries respecting scru­
pulously the territorial integrity of all States oppose
7

by all means any aims of annexation by other
nations." 4

the Indonesian Republic today. I must stress the fac:
that in May of the same year there also took place
in West Timor a rebellion against the Javanese Goverr,ment. Perhaps this was the reason why the Indonesia-.
Government had only apathy to show in the face of the
massacre that was perpetrated in the same year ir.
East Timor by the Portuguese colonialist Govern­
ment's forces.

54. These principles were indeed inspired by the
heroic struggles for national liberation of the oppressed
peoples of the colonies. The brotherly peoples of
Angola, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique and
Sao Tome and Principe took up arms to exercise their
right to self-determination because it had been denied
by the colonial Power. The people of East Timor also
have a history of heroic resistance to foreign domina­
tion. The wars of Cova Lima in 1719, Cova Cotubaba
in 1868-1869 and Manufahi in 1912 are chapters of the
history of our people in their constant struggle for the
right to self-determination, independence and freedom.
Dom Boaventura, the great nationalist leader, led his
people in a long bloody struggle against the Portuguese
colonialists which lasted for 17 years—from 1895 to
1912. Speaking about Dom Boaventura, I pay a tribute
of homage to Her Majesty Queen Maria de Manufahi,
his widow, who is still alive and is 80 years old. Her
Majesty Queen Maria is a militant of FRETILIN.

58. I think that these are sufficient examples to
confirm that the East Timorese people have always
wanted to free themselves from any type of domina­
tion and exploitation.
59. In the face of the aggression to which the East
Timorese people are being subjected, it has once more
been confirmed that oppression, domination, viola­
tion, exploitation and all types of corruption are the
result of a social, political and economic system that
is deeply incorrect, unjust and decaying.
60. These things are not the result of a struggle
between different races. It is the constant and con­
tinuous action of one class upon another, where
consciousness has become the main element of all the
antagonistic interests. These conflicts are not only at
the national level but also at the international level.

55. Therefore, we cannot speak of the present
resistance of our people as though it was a spontaneous
event without political consistency. The East Timorese
people have always shown their aversion to any type
of domination, exploitation or oppression. Thus, from
the history of colonization and imperialism in East
Timor, we can verify the heroic resistance of our
people. It has been such that several times our people
have resorted to armed struggle to break out of their
chains and free themselves from colonial domination.

61. Seldom in the world's history has a country of
600,000 people successfully resisted a powerful
aggressor of 130 million, which still receives millions
of dollars of military and economic aid from the
United States, Australia, the United Kingdom, Canada
and so on. Against 30,000 paratroopers and marines,
against chemical and biological warfare, against tanks
and warships, the people of the Democratic Republic
of East Timor, under the correct leadership of
FRETILIN, have, during the eight months of heroic
struggle against the neocolonialist and reactionary
forces and the Javanese army, shown their unshakable
will to be free and to be master of their own
country.

56. We have sufficient documentation to prove this
reality, though there are still people who want to hide
the truth and demonstrate the contrary. The historian
Arturde Sa, in his book A Planta de Cciiluco, stated:
"Timor was the last of the Portuguese colonies
to be completely pacified. In 1912 Portuguese
authority still ran a heavy risk, threatened by the
revolt of Dom Boaventura, the greatest native King,
who cunningly influenced the other chiefs and
clans."

62. What, in the final analysis, is an act of selfdetermination? When a whole nation for many
centuries heroically resists the colonialists in such an
unequivocal way, as is displayed in the bloody pages
of the history of Timor, is this not an act of seltdetermination? When a whole nation—men, women
and children—engage in a people's war of resistance
against the foreign aggressor, is this not a supreme
act of self-determination? When a whole nation pays
with blood and lives for each inch of its soil in the
struggle against the foreign aggressor, is this not a
noble act of self-determination? When one tenth of our
population has been massacred by the Nazi army
of Java, in spite of which the whole nation continues
the struggle for liberation, is this not a sublime ac:
of self-determination?

He went on:
"Since then, the history of East Timor is a
history of long, hard campaigns, continuous change,
constant watchfulness in order to establish, to
consolidate and defend the Portuguese rule in this
island."
57. The last revolt, which many people classified as
a pro-Indonesian movement, took place in May and
June 195?Tin Viqueque, Uato Lari and Uato Carbau,
where the population was massacred by colonialist
forces. This movement had the support of the same
Moluccan soldiers and officers who became refugees
there after the declaration of independence of the
South Moluccas, one of the provinces that constitute

63. The war of national liberation in East Timor
against the Indonesian Nazi army has been going or.
8

for eight months. Facing massive Indonesian military
strength, the people of East Timor have resisted
heroically, thus showing the world their determina­
tion never to surrender their newly gained freedom
and independence.

the "anti-communist movement" in two weeks in
August? How could it have been possible otherwise
for the heroic people to resist the Indonesian army
for eight months?
68. The Indonesian Government claims that the
heroic struggle of the people of East Timor for national
liberation is being run by a professionally trained army
left over from the colonial days. This is a gross insult
to the people of East Timor. The origin of the army
of the struggle for national liberation of the people
of East Timor is the same as the origin of the army
that achieved the liberation of the people of Indonesia
from colonialism at the end of the Second World
War. The first army of the Republic of Indonesia was
built from men trained in the Dutch Indies army and the
army of the Japanese occupation forces. So, many of
our heroic soldiers received their first military training
as conscripts in the Portuguese colonial army. But the
peasants who were conscripted were conscious that
their ultimate mission was the liberation of their
people. The guns that were left behind by the
Portuguese, and those that we have captured or
bought from the Indonesians, are now being used for
the only legitimate purpose—the liberation of the
people.

64. The military forces of the Government of Indo­
nesia invade our territory. They destroy everything
and kill everybody that they find in their way. They
have massacred tens of thousands of the East Timorese
people. When their thirst for blood has been satisfied,
then they will offer the people an "act of free choice".
After all, if the choice is to be a real "act of free
choice" it must be made by free people. Therefore it
ought to respect and honour the freedom of the people
of East Timor which they have obtained with centuries
of suffering, blood and death at the hands of the
colonial Power. To respect this freedom that has been
seized by the people of East Timor it is necessary
to recognize the right of the people to be independent,
and this must lead to the recognition of the Democratic
Republic of East Timor. Only after such recognition
can we say that the people are free and sovereign
in having the minimum condition to make whatever
decisions concerning their future they may desire.
Otherwise, it would be a blatant contradiction,
because no colonial person can be free. Not being a
free man he cannot by himself decide his future,
and in this condition he can never exercise his right
to self-determination. Therefore, it is necessary to
recognize and to support his right to be free, his right
to form an independent nation. Only if political, social,
economic, cultural and historical conditions favour
the union of two independent States will both peoples
be able to assess carefully the advantages and dis­
advantages of a union in such a way that it will not
jeopardize or adversely affect either part. Finally, we
may say that the union of two States would be achieved
with equal benefit.

69. One of the greatest revolutionary leaders of the
world today, Comrade President Samora Machel of the
People's Republic of Mozambique, has said: "A gun
in the hands of a colonialist is to oppress; a gun in
the hands of a revolutionary is to liberate the people".
70. My Government respects the territorial integrity
of the Republic of Indonesia. We admire the great
and heroic nation that was born and forged in a long
and heroic struggle that transformed the map of South
East Asia and changed the balance of power in the
world. The wonderful people of Indonesia rewrote
their history with suffering and blood. The people of
East Timor in the future might decide to seal their
destiny with the destiny of the people of Indonesia.
But such cannot be achieved with armed aggression.
It is with profound sadness that we see Indonesia
today so different from the Indonesia of 15 years ago.
It is with profound sadness that we see a country of
the third world now aligned with the forces of exploita­
tion and oppression. We hope anxiously that Indonesia
will find its way again and will again become a voice
and a force for the liberation of the third world
countries.

65. The Political Constitution of the Democratic
Republic of East Timor states that elections should
take place in the near future for a people's assembly,
which is to be the supreme organ of the legislative
power of the State. Such a people's assembly—for
which all East Timorese, enjoying all their consti­
tutional, political rights may vote and become can­
didates—will be the supreme organ which decides the
future status of the Democratic Republic of East
Timor.
66. We have told how the army of the Indonesian
fascist Government controls militarily less than
20 per cent of our national territory despite the fact
that for eight months they have used against our
people all of their military apparatus, from the most
sophisticated and criminal weaponry prohibited by
international conventions right up to their best para­
troops and marines.

71. East Timor is an independent and sovereign
State. We belong to the third world and we are a
non-aligned country. The aggression against the
Democratic Republic of East Timor is contrary to
peace, which it is our duty to build up actively and in
solidarity with all peace-loving countries and nations.
72. We cannot be a source of instability because we
are committed to contribute to a real and long-lasting
stability in our geographical region and in the world.

67. If it were not for the total support of the people
of East Timor, how could FRETILIN have defeated
9

But nobody should expect us to sell our principles.
The President of FRETILIN and the President of the
Democratic Republic of East Timor have said that:
"Our enemy is no more than a hungry giant, a crippled
monster, a volcano that has erupted and that will
extinguish itself'. Eight months of heroic struggle
have passed. It might be necessary to fight for another
eight months or eight years before the nationalist
forces defeat the enemies of the people. The resistance
will be as long as necessary. We have attained inde­
pendence from the colonialist Portuguese, who for
almost 500 years oppressed our people. The people of
East Timor have been tempered sufficiently by the
anti-colonial struggle to continue the resistance
indefinitely.

(a) either recognize the legitimacy of the struggle
of the people of East Timor under the leadership
of FRETILIN for national liberation and consolida­
tion of the Democratic Republic of East Timor, or
(b) connive with and legalize Indonesian aggression
against the territory and the people of East Timor.
"The Central Committee of FRETILIN and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of Eas:
Timor call on the United Nations to use all neces­
sary means to honour the unanimous resolution of
the Security Council. Should Indonesia refuse to
be bound by the resolution, economic sanctions
should be applied forthwith."
74. We have stated our Government's stand on
the question. We believe that the members of the
Council will be able to reach a certain degree of
agreement along the lines of resolution 384 (19751.
We are firmly committed to our principles and.
according to our Government's instructions, we are
willing to co-operate fully with the United Nations in
order to find a just solution to the war in East Timor.
My Government is ready for talks under the auspices
of the United Nations, as we believe that through
dialogue it will be possible to find a solution which
will be in everybody's interest. Whatever the outcome
of this session, we shall bear in mind that the members
of the Council could not have done better. The dut\
to bring peace where there is war and aggression is
not an easy one.

73. On 16 March 1976, I informed the SecretaryGeneral about my Government's stand on the question
of Indonesian aggression against the Democratic
Republic of East Timor. I wish to read out the relevant
paragraphs of my letter:
"On 28th of November 1975, the Central Com­
mittee of FRETILIN, vanguard of the people of
East Timor, declared independence of the so-called
'Portuguese Timor' and constituted the Democratic
Republic of East Timor. The Democratic Republic of
East Timor is governed according to the political
programme of FRETILIN and by the Constitution
of the Republic.
"The Central Committee of FRETILIN, there­
fore, considers as terminated any political ties
between East Timor and Portugal. Therefore, the
Central Committee of FRETILIN and the Govern­
ment of the Democratic Republic of East Timor
repudiate any suggespion that Portugal is still the
administering Power. Indeed, it is a unique situation
in which the people of a colony declare their political
independence and the United Nations still recog­
nizes the colonial legality over the territory and
the people. This is a blatant contradiction of all
United Nations principles.

75. As I have mentioned, our statement comprises
two parts. We shall respectfully request permission
to deliver the second part if circumstances force us to
do so. Our second statement will be a brief one. It is
a dramatic account which exposes human suffering,
evil and sinister events.
76. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
The next speaker is the representative of Portugal,
on whom I now call.
77. Mr. GALVAO TELES (Portugal) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, permit me first to thank
you and the other members of the Council for giving
the Portuguese delegation the opportunity to explain
here once again its position on the question of Timor,
which is today again on the Council's agenda.
Permit me also to add that it is a particular pleasure
for me to pay a sincere tribute to Ambassador Huang
Hua of the People's Republic of China, whose turn it
is in April to preside over the Council and who brings
to this task his particular experience and competence.
I am sure that our two Governments, pending the
restoration of relations between our two countries,
will do everything in" their power to ensure the
strengthening of international peace and securit\.
the application of the fundamental principles of
decolonization and implementation of the right ct
peoples to self-determination and independence. This
series of meetings of the Council, I am sure, will
provide striking proof of this.

"The Central Committee of FRETILIN and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of East
Timor regret that the United Nations has not been
able to implement paragraphs 1 and 2 of Security
Council resolution 384 (1975). The Indonesian fascist
army continues the war of aggression against the
Democratic Republic of East Timor. Therefore, the
people of East Timor, under the leadership of
FRETILIN, continue the war of resistance and
national liberation, and they will resort to all means
necessary to counter Javanese expansionist designs.
The Central Committee of FRETILIN and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of East
Timor consider that to speak of self-determination
before the Indonesians withdraw is a blatant
hypocrisy, against all precepts of international law
and its universal moral foundations. Therefore, for
the United Nations there are only two alternatives:
10

78. On 22 December last the Security Council met at
the request of the General Assembly and Portugal to
consider the situation created by the invasion of Timor
by Indonesian armed forces on 7 December and
adopted resolution 384 (1975). In this resolution the
Council called upon all States to respect the territorial
integrity of East Timor as well as the inalienable
right of its people to self-determination in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV). It called
upon the Government of Indonesia to withdraw without
delay all its forces from the Territory and called upon
the Government of Portugal as administering Power
to co-operate fully with the United Nations so as to
enable the people of East Timor to exercise freely
their right to self-determination. It urged all States and
other parties concerned to co-operate fully with the
efforts of the United Nations to achieve a peaceful
solution to the existing situation and to facilitate the
decolonization of the Territory. Furthermore, the
resolution requested the Secretary-General to send
urgently a special representative to East Timor to
make an on-the-spot assessment and to establish
contact with all the parties in the territory and all
States concerned in order to ensure implementation
of the resolution.

1975 [S/II922], reaffirmed that it was ready to
co-operate with the United Nations to the fullest
possible extent so as to enable the people of East
Timor to exercise freely their right to self-deter­
mination and independence and reaffirmed that it was
available to the Special representative to hold consulta­
tions at Lisbon within the framework of his mission
and to provide him with the necessary assistance.
81. Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi and 1 also had the
opportunity to meet here in New York at the beginning
of January, just before he left for Lisbon, where he
was subsequently received by Major Melo Antunes,
the Foreign Minister, Commandant Victor Crespo,
Minister of External Co-operation, and Colonel Lemos
Pires, the Governor of Timor, as well as other highranking Portuguese officials.
82. Transmission facilities on one of the two corvettes
which my Government keeps in the Timor Sea were
made available to Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi, and the
authorities also offered him the use of one of these
vessels, if necessary, to travel to a point on the coast
of Timor where it would be possible for him to dis­
embark in order to get into direct touch in the Territory
with FRETILIN elements.

79. The Council is meeting again today, almost
four months after the adoption of resolution 384 (1975),
in order to assess the present situation on the basis
of the report of the Secretary-General and that of his
Special Representative, Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi
[SII20I1], The Council, therefore—and this is the
sole purpose of this meeting—should take cognizance
of the events which have occurred in the Territory
since the adoption of resolution 384 (1975) and, in the
light of the present situation, take the measures neces­
sary to ensure the implementation of this resolution.
Consequently it should, in our view, avoid becoming
involved in sterile discussion about the situation in
the Territory before 22 December, so that debate can
proceed pragmatically, in order to bring about concrete
and genuine solutions for existing problems. For its
part, it is in this spirit that the Portuguese delegation
has asked to speak, aware as it is particularly of the
time already lost and of the fact that it is imperative
to find
without delay a balanced, concrete and
realistic solution to the problem of the decolonization
of Timor. In other words, we must take into account
the true interests of the people of Timor, even if at
the expense of long demagogic tirades by some or the
Utopian positions of others.

83. On 10 February, on his return from his mission
to Timor, the Special Representative once again met
at Lisbon with the Foreign Minister, the Minister of
External Co-operation and the Governor of Timor.
84. My Government would like to pay a tribute to
Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi for the diligence and deter­
mination with which he undertook his mission to Timor
and for the good will and devotion he demonstrated
in overcoming all the obstacles and difficulties he
encountered in the performance of his task. The
contacts he made with the various interested parties,
including the Indonesian Government, which are dealt
with in his report, have turned out to be of undeniable
usefulness. It is to be hoped that they have opened
the road to a solution to the problem guaranteeing
respect for the territorial integrity of Timor and the
expression of the genuine will of its people.
85. However, my Government deplores the fact that
it was not possible for the Special Representative to
undertake as complete a concrete examination of
the present situation as was to be desired. My Govern­
ment deplores in particular the fact that it was not
possible for him to get into direct contact in the Terri­
tory with the leaders of FRETILIN, despite all efforts
made to that end, efforts with which the Portuguese
authorities co-operated as far as they were able. In
that regard I cannot refrain from recalling what
Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi himself wrote in para­
graph 36 of his report:

80. The Secretary-General, who has spared no
effort to find a solution to the Timor problem, and
whom I should like to thank on behalf of my Govern­
ment, has sent his Special Representative in accor­
dance with paragraph 5 of resolution 384 (1975) to
undertake an on-the-spot assessment and to
establish within the Territory the contacts suggested
in the text of that paragraph. I should like in that
regard to recall here that my Government, in the letter
addressed to the Secretary-General on 24 December

"... I went to certain places only and was unable
to travel widely. Quite apart from the general
difficulty of communications, security reasons were
11

advanced by the 'Provisional Government' as well
as by the representatives of the 'Government of the
Democratic Republic of East Timor' aginst my going
to other centres of population or moving about the
countryside."

requesting foreign troops to intervene militarily in
East Timor and to remain there in violation of East
Timor's territorial integrity.
90. Furthermore, my delegation would also point out
that the armed struggle is continuing in the Territon
between, on the one hand, the Indonesian troops and
the elements of the so-called Dili Government—which
favours the integration of East Timor with Indonesia—
and, on the other, the troops of FRETILIN, which
demands independence for the Territory. As is clear
from certain passages of the Special Representative's
report, there is still fighting in the Territory, which
the two warring factions say they control. Portugal
condemns all the crimes and all the atrocities of
which the people of Timor have been the victim during
the struggle taking place there.

And he concludes in the next paragraph, "Any accurate
assessment of the situation as a whole remains
elusive."
86. The examination or assessment of the situation
on the basis of this report, in the period between the
Security Council's last meeting on the question of
Timor and today's meeting, can, frankly, only be
pessimistic, from all points of view, including the
pragmatic. Indeed, almost four months have elapsed
since the resolution's adoption, and my delegation
can only deplore the fact that so little has been done to
end the foreign military occupation of Timor and to
prepare the people of the Territory for the genuine
exercise of their inalienable right to self-deter­
mination.

91. The naval units that my Government maintains
in the region of Timor have also detected the presence
of Indonesian warships in Timor's territorial waters.
My Government informed the Council of this at the
time [SI 11955], The occupation forces have also con­
tinued to unload war materiel of various types in East
Timor.

87. The Portuguese Government, as the adminis­
tering Power—a capacity it is recognized as having
in General Assembly resolution 3485 (XXX), of
12 December 1975, and Security Council resolution 384
(1975)—solemnly reaffirms here its intention to do
everything in its power to safeguard the legitimate
right of the people of Timor to self-determination.
That attitude, which in my Government's view is
the most elementary duty of a Power responsible for
a Territory that is still non-self-governing, is entirely
in keeping with resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant
United Nations resolutions, particularly the resolu­
tion 3485 (XXX), which explicitly bears on the question
of Timor.

92. Many communiques and reports published in
the international press have noted the continued
presence of Indonesian armed forces in East Timor
and the military actions undertaken by those forces,
in constant violation of General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions.
93. Portugal calls to the Council's attention all the
difficulties with which it has been confronted in its
efforts to obtain information on the situation of Por­
tuguese citizens in Timor and to obtain the release
and repatriation of those being held by the warring
factions.

88. However, the armed forces of the Republic of
Indonesia continue, without any doubt, to be illegally
present in the Territory of Timor, thus contravening
the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of resolu­
tion 384 (1975) and paragraph 5 of resolution 3485
(XXX). The presence of Indonesian armed forces in
East Timor is openly acknowledged by the Govern­
ment of Indonesia, which stated to the Special Repre­
sentative, according to paragraph 39 of his report,
that the presence of the so-called volunteers in East
Timor was the result of a request made first by the
APODETI, UDT, KOTA [Klibitr Oan Timor Aswain]
and Trabalhista parties and then by the so-called
Provisional Government of East Timor, and that those
"volunteers" would leave East Timor only upon the
request of the so-called Provisional Government.

94. In that respect I should like to draw the Council's
particular attention to the fact that 23 Portuguese
soldiers have been held in the Territory since August
1975 by the so-called Provisional Government of East
Timor. They are still being held there despite all the
efforts deployed by my Government to free them from
such unjustifiable captivity. It should be noted that
five of those soldiers asked for asylum in Indonesian
territory and that the Indonesian authorities turned
them over to the UDT even though their repatriation
had been authorized by the Djakarta Government.
Furthermore, despite all the initiatives taken, the
International Red Cross has been prevented from
acting on the territory of Timor, which has rendered
impossible any humanitarian assistance to those being
held and to the refugees and any channelling to Timor
of international assistance, including that of Portugal,
under the auspices of the Red Cross.

89. My delegation would like in this respect to draw
the Count's attention to the fact that the so-called
Provisional Government of East Timor is not recog­
nized either by the United Nations or by the adminis­
tering Power of the Territory and that it consequently
cannot claim the slightest legitimacy—any more than
can the political parties to which it has alluded—for

95. In those conditions, East Timor's isolation from
the rest of the world—with the exception, of course,
of the close relations it is forced to maintain witr.
12

Indonesia—is almost complete. That is a situation
which the international community has the duty to
denounce.
96. That, then, in broad outline and in the most
salient aspects, is how matters now stand in the
question of Timor, more than four months after the
invasion by the Indonesian armed forces. In view of the
situation described, it is necessary to consider what
measures the Council can take now to establish in
East Timor the conditions necessary for the true selfdetermination of its people.
97. The presence of the Indonesian armed forces in
East Timor, in violation of East Timor's territorial
integrity and contrary to the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council, is an
undeniable fact, and the Council cannot tolerate such
a situation any longer.

is essential, my Government expresses its agreement
to a possible prolongation of the mandate conferred
by the Council on the Secretary-General in para­
graphs 5 and 6 of resolution 384 (1975). Portugal,
indeed, is particularly aware of the nqed for urgent
international action to prevent, by rapid and effective
measures, the consolidation of an abnormal situation
which deprives an entire people of the opportunity
to exercise its right to self-determination. We there­
fore consider it desirable that the consultations be­
tween the Secretary-General, or his Special Repre­
sentative, and all the parties concerned should
continue so as to ensure the implementation of reso­
lution 384 (1975).
102. May I therefore be allowed to draw the Council's
attention to the usefulness of having a more concrete
and specific definition of the mandate of the SecretaryGeneral to enable him to undertake more speedily and
effectively the consultations provided for with the
interested parties, thus avoiding delays and hesitations
the only effect of which would be to consolidate
the inadmissible status quo. My Government would
consider very favourably the convening of a conference
under United Nations auspices with the participation
of all interested parties, as a means to facilitate the
holding of those consultations and of giving them
some force. The conference would have the advantage
of bringing together, at a given time and in one place,
in addition to representatives of the United Nations
and of Portugal, the administering Power, those who
have intervened directly in the conflict, thus forcing
each of the interested parties clearly to assume its
responsibilities before the international community as
far as developments in the issue of Timor are con­
cerned.

98. No serious process of decolonization, effectively
respecting the inalienable right of any colonized people
to self-determination and independence, can take
place while foreign troops are on a Territory, distorting
any manifestation of the true will of the people. The
Indonesian armed aggression is the main obstacle to
any serious act designed to determine the form desired
by the people of Timor to decide on their future.
The Government of Indonesia must therefore again be
persuaded to withdraw immediately and uncondi­
tionally the armed forces it maintains in East Timor.
This it has publicly refused to do so far, on the fallacious
pretext that those forces are made up of volunteers.
99. Such an attitude can only be interpreted as a
clear, formal and inadmissible refusal by the Indone­
sian Government to implement the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions on the
question. Moreover, in this refusal, the Indonesian
Government manifestly has no other intention than
to confront the Council with an actual fait accompli.
That is precisely why it will certainly not fail, in the
course of the present series of meetings, to go one step
further in its policy of fait s accomplis and underrate
its role by overrating that of the so-called Provisional
Government of East Timor. The Council cannot, how­
ever, allow matters to take this course. That would
constitute a most dangerous precedent, not only for
the decolonization of small territories but for interna­
tional relations in general.

103. Furthermore, considering that the process of
decolonization of Timor, like any other socio-political
process, cannot be arbitrarily divided into totally
distinct phases, and considering that we must now take
an over-all approach to the problem without thereby
excluding the possibility of developing the process by
stages, that conference could have as its main purpose
to seek agreement on the following points: first,
control over the withdrawal of Indonesian forces
from the Territory of East Timor and the simultaneous
establishment of a cease fire; secondly, a civilian and
military administration of the Territory during the
period between the withdrawal of the Indonesian
forces and the effective exercise by the people of
Timor of its right to self-determination; and thirdly,
forms and conditions for the exercise of the right to
self-determination by the people of Timor.

100. In our opinion, accordingly, a cease-fire should
immediately be established so as to put an end to the
fratricidal struggle being waged in the Territory,
causing substantial human and material losses to the
people of Timor, and so as to make it possible to
create that atmosphere of peace which is essential for
a genuine consultation of the will of the people.

104. Nevertheless, taking into account the existing
separation, which must be respected, between the
competence of the General Assembly and that of the
Security Council and the close link between the with­
drawal of foreign troops and the establishment of
conditions that would enable the people of Timor
actually to exercise its right to self-determination,

101. Furthermore, consistent with the principle we
have always maintained, that increased United Nations
participation in the decolonization process in Timor
13

the active participation of the Committee of 24, 5
beginning with this first phase in the solution of the
problem of Timor, would be of utmost interest and
usefulness. Thus, if the Council considered this useful
and possible, the Secretary-General and the Committee
of 24 would certainly be in a position to guide the
scheduled consultations or the proposed conference
towards a reactivation of the decolonization process
in Timor without any interruption.

whose invitation was requested in document S/1204?.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make a statement.

105. Portugal has no political, strategic or economic
interest as regards Timor, a Territory of which we
continue to be the administering Power. Portugal,
furthermore, has already given the international com­
munity sufficient proof of its impartiality, sincerity
and determination in the difficult task of decoloniza­
tion, which we have endeavoured to complete success­
fully. Thus, although we are, de facto, prevented from
exercising our powers and attributes as administering
Power, Portugal considers that in this case too it is its
duty to do battle for respect for the free exercise by
the people of Timor of its right to self-determination,
without outside interference or pressure. Accordingly,
Portugal continues to feel in complete solidarity with
the people of Timor. We feel very deeply the struggles
taking place among the Timorese themselves and the
divisions which have been created among them, and
we are making every effort to contribute to a peaceful
solution to the conflict.

111. Mr. President, permit me at the outset to thank
you and the other members of this august body for
the opportunity given to me and to my colleagues to
address the Council in the course of its consideration
of the situation in Timor. I would certainly be remis>
in my duties if I did not avail myself of this opportunit)
to express, on behalf of the Provisional Government
of East Timor and on behalf of the East Timorese
people, their deep respect for you, Mr. President, and
for all the members of the Council, as well as our firm
conviction that, under your wise and competent leader­
ship, the Council will be able to make a constructi\e
contribution to the solution of the question before
it and, by so doing, create an atmosphere of peace
and tranquillity in the region.

110. Mr. GON£ALVES: The Provisional Govern­
ment of East Timor has placed upon me and my three
colleagues present here the heavy burden of repre­
senting it and explaining its views to the members of
the Council.

112. When I spoke in the Council last December
[1865th meeting], I spoke on behalf of APODETI.
Mr. Mario Viegas Carrascalao, who is also present
here as a member of my delegation, represented
UDT, and Mr. Jose Martins spoke on behalf of his
party, KOTA. This time, however, as Chairman of the
Advisory Council, I am entrusted with my delegation
to represent the Provisional Government of East
Timor. As for myself, I am a man with very little
education and experience, and the trust which the
Provisional Government has placed on my shoulders
is really a heavy burden to carry.

106. It is in this spirit that my Government reaffirms
here, before the Council, that it is prepared, to give
the United Nations, in so far as it is able, its full
co-operation for a solution to the problem of Timor.
107. It remains for me to voice the hope that the
Council, in exercising the competence it holds under
the Charter, will take the measures essential to safe­
guard this inalienable right of the people of Timor,
whose cause is that of all peoples struggling for the
right to decide their own fate, a cause which has
always been the major concern and has mobilized
the most sustained efforts of the Organization.

113. The four parties—UDT, APODETI, KOTA
and Trabalhista—have dissolved themselves, and their
members are now united in a new party, which we
call the National Front, which forms the Provisional
Government. Former members of FRETILIN also
hold posts in the East Timor administration—for
instance, the district chiefs of Dili and Ocussi and
many other districts throughout East Timor.

108. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
I should like to inform the Council that I have received
a letter from the representative of the Philippines
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
Council's discussion of the item inscribed on our
agenda, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure. I therefore propose, with the consent of the
Council and in accordance with our usual practice, to
invite the representative of the Philippines to par­
ticipate in our debate, without the right to vote.

114. The composition of my delegation is as follows:
Mr. Mario Viegas Carrascalao, an engineer in forestry,
former prominent member of UDT and now a mem­
ber of the National Front, in charge of protocol and
liaison in the Provisional Government. Another
member of our delegation is Mr. Jose Gonfalves. an
economist, formerly the-Minister of Economics ana
Statistics in the self-styled FRETILIN Governmen:.
which lasted only four days. Mr. Gon^alves is certain!)
in a position to tell the Council about FRETILIN
practices when they were in power. All the lies ana
distorted facts about East Timor which Mr. Horta has
fabricated and disseminated all around the world ca"
now be checked with Mr. Gongalves, who left D;n

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Reyes (Phi­
lippines) took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.
109. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
The third speaker is Mr. Guilherme Maria Gongalves,
14

just a few weeks ago. The fourth member is Mr. Joao
Pedro Soares, former secretary of FRETILIN in the
district of Manatuto and former commander of
FRETILIN there. He can provide the Council with
details of FRETILIN'S operations, their methods and
tactics designed to annihilate their enemies, UDT and
APODETI. On the other hand, Mr. Soares also is
certainly in a position to report how former FRETILIN
members or supporters are being treated by the Pro­
visional Government. Mr. Soares entered the Portu­
guese colonial army in 1967. He served four years
and seven months as a first-line soldier and reached
the rank of sergeant—the highest rank permitted a
native. He left the colonial army in 1972. He joined
FRETILIN in the Manatuto area, with 1,200 militia
men equipped with some 70 guns under his command.

supporters fled Dili and surrounding areas and sought
refuge towards the Indonesian border. Later
APODETI members were included in the massive
FRETILIN man-hunt. In their flight to safety the
refugees were harassed by FRETILIN gangs, villages
were looted and burned down, even women and
children were ambushed, so that hundreds of these
refugees perished before they reached the safety of
Indonesian Timor. The number of refugees in West
Timor swelled to 50,000 people. But the Lord is
merciful; He gives the refugees comfort—food, shelter,
clothing and medical care and friendship as bestowed
by the Indonesian people and Government. Thousands
of our families, fellow party members, friends and
other fellow Timorese were not so lucky as to escape.
Many were thrown in jail, tortured, murdered and
buried in shallow mass graves. I will come later to
this tragic and almost unbelievable story.

115. It will take too much of the Council's time
if I have to repeat all our statements delivered here
when the question of Timor was discussed last Decem­
ber. All those statements are still valid now. Never­
theless, I should like to touch upon the main events
in East Timor as they have developed.

118. Council members may recall that before the
coup last August several efforts had been made to
arrange talks between the political parties in Timor.
It is also to be recalled that FRETILIN was the
only party which boycotted the Macao meeting, which
discussed the decolonization programme for East
Timor. When FRETILIN and the former colonial
troops had occupied many parts of East Timor they
again ignored the invitation of the Portuguese Govern­
ment to have another round of meetings with all the
other political parties.

116. Before the fall of the Caetano regime there was
only one party—the Acgao Nacional Popular—which
provided the essential support for the colonial
regime. After the fall of the Caetano regime, brought
about by the military coup of 25 April 1974, three
political parties were formed in Timor, each having
its own programme and its own viewpoint on the
political future of East Timor. Later on, two more
parties, K.OTA and Trabalhista, were formed during
the internal struggle. UDT was formed on 11 May
1974—presumably the most popular party in Timor,
since it counted on the support of 236 of the 472
existing sucos in Timor, which comprised about
50 per cent of the population of the territory. At that
time, UDT favoured gradual independence, since
prevailing conditions did not warrant immediate inde­
pendence. Even FRETILIN recognized the strength of
UDT at that time. FRETILIN, formerly the ASDT,
advocated immediate and total independence and
claimed to be the second strongest party. APODETI
since its inception has favoured integration with Indo­
nesia and has based its strength on the loyalty and
support of 95 sucos, or about 20 per cent of the entire
population. KOTA, founded 10 November 1974, has
about 28,000 members. It advocated independence
and integration with Indonesia, while supporting the
continuation of the linrais as the traditional leaders
of the people. Trabalhista was founded in October 1974
with a membership of 25,000, composed mostly of
labourers in the harbours and common workers in the
villages; this party also called for independence and
integration with Indonesia.

119. On 28 November 1975, FRETILIN unilaterally
proclaimed its independence and formed its selfstyled republic, thereby trying to impose its will by
force upon the majority of East Timor. It was only
logical that the four other parties should respond to
the challenge immediately. On 30 November they
stated their desire to be independent and to be inte­
grated with the Republic of Indonesia. Now that we
have witnessed the practices of FRETILIN when they
were in power, we are absolutely certain that the
totalitarian methods and practices it imposed on East
Timor cannot be tolerated by our people. The dignity,
honour and traditions of the people of East Timor have
to be defended at all costs. Force was imposed upon
us and we were forced to defend ourselves, whatever
the consequences. We declared the independence of
the whole former Territory of East Timor and its
integration with the Republic of Indonesia on 30 No­
vember, and on 17 December the Provisional Govern­
ment of the Territory of East Timor was established.
120. As representatives of the majority of the people
of East Timor, we have the moral duty and obligation
to do what is right to defend the interests of our people.
Therefore, on behalf of the people of East Timor, on
30 November the four political parties asked the
Indonesian Government and the Indonesian people
for assistance in the restoration of peace and security.
We invited the Indonesian people to help us in our
just struggle and to defend and protect the dignity and
the interests of the people. On 18 December the Pro­

U7. After the coup and counter-coup mentioned in
paragraph 15 of the report of the Special Representa­
tive, FRETILIN regained control of Dili and imme­
diately implemented the first priority on its programme,
the elimination of all its adversaries, UDT in particular.
Thousands upon thousands of UDT members and their
15

prior interrogation. He did not even know how man>
were put in gaol. The families of the detainees were
instructed to feed their relatives in gaol. If a prisoner
had no family in the vicinity of the prison, then he
had to survive on his own somehow. Mr. Soares later
surrendered to the forces of the Provisional Govern­
ment with the available FRETILIN forces under his
command because he realized, however late, that to
follow the instructions of his military superiors meant
that he had to put many innocent and illiterate people
in gaol, many of whom he knew were good and hard­
working villagers.

visional Government sent a cable to the Chairman of
the Committee of 24, 5 informing him that the Pro­
visional Government of East Timor had requested
the Government of the Republic of Indonesia to
render assistance so that a condition of peace and
order in the Territory of East Timor could be
restored, free from the disturbances and threats of
the terrorist remnants left by the Portuguese
Government.
121. What were the practices of the FRETILIN
terrorists? As soon as the Portuguese Governor had
abandoned Dili, the FRETILIN leadership con­
solidated their military power in Dili and other areas
of East Timor. They undertook a massive hunt for all
UDT and APODETI members. Thousands were
thrown in jail in Dili and other towns under the control
of FRETILIN for the simple reason that they happened
to be members or supporters of APODETI and UDT.
Leaders and functionaries of these two parties were
humiliated and tortured in their prisons; many of these
patriots never saw their families again.

124. Mr. Soares' testimony makes clear that the
world outside Timor has been misled by FRETILIN
propaganda. There has been no widespread heav\
fighting or ill-treatment of FRETILIN members since
December. In most cases the FRETILIN forces just
fled or surrendered to the joint forces of the Pro­
visional Government, putting up little or no resistance.
In some cases, FRETILIN units did retreat to the
hills, often taking with them women and children as
hostages, with the threat that all hostages would be
killed if the joint forces of the Provisional Govern­
ment tried to capture them. The joint forces therefore
have to manoeuvre very carefully so as not to endanger
the lives of these hostages.

122. The FRETILIN leadership instructed their
branches and district commanders, like FRETILIN
Commander Soares, now a member of our delegation,
to round up all members and supporters of UDT
and APODETI and to throw all of them in gaol.
Illiterate and innocent people fell victim to the
totalitarian methods of the FRETILIN leadership.
To enlarge its following, FRETILIN forced 200 men
in every pasto to enlist in their militia. Boys of 12
and 13 years of age were recruited and provided with
weapons but with very little or no training. These
militia were later moved from one part of East Timor
to another where they would have difficulty in com­
municating with the local population because of the
differences in dialect. This was to make it easy for
the FRETILIN leadership to give whatever orders
they liked and have them executed promptly. Villages
were looted for food and cattle and houses were
burned down on orders. This systematic reign of terror
was implemented without hesitation so as to intimidate
the people and to enable FRETILIN to rule the country
through fear.

125. After the liberation of Manatuto, all FRETILIN
members were duly registered, and within a week they
were allowed to go back to their own communities
or villages. No FRETILIN militia is kept in gaol by
the Provisional Government. Reprisals against
FRETILIN members or supporters are prevented by
the joint forces of the Provisional Government. In fact,
many former members of FRETILIN have asked to
be put in gaol in order to protect themselves from the
revenge of the angry masses.
126. These are the confessions of a FRETILIN
commander, Mr. Soares himself, now a member of
our delegation. With the Council's indulgence, I should
like to acquaint the Council with the experience of
another former member of the FRETILIN leader­
ship, Mr. Jose Gongalves. He is an economist who
graduated from the University of Liege, Belgium, in
1968 and worked in a private enterprise in Madrid
until 1974, at which time he returned to Dili. The
Portuguese Government appointed him as inspector,
and later he was promoted to be Chief of the
Provincial Economics Department. After an absence
of almost 26 years, he found in East Timor the same
semi-feudal system, the same method of indirect rule
governing the islands, an illiteracy rate of 90 per cent,
a 40 per cent mortality rate for children and an average
lifespan for the common Timorese of only 40 years.
As an economist, he saw the dangers of the mono­
culture—coffee. Rice and maize, the main food
products of the island, still had to be imported.

123. Let us examine for a moment the experience of
Mr. Pedro Soares, a member of our delegation. As
I said earlier, he was secretary of FRETILIN in
Manatuto; he had 1,200 militia under his command
with only 70 guns. These 1,200 troops were dispersed
in the six postos of Manatuto. As a FRETILIN
commander, Mr. Soares got instructions straight from
FRETILIN military headquarters to round up all UDT
and APODETI members in his district. He did not
even know how many UDT and APODETI members
were in his area. He had room for only 70 people in
his prison, and there were no supplies for more than
that number. That was no problem. FRETILIN
members in his area rounded up all suspected
APODETI and UDT members and brought them to
the Manatuto commander to be put into prison without

127. At first Mr. Gongalves made several efforts to
convince the party leaders in Dili to unite and align
16

themselves in a common front to strengthen themselves
in their negotiations with the Portuguese, but his efforts
failed because, according to him, at that time the
political leaders were more concerned with party
interest than the interests of the people as a whole.
Although reluctant in the beginning, he joined
FRETILIN, thinking it was democratic, but later he
became disillusioned by events. He was in Dili when
FRETILIN proclaimed its independence on 28 Novem­
ber 1975. On 2 December a "cabinet" was formed,
to which he was appointed as a minister. He accepted
the job for the simple reason that by so doing he
thought he could do something to rectify the bad
situation.
128. The first meeting of this "cabinet", at which
Mr. Horta was also present, was held on 2 Decem­
ber and was presided over by Francisco Xavier do
Amaral, President of FRETILIN. Decisions on the
general policies of the "new government" were taken.
Several ministers were instructed to go outside Timor;
Mr. Horta was instructed to join Araujo in Lisbon
and to proceed to the United Nations to obtain
recognition of the "new republic" and to influence
public opinion in Australia and other countries.
Mr. Rogerio Lobato was instructed to visit certain
socialist countries to ask for financial and military
assistance. Mr. Alkatiri, Minister of Politics, was
instructed to go to Africa and request recognition of
the "new government" and take with him the cre­
dentials of Mr. Roque Rodrigues, who was appointed
ambassador to an African country. Mr. Gon?alves
was completely surprised at the general policies
adopted by the "new government" and at the way
decisions were reached. These certainly reflected a
system unfamiliar to the traditional East Timorese,
where consensus plays an important if not a dominant
role in the tribal society.

the direction of Aileu, 30 miles away. By noon the
whole town was controlled by the joint forces and the
volunteers. Later in the afternoon, however,
FRETILIN forces fired mortars into Dili for about
half an hour; they fell in the business-and residential
areas of the town. Mr. Gongalves discovered later
that about 200 FRETILIN troops had been killed
during the short fight and about 100 civilian casualties
had been reported treated in the hospital. There was
no massacre. The next day, 8 December, Mr. Gonfalves was arrested by the joint forces and detained.
According to him, he intentionally stayed in town,
having gleaned from the two meetings he attended
that FRETILIN was planning to establish a totalitarian
State with a foreign ideology. He was and he is against
such a system. His decision was also influenced by the
many reports from other districts telling about over­
loaded prisons, mistreatment and torture of prisoners.
131. After Dili fell into the hands of the joint forces,
an open-arms policy was announced through Radio
Dili. Any member of FRETILIN who surrendered with
his weapons would get fair treatment and would be
allowed to return to his own community. They
surrendered by the hundreds; it was reported that
many of them went quietly back to their own villages,
deserting their units and abandoning their weapons.
The members of the popular militia who surrendered
were registered and later sent back to their respective
communities. Many of them were very young—12
and 13 years old—and had received one or two months'
training, mostly political indoctrination. Those with a
criminal record have been detained for eventual court
proceedings. A few former leaders of FRETILIN are
now in custody, often at their own request, in order
to protect them from the revenge of those UDT or
APODETI members who had been imprisoned or who
lost families in the mass murders.
132. East Timor is a small territory with a small
population. Every crime committed can easily be
recorded by the people themselves, and therefore the
Provisional Government has a very difficult task in
preventing retaliatory acts or acts of vengeance by
certain segments of the population that have been
victimized by FRETILIN. With patience, persuasion
and good information the Provincial Government has
thus far been successful in convincing certain segments
of the people to accept former FRETILIN members
without any criminal record into the local govern­
ment. This may at times sound strange until one
understands Timorese customs. But we have to accept
existing traditions and values; we have to accept the
fact that the Timor problem is a complex one. For
example, Mr. Horta of FRETILIN is related by
marriage to a brother of Mr. Mario Viegas Carras­
calao of the Provisional Government, and so are many
others. The return of the remnant of FRETILIN now
still in hiding can be brought about through the
intermediary of family or tribal members. Hundreds
of FRETILIN troops have already surrendered, after
they saw for themselves how their comrades who
gave themselves up were set free immediately.

129. A second meeting was held on 6 December,
at which time there were complaints from the people's
militia of shortages of ammunition and food. They
threatened to surrender in an eventual attack if their
demands were not met. Mr. Gon9alves himself was
not familiar with weapons, but he certainly knew
that the food supplies for the troops were enough for
about two months only. Meanwhile, food supplies for
the population were fast becoming a big problem since
they could not import any more rice for lack of money.
130. Mr. Gon^alves was in Dili when the joint forces
of the four parties, assisted by the Indonesian volun­
teers, attacked Dili on 7 December at 5.30 in the
morning. The attack was in fact expected both by
the FRETILIN leadership and the people of Dili, and
therefore the population was not allowed to leave
town. UDT and APODETI prisoners were transported
secretly out of Dili a few days before the attack. Not
one single bomb was dropped on Dili; there was no
naval bombardment; there was only a short exchange
°f fire accompanied by the sound of mortars exploding.
FRETILIN forces and leaders fled in great disorder in
17

of the victims buried in the said mass grave w ere
UDT adherents, numbering approximately 40 ::
50 persons. Among them was the corpse of Liong?.
Riberlo, who was identified by the purse found ihis shirt jacket. A certain villager from Maulau Rh:
named Francisco Pereira, who happened to witness
the excavation, explained that he, himself, ha:
witnessed the slaughter by FRETILIN members, an:
amongst the victims he mentioned Victor Santa, the
deputy head of local authority of Dili, and seven other?
The report of the Indonesian Red Cross concerning
its findings has been circulated as document S/12040.
I should like to submit as documentation to the Council
the pictures of the mass graves and the films made
during the digging. Another mass grave was discovered
one and a half kilometres from the first one. Sixt>
bodies, all those of APODETI members, were found
in the second grave, which was 6 x 9 metres in size.
The details are given in the report of the Indonesian
Red Cross.
:

133. It is a fact, which everybody can check, that
the Provisional Government has appointed former
FRETILIN members to responsible positions. Those
FRETILIN members who realized their mistake and
who of their own free will decided to join the Pro­
visional Government in its programme of reconstruc­
tion and development were given a fair deal. This was
done because, in the final analysis, while they may
have behaved like wild animals and hungry beasts,
they are still our own brothers, and family ties are
very strong in East Timor. If we do not solve our
problem right now, it may perhaps never be resolved.
For instance, the current head of the district of Dili,
Mr. Mario Sanches, is a well-known former FRETILIN
member; so is Mr. Jaime Oliveira, head of the district
of Ocussi. The secretary of the district of Baucau is
also a former FRETILIN member. After they pledged
their loyalty to the Provisional Government, former
FRETILIN members with administrative capability
and experience were appointed to top-ranking adminis­
trative positions in Manatuto, Aileu, Maliana, Suai,
Viqueque and Atauro. Many former FRETILIN
members and supporters are also working in the
offices of the Provisional Government and in Radio
Dili.

137. On 16 February another mass grave was dis­
covered two and a half kilometres south of Aileu in
the neighbourhood of the road from Aileu to Maubesi.
In a grave cavity of 5 x 6 metres and at a depth of
60 centimetres, around 45 damaged and decaying
corpses were found. An automatic Seiko watch was
also found, evidently stopped on the 7th of the month.
It was supposed that these victims died before
7 February.

134. The Provisional Government has done every­
thing in its power to create favourable conditions in
East Timor so as to bring about a peaceful settlement
of our dispute and, by so doing, to prevent a neverending conflict between relatives in the next genera­
tion. It was therefore a tremendous shock for the
Provisional Government and for people of East Timor
when we received the tragic news that mass graves
had been discovered in the vicinity of Aileu and Same.
Allow me to go into more detail about this mass
murder.

138. A fourth mass grave was discovered on 17 Feb­
ruary in the upper part of the town of Same, 95 kilo­
metres south of Dili. The grave was approximate^
1.5 x 15 metres and at a depth of 30 centimetres
another pile of corpses was found. According to the
information of the local inhabitants who were present
at the moment of excavation, the slaughter was carrie:
out by FRETILIN members on 29 January. Escape:
witnesses identified 14 of the victims. It was estimate:
that no less than 40 corpses were piled, unarranged.
one on the other. According to information gaine:
from the local people, all these victims had beer,
prisoners of war of FRETILIN.

135. The Council may recall that the FRETILIN
leadership has put thousands of UDT and APODETI
members in prison all over East Timor. When the
Provisional Government took Dili, most prisoners had
been removed, probably to other places still in the
hands of FRETILIN. When we took Aileu, about
30 miles away, a known stronghold and the head­
quarters of the FRETILIN forces, we still found no
trace whatsoever of the prisoners. When almost all the
towns had fallen into our hands, there was still no
evidence of these prisoners. On 3 January 1976, the
Provisional Government requested the Indonesian
Red Cross to look for them.

139. Near the Concelho Office in Same there was
a school building where bands of FRETILIN members
has shot down individuals from the local community,
numbering about 34. Among the victims of the cruelty
demonstrated by FRETILIN was the prominen:
APODETI figure, Osorio Soares. Osorio, who had (
studied philosophy and the history of politics in Macao,
once held the office of General Secretary of APODETI
when the process of decolonization in East Timor
was about to begin. Osorio Soares, aged 35, his hands
tied behind his back, was shot by the FRETILIN
terrorists on 28 January in a village called Holarua.
together with his two younger brothers and four ot
his followers. Osorio Soares was an idealist, and unt:
the last moments of his life was still of the conviction •
that the process of decolonization of East Time*
would take place in an orderly and peaceful manner j
May his soul rest in peace.

136. The Indonesian Red Cross team and the attached
group of officials, including the Executive Chief of the
Provisional Government and a priest, on 15 February
discovered a sand heap which looked recently
disturbed. Upon excavating the spot, they discovered
a grave cavity which turned out to be 3 x 3 metres in
size. At a depth of 80 centimetres they came across
decaying human corpses. These had been put in a
heap, unarranged and interlaced with wire so that no
one of them could be released from the others. Most
18

140. One hundred and sixty-eight members of
APODETI who were detained in Dili and taken away by
FRETILIN gangs are still being sought. Ten members
of APODETI died while in FRETILIN detention in
Dili. Twenty-one members of APODETI and UDT
detained in Los Palos were taken away by FRETILIN
gangs, and we are still searching for them. Sixty-six
members of UDT, KOTA and Trabalhista detained
in Dili were taken away by FRETILIN gangs. The
names of all these missing persons have been com­
municated to the Secretary-General [S/12044].

also been created to provide technical and administra­
tive advice to the Provisional Government. The struc­
ture of the Provisional Government is being maintained
for the time being, and, whenever it deems necessary,
innovations are introduced to increase efficiency in the
bureaucracy.
145. Although calm has largely been restored to East
Timor, the brutal killings and mass murders have
shocked the traditional society. Scattered FRETILIN
gangs led by former colonial regular troops are still
roaming the isolated villages. However, the growing
numbers and the increasing strength of the security
forces of the Provisional Government have enabled it
to cope with the threat posed by these FRETILIN
gangs and to prevent a bloody mass revenge from being
carried out by those who have been victimized by the
FRETILIN regime. The violence and bloodshed
systematically committed by the FRETILIN leader­
ship in the tribal society of East Timor might otherwise
cause a never-ending conflict in the island. The Portu­
guese cannot wash their hands in innocence and plead
not guilty before the international jury, for the simple
reason that they are the ones who handed over their
arsenal and their former colonial troops to FRETILIN.
The thousands of innocent lives which have been taken
away by Portuguese weapons will remain their moral
responsibility.

141. I thank you, Mr. President, and all members
of the Council, for your indulgence. I have presented
to the Council evidence and documents of the mass
murders committed by FRETILIN. It is my sacred
duty to mention all the names of our fallen heroes.
Their sacrifice will not be in vain, for the heroic
struggle of the people of East Timor cannot be
extinguished by any force or power whatsoever. We
will fight for our beliefs until the end.
142. Lies and slanders were fabricated by Mr. Horta
for the outside world in order to hide FRETILIN'S
crimes. He may succeed in deceiving the world for a
time, but he cannot fool the world all the time.
Mr. Horta and other FRETILIN members outside
East Timor who have sold themselves to foreign
interests are still trying to bring foreigners into Timor.
The people of East Timor will not be caught napping
another time.

146. Requesting aid from brothers is not a monopoly
of the people of East Timor. Neither is the sending of
volunteers in compliance with such a request a
complete novelty. Indeed, many instances can be cited
in which aid has been supplied over vast distances,
even spanning oceans and continents. Let me remind
those who wish to deny the people of East Timor
their right to request aid from their Indonesian kin
and those who so strongly censure Indonesia for
giving aid to us, who are bound by such strong ties
of blood and culture, of the biblical words: "Let those
who are without sin cast the first stone". As far as the
people of East Timor are concerned, they have
declared themselves independent and integrated with
Indonesia and therefore as Indonesians they have the
right to be protected by fellow Indonesians. The
presence of Indonesian volunteers in East Timor is at
the urgent request of the majority of the people of
East Timor through the four political parties and later
formally repeated by the Provisional Government of
East Timor. The text of this request has been com­
municated to the Committee of 24 and to the Security
Council.

143. On 17 December 1975, a Provisional Govern­
ment was set up in Dili. All former members of the
civilian administration were instructed to report for
work, including former FRETILIN members. With
the help of the civilian volunteers some order was
brought to the chaos and anarchy left by FRETILIN.
The local government in all 13 districts has now been
reactivated, schools have been reopened and hospitals
and clinics are back providing services with the
assistance of Indonesian doctors and nurses. The
Provisional Government has responded positively to
•he request of the Indonesian Red Cross to invite a
representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross to visit Dili. Broken communications have
been restored and food supplies can be provided to
the people, and a general return to normal is beginning
to take place.
144. On 31 January 1976 all political parties dissolved
themselves and a new unified party, called the National
Front, was created on which the Provisional Govern­
ment is now based. A deliberative council was estab­
lished to help the Provisional Government reach
important decisions. Representatives of former
Political parties together with prominent leaders of
society and religion are included in this council, which
Performs the functions and has the responsibilities of
provisional assembly. Preparations for a people's
assembly based on consultations and tradition have
reached an advanced stage. An advisory council has

147. In discussing the problem of East Timor, many
people seem to forget that FRETILIN never repre­
sented the majority of the people. The Portuguese
Government itself recognized the fact that FRETILIN
was a minority in East Timor, and that was the main
reason why Portugal found it impossible to relinquish
power to FRETILIN. The legitimate representatives
of the majority of the people, therefore, are the four
political parties which now form the Provisional
19

also be in line with law no. 7/75 of July 1975 pro­
mulgated by the Government of Portugal.

Government. When FRETILIN imposed its will by
force upon the people of East Timor with its so-called
proclamation of independence, it was only logical
that the genuine representatives of the people of East
Timor should defend the interests of the majority.
The wish of the majority, announced on 30 November
1975 through the four political parties, was clear-cut:
to be independent through integration with Indonesia.

153. I wish for your information to state here the:
many suco chiefs were killed during the turmoil in
the island. The Provisional Government is now making
preparations for the elections of new suco chiefs to
replace those who have been killed. In population
centres like Dili and Baucau where the people ha\e
some education, preparations for the elections of their
representatives of the people's assembly are in an
advanced stage. The Provisional Government of East
Timor and representatives of the United Nations will
meet to discuss what type of role the United Nations
will play in the electoral process. In another stage,
all the SIICO chiefs, with other prominent figures in
society and religion, would form the people's assembh
in Dili with the determination of the future political
status of East Timor as its primary duty. We are
preparing this difficult and time-consuming task
because we have a high respect for the principles of the
United Nations and its Charter. How difficult this
task is can be understood only if the members of this
Council can visualize the existing social and cultural
realities in the island.

148. The Provisional Government has communicated
the sacred wishes of the people of East Timor to the
Government of Indonesia. Indonesia has accepted in
principle our request for independence and for our
integration with the Republic of Indonesia. The reason
for this attitude was made known here when our
delegation appeared before the Council. Indonesia has
asked the Provisional Government to ensure that the
implementation of the right to self-determination is
carried out properly, namely, that the decision is
ratified by all our people in the presence of the United
Nations.
149. Life has now returned to normal in East Timor,
except for a few disturbances caused by FRETILIN
gangs in isolated locations. It is our hope that the
people's assembly can be established within the next
two or three months.

154. There were other situations in the past where the
Portuguese Government simply handed over inde­
pendence to one liberation movement or another
without any consultations whatsoever with the people.
In fact, there was one instance when the Portuguese
Government assumed it had fulfilled its duties as
administering Power when it declared the indepen­
dence of a certain country without handing over the
administration to any existing body or organization.
Nevertheless, the Provisional Government of East
Timor has decided that it will follow the right
procedure as far as possible, and it is our earnest
hope that the United Nations will send its observers
to witness the exercise of the right of self-determina­
tion by the people of East Timor concerning their
future political status. Every East Timorese outside
the island is welcome to come to East Timor and par­
ticipate in the proceedings. Mr. Horta and his friends
are welcome to return to Dili, and their safety will
be guaranteed by the Provisional Government; but we
are not going to talk to them as representatives of
FRETILIN. The reason for this I have alread}
explained—namely, that as of today prominen:
members and supporters of FRETILIN inside Easi
Timor are already represented and already participate
in the Provisional Government. If the United Nations,
this Council or the Committee of 24 desires to send a
mission to the Territory to witness the real situation
in East Timor, it is welcome to do so. The Provisiona:
Government will do its utmost to facilitate such a visit.

150. With your permission, Mr. President, and
because it is so important to an understanding of the
basis of Timorese life, 1 want to elaborate further on
the social structure in my country.
151. First, the chief of the cnua is the head of the
family; a family means man, wife, children and those
relatives with blood ties up to a certain degree. The
chief of the cnua is responsible for the welfare of the
family and represents the family in all external affairs.
Secondly, a certain number of cniuis form a siico.
The chief of the sucos is elected for life; he is
responsible for the welfare of all the sucos and repre­
sents them in all their external affairs. There are about
472 sucos in East Timor. Thirdly a number of sucos
form a rcino, headed by the chief of the sucos who is
called a liurai. There are circumstances where the
sucos are placed directly under an administrative da
posto—the "divide and rule" policy in practice. All
decisions within the family are taken by the chief of
the cnua, after consultations with the members of
his family. The SIICO chief makes the decisions for the
suco, after consultations with the members. The liurai
makes decisions for the council after consultations
with the members. The liurai is responsible to the
administrative da posto, who is the lowest official of
the Governor in the province of East Timor.
152. It is our belief that this method of taking deci­
sions through consultation is most appropriate to East
Timorese society and the Timorese people. We
fervently hope that these traditional values of the
people will be seriously considered and accepted in the
exercise of their right of self-determination. It would

155. The representative of Portugal has referred to the
23 Portuguese prisoners now held by the Provisional
Government of East Timor—not by Indonesia. M>
delegation finds it difficult to understand the attitude
of the Portuguese Government in this matter, because
20

it has kept silent about other Portuguese killed and
murdered by FRETILIN. The Provisional Government
accepts the responsibility for these 23 people. They
are detained in East Timor and enjoy good care. They
have complete freedom of movement within the
borders of the village where they are held, although a
few of them have confessed to having committed
criminal acts against the people, acts punishable under
the existing laws of East Timor. Although we recognize
the humanitarian aspects of the question, this is not
and never has been primarily a humanitarian problem.
It is and should be treated as a political problem.
156. After the Portuguese Government deliberately
abandoned the Territory and its own responsibilities
as administering Power, much suffering and misery
afflicted the people of East Timor. Many lost their
lives to Portuguese weapons, while thousands more
lost their homes, were separated from their families
and became refugees. At one point 50,000 of these
unfortunate people had fled to Indonesian Timor,
and 15,000 of them still remain there, still unable
to return to their homes, which were burned to the
ground by FRETILIN forces. In addition, cattle and
foodstocks were dispersed and savings and valuables
were looted, all as a consequence of the disorder
which resulted from Portugal's abandonment of the
Territory.
157. The life and livelihood of an East Timorese are
surely as valuable as those of a Portuguese. The
Provisional Government has demonstrated that it
respects the human rights of the Portuguese equally
with those of its own people. The Portuguese Govern­
ment should now show that it no longer follows its
old colonialist habits but, instead, is prepared to
acknowledge its responsibility for the injuries com­
mitted with its weapons in East Timor and to embark
upon a policy of equal treatment for the East Timorese.
158. If Portugal truly wants to obtain the release of
the prisoners it should address itself to the Provisional
Government, which has them in its hands. This
question should not be dealt with as an isolated
problem but rather as part of the overall political and
humanitarian problem of East Timor. The Provisional
Government is willing to discuss this question, together
with all other relevant problems, at any time the
Portuguese Government finds it opportune to do so. If
a spirit of conciliation and responsibility prevails,
such questions as have been raised here will shortly be
settled to the benefit of both peoples.

existing situation and to establish contact with all the
parties in the Territory and all States concerned in
order to ensure the implementation of that resolution.
The Provisional Government and the people of East
Timor are not happy with resolution 3^84 (1975), but
we have co-operated as far as possible with the Special
Representative.
161. My delegation would like to express its apprecia­
tion to the Special Representative for the manner in
which he tried to implement the task entrusted to him
by the Secretary-General. He tried to be as factual as
possible, with his characteristic objectivity. Had there
been more time available to him and had he come in
the dry season, he certainly would have produced a
more comprehensive report, more satisfactory to
everybody.
162. In paragraph 15 of his report, the Special
Representative failed to mention the goodwill and the
offer of the Indonesian Government in September
1975 to the Portuguese Government to provide
assistance for the sole purpose of restoring peace
and order in East Timor. Had Lisbon accepted that
offer at that time, thousands of lives could have been
spared. Furthermore, the withdrawal of the Portuguese
Governor and the garrison to Atauro should have been
explained in more detail, because this was a betrayal
of the innocent majority of East Timor. In fact, the
Governor's abandonment of his post was a full mandate
for FRETILIN to consolidate its position and to expand
its power throughout the Territory with the arms given
to them by the Portuguese. The Portuguese Govern­
ment has never explained the transfer of its colonial
troops to FRETILIN and how thousands of weapons
and tons of ammunition could have been acquired
by FRETILIN. It is hard to believe that such an
experienced colonial regime as Portugal's could be
intimidated by such an upheaval while in the past
it could quell more serious rebellions in East Timor and
elsewhere easily.
163. The Special Representative visited Ocussi,
Atauro, Dili, Baucau and Manatuto. It is true that
Mr. Winspeare" Guicciardi had made known his desire
to visit as many places as possible. For technical
and security reasons it was impossible at that time to
visit other places: impassable roads, the lack of
bridges and airstrips and the unpredictable weather
conditions were some of the difficulties that hampered
his visit to other places. In fact, it was suggested
that Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi go on horseback to
those places, but this became impractical because of
lack of time. When the Provisional Government
suggested he go on horseback, it was not a joke;
the horse in Timor is like the Cadillac in New York,
because the only other alternative is to go by foot.
Thanks to the "efficiency" of the Portuguese Govern­
ment in East Timor, it is now possible to cover a
distance of about 120 miles within 48 hours, assuming
that the rivers are passable. In addition to these
difficulties,
our
intelligence
sources
received

159. My delegation has studied the report of the
Secretary-General and its annex, and I should like to
take this opportunity to make a few observations
on it.
160. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 384
(1975), the Secretary-General dispatched his Special
Representative, Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi, to East
Timor to make an on-the-spot assessment of the
21

information that FRETILIN men disguised as Indo­
nesian volunteers were planning to ambush the
Special Representative either in the area of Los Palos
or some other place in Ermera. This information was
later confirmed by captured FRETILIN members.
The ambush party even found time to hold a rehearsal
of the planned assault. We did not want to be held
responsible for a repetition of the murder of Count
Bernadotte. However, since then such favourable con­
ditions have been created for the maintenance of peace
and security that the Provisional Government com­
municated by cable to the Secretary-General on
17 March an invitation to the Special Representative
to make another visit to East Timor and to discuss
further the implementation of its decision with a view
to a solution of the question of East Timor.

166. It is our sincere hope that the Council will com:
up with constructive decisions which take into accour:
the sacred wishes of the majority of the people C
East Timor and the realities now prevailing in the
island. We feel deep gratitude to the Indonesia
Government and our fellow Indonesians, who ha\e
given us the opportunity to regain our dignity, honour
and pride, which for almost five centuries were
trampled on by colonialism. The knowledge thru
economically we will be an extra burden for Indonesia
makes us all the more grateful for our spontaneous
acceptance and reception by the Indonesian people.
We fully understand that certain formalities have to be
met to make our independence and integration with
Indonesia effective, but the people of East Time
—and they alone—should decide on the procedure
for the exercise of the right of self-determination.

164. The position of the Provisional Government is
clear, as it is stated in the report; we have nothing
new to add to it. As far as my Government is con­
cerned, the question of Timor has already been solved
by the East Timorese themselves. There is no Portu­
guese administering Power any more in Dili or in
Atauro. It has deliberately abandoned the Territory.
The existence of FRETILIN has become a completely
irrelevant question. Former prominent members and
supporters of FRETILIN have joined the Provisional
Government to build up their country; many former
leaders of FRETILIN were invited and have accepted
various assignments in the Provisional Government.
It is because of these developments and the gradual
return to normal that the Provisional Government
decided to allow volunteers to return to their places
of origin. This return had already started in February,
and it continued in March. It is to be expected that
the return of the armed volunteers will be completed
within a short time.

167. In closing, we appeal to the members of the
Council to embark on a constructive, future-orientec
course of action taking into account the misery arc
the suffering experienced by the people of East Time:
in the past. It is our fervent hope that the value
systems practised by the people of East Timor can aho
make their humble contribution to the solution of the
Timor question.
168. I should like to reserve the right to speak agair
on this matter when my delegation deems it necessan.
The meeting rose at 7.00 p.m.

Notes
' Henry A. Kissinger, Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Polh\
New York, Harper and Brothers, 1957, p. 256.
2//>«/., p. 259.
' Asian-African Conference, April 18-24, 1955, New Dellv
Government of India Press, 1955, p. 36.
4 Documents of the Gatherings of Non-Aligned Countries. 1951
1973, Secretariat for Information of the Federal Executive Coucil, Belgrade 1973, p. 17.
5 Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Imp.
mentation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independer..
to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

165. Remnants of the FRETILIN leadership, who
have caused so much misery and suffering to our
people and still refuse to be reconciled, cannot
escape the hour of judgement of the people. We have
nothing to say to Mr. Horta; we will forgive him for his
blind acceptance of his foreign advisers, but we cannot
forget that he has sold out his countrymen.

i

22
Litho in United Nations, New York

00400

83-60801-August 1984-2.2-
