A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/140
10 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 109
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/598 and Corr.1 and 2)]
54/140. Revitalization and strengthening of the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1999/54 of 29 July 1999 on the revitalization
of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women,
Reaffirming article I of the statute of the Institute,1 which sets out its autonomous status,
Reaffirming also that the Institute continues to have a unique role to play, in that it is the only entity in
the United Nations system devoted entirely to research, training and information in the context of the
advancement of women in development,
Reaffirming further the objectives of the Institute to stimulate and assist, through research, training and
the collection and dissemination of information, the advancement of women and their integration in the
development process, both as participants and as beneficiaries,

1

A/39/511, annex.

00 27163

/...

A/RES/54/140
Page 2

Reiterating paragraph 334 of the Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women2 and
the relevant provisions contained in agreed conclusions 1997/2 of 18 July 1997 of the Economic and Social
Council,3
Taking note of the recommendations contained in the report of the Joint Inspection Unit,4 which
conducted an evaluation of the Institute,
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the Institute,5
Taking note further of the report of the Secretary-General on the new structure and working method of
the Institute,6
1. Takes note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1999/54, and endorses the decision of
Member States to engage in the revitalization of the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the proposal for a new working method of the Institute through
the establishment of an electronic Gender Awareness Information and Networking System, the principal
activities of which are disseminating information from all countries, conducting research, capacity-building
and networking, taking into account the special needs of developing countries;
3.

Urges that the traditional methods of disseminating information also be improved and strengthened;

4. Expresses its satisfaction with the establishment of a new staffing structure for the Institute,
consisting of a small number of persons, and urges that the approved posts be filled as soon as possible;
5. Notes the project-centred approach and the fact that the Gender Awareness Information and
Networking System and special research and training projects will be financed and managed separately;
6. Acknowledges the efforts of the Institute in producing outputs during the biennium 1998–1999,
notwithstanding its current financial and institutional constraints;
7. Welcomes the recent appointment of the Director of the Institute, and urges the Secretary-General
to ensure the stability and continuity of the post of Director;
8. Requests the Director of the Institute to ensure the preparation of a feasibility study of the Gender
Awareness Information and Networking System, including the work plan and budget for the biennium

2

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

3

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 3 and addendum
(A/52/3/Rev.1 and Rev.1/Add.1), chap. IV, sect. A, para. 4.

4
5
6

See A/54/156–E/1999/102.
A/54/352.
A/54/500.
/...

A/RES/54/140
Page 3

2000–2001, by an independent body funded by voluntary contributions, on the basis of the new structure and
working method of the Institute, for approval by the Board of Trustees as established in article III,
paragraph 2, of the statute of the Institute;1
9. Recommends that the feasibility study provide, inter alia, information on how the new working
method and work plan will benefit the advancement of women, in particular women from developing
countries;
10. Urges that the use of all six official languages of the United Nations on the web site of the Institute
be ensured as soon as possible, and in this context requests that the feasibility study, inter alia, examine the
technical use of these languages on the web site of the Institute, and also requests the Secretary-General to
report on the developments in this regard to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to fulfil the commitment made to take the necessary measures to
correct the administrative anomalies noted in the report of the Joint Inspection Unit,4 and urges that those
measures be effected as soon as possible, given the critical financial situation of the Institute;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide support to the Institute, in particular in
setting up the new structure and working method for the Institute, by encouraging voluntary contributions
to the Institute and its special projects;
13. Urges Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to contribute
or to consider increasing their contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for the International Research
and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women in order to facilitate the immediate implementation
of the programmes and activities of the Institute;
14. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments and organizations that continue to contribute to
and support the activities of the Institute;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
