A/S-26/PV.8

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Twenty-sixth special session

8th meeting
Wednesday, 27 June 2001, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Finland)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Abulhasan
(Kuwait) took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Review of the problem of human immunodeficiency
virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(HIV/AIDS) in all its aspects
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by His Excellency Mr. Hama Amadou,
Prime Minister of the Republic of Niger.
Mr. Hama (Niger) (spoke in French): Today
AIDS is the subject of this world summit because
humankind has become aware of the terrible danger the
illness represents to the human race. Indeed, we are all
aware that AIDS spreads quickly and kills mercilessly
with the complexity of the mutations of its virus, which
renders human science nearly impotent in the face of
this scourge. Unlike malaria, AIDS has in fact made
humankind humble; it has also, however, made
humankind aware of its unity and, therefore, of the
need for solidarity, which must exist among members
to preserve the human race.
What has happened is something we could hardly
have imagined a while ago: AIDS has mobilized the
world, united and in solidarity in a unanimous coalition
of all nations on the planet, to face this threat and halt
it. In Niger, we welcome the initiative the summit

represents, and we place legitimate hopes on its full
and total success.
Niger is in that part of Africa where, according to
the estimates of the countries’ health services, the rate
of HIV is still weak, about 1.4 per cent of the general
population. But this figure hardly reassures us, for in
reality it rather reflects our lag in establishing ways to
detect and monitor epidemics. Moreover, 1.4 per cent
is still too much, particularly when we know that Niger
is located at the crossroads of sub-Saharan Africa and
North Africa — that is, on the route of migration
towards Europe, where those who refuse to resign
themselves to living in poverty and the structural
shortages of the African countries are hastening to go.
Unfortunately, among their numbers must be
included those who are sick who do not yet know that
they are sick. In Niger, we are therefore as much
concerned as the most infected countries of the region,
and we consider that the campaign against AIDS within
a regional and global framework must take Niger into
account as a corridor for possible migration of the
illness from the South toward the North. This corridor
clearly must be cleaned up.
We have come here with the hope that this
summit will not be a meeting of empty speeches, but,
rather, a meeting of active solidarity between rich and
poor, as well as one of collective responsibility of
States in the struggle against the pandemic, which we
must conquer by providing the necessary means. This
means that in the Declaration of Commitment that we
will be adopting at the end of our work, each country

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

01-42864 (E)

*0142864*

A/S-26/PV.8

must absolutely contribute — in accordance with its
own means to be sure, but bearing in mind that the war
against AIDS cannot neglect any resources, since it is
waters from small brooks that form great rivers.
It is precisely for this reason that His Excellency
Mr. Mamadou Tandja, President of the Republic of
Niger, has asked me to convey to the General
Assembly and to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, his sincere encouragement for the latter’s
outstanding efforts to mobilize the special fund to
combat AIDS that he initiated for the significant
financial resources that this campaign needs so badly.
It is true that this fund is indispensable. Niger,
naturally, will support it with full conviction, but
money alone will not solve the problem of AIDS. In
addition, there is a need for a strong political
commitment, at the highest level, in all of our
countries. There is also a need for full accessibility by
people to all information available on AIDS. Taboos
must be broken and sociocultural barriers lifted. In
short, men and women on whom tradition is holding
blind sway must be educated. Finally, antiretroviral
drugs must be made financially and geographically
available to all of those who are ill.
This summit prompts us to hope, and no doubt it
represents a first step towards controlling the
pandemic. Here we have a great opportunity for
humankind, which has finally understood that no State,
however rich and powerful it may be, can overcome
this illness without the others. Hence, the strategy to
combat the AIDS epidemic must have a global
magnitude and simultaneously be based on a regional
approach and subregional initiatives. In other words,
we must all cooperate and stop thinking of AIDS as an
illness like all the others, which one can use in
commerce and profit-making.
The campaign against AIDS will certainly be
very expensive. But AIDS is already costing too much
in terms of human life. This summit, we believe, must
first and foremost serve to mobilize the necessary
financial resources and assist the weakest nations —
that is, those most exposed to the rapid spread of the
illness. Indeed, these countries are badly lacking in
means of detection, in adequately trained health
personnel and in technical equipment. But these
countries are vulnerable, above all, because of the low
level of education of men and women who continue to
believe, unfortunately, that AIDS is merely an

2

invention of the West, if not a shameful illness like
leprosy which must be concealed.
Therefore, funds are needed — a great deal of
money, for now, at $2 per day per patient in countries
such as ours, people will continue to die of AIDS. The
State alone cannot ensure their care, and the extremely
low level of their present revenues condemn them to
inevitable death.
To sum up, I wish to say that now, as I am
speaking to you, to survive with AIDS one has to be
either rich or live in a prosperous country. But AIDS
has the mission also of destroying prosperity. This is
how important it is that this summit mobilizes
significant funds to provide an impetus simultaneously
for research in public institutions and aid in the care of
HIV-positive individuals in low-income countries.
Without the hope of possible care, few people will
accept voluntarily submitting to AIDS tests. Rather,
they will continue to hope that they are not ill, which is
only human, thus becoming the unwitting agents for
the transmission of an unforgiving illness. This is why
Niger has also decided to make a symbolic contribution
of $50,000 to the global AIDS health fund.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hear a statement by Her Excellency Sandra Pierantozzi,
Vice President and Minister for Health of the Republic
of Palau.
Ms. Pierantozzi (Palau): As all of you may
know, the Republic of Palau is one of the newest
Members of the United Nations, having only joined the
Organization in 1994, shortly after achieving its
independence on 1 October of that year. The Republic
of Palau is an archipelago consisting of more than 200
small islands in the western Pacific. It is another
tropical paradise in the Pacific Ocean.
Idyllic as this beautiful, seemingly carefree
paradise may sound, there is trouble. Palau is not
immune to the scourge of HIV/AIDS; the disease
respects no boundaries and has been imported to our
shores. Palau has lost two of its citizens to AIDS, with
another three confirmed infected with HIV.
While these figures appear low and insignificant
compared to statistics from other countries — and, in
fact, statistics from the Pacific region still show low
incidences of HIV/AIDS — when they are viewed in
light of our small populations, the impact is enormous.
For Palau’s population of only 20,000, the impact is

A/S-26/PV.8

tremendous. Given our small population and slow
growth, Palau can ill afford to lose any more of its
citizens to HIV/AIDS. The HIV/AIDS threat is very
real to us, because if left unchecked, it could decimate
our entire community in no time at all.
Like many remote islands in the vast Pacific
Ocean, Palau has limited natural resources and
therefore relies heavily on assistance from offshore
sources. Our number-one industry is tourism. While the
industry brings in needed revenues, it also brings
unwanted extra baggage that puts our people at risk.
Our people’s propensity to travel abroad and return is
another revolving door adding to this risk.
From our standpoint, the best way to effectively
combat the HIV/AIDS pandemic is through massive
public education on prevention through safe sex. This
is especially critical among young people who are
active socially, migrate around freely and are most at
risk. Our efforts at public education are often hampered
by cultural barriers and limited resources.
In the last few months, a young HIV-infected
mother gave birth to a healthy baby. With the wonders
of medical technology and protocol, our hospital was
able to follow closely such protocol, according to
which the mother’s identity was kept confidential, and
proper procedures were followed for delivery. I am
pleased to report that early testing has shown the new
infant to be HIV free. The new mother is doing well.
Her husband has also tested negative, and with
counselling, their family life has continued
uninterrupted. This is a milestone in our medical
history, but there is no guarantee that it can be repeated
successfully.
While we strive to maintain confidentiality when
appropriate, we would urge that efforts be aimed at
removing the stigma and isolation associated with
HIV/AIDS so that those infected may come forth
without fear of ostracism. This is particularly important
where an informed public could avoid further spread of
the disease by those intent on spreading it around. One
young man infected with HIV has courageously come
forth and has been accepted by the community, and he
is a powerful living testimony to the dangers of this
disease.
Last, but certainly not least, I would like to say
something about women with relation to the HIV/AIDS
pandemic. It has been noted that women and girls bear
a disproportionate share of the HIV/AIDS burden, but

that women are central to prevention and treatment
plans and to finding sustainable solutions to this
pandemic. Having noted this, I wish to make an appeal
that we ensure gender equality in strategies to address
HIV/AIDS, that the disease be recognized as genderblind — and therefore requires the attention of both
men and women equally — and that women be not
tasked alone with the responsibility for this affliction,
which affects all of humanity.
The Republic of Palau is privileged and honoured
to be part of this global effort to seek solutions to
HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases. We,
too, recognize and appreciate the commitment of the
Secretary-General and everyone else to fighting this
disease. We recognize the devastating effects of
HIV/AIDS in many large countries, but we wish to
emphasize again that even our small countries are
affected, too, by HIV/AIDS. We all must make sure
that small countries such as my own, with limited
ability to fight HIV/AIDS, are not left out of the total
picture. The Republic of Palau is fully committed to
these efforts to seek solutions within our lifetime.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency The Honourable John Junor, Minister for
Health of Jamaica.
Mr. Junor (Jamaica): On behalf of the
Government and people of Jamaica, it is a privilege for
me to address the twenty-sixth special session of the
General Assembly, on HIV/AIDS.
The convening of this special session should be
seen a major step in intensifying international
partnerships and in building consensus for action
against HIV/AIDS at the global level. I wish to take
this opportunity to express appreciation to the cofacilitators, Ambassador Ka of Senegal and
Ambassador Wensley of Australia, for the outstanding
work they have done in guiding the negotiating process
for the outcome document. Jamaica also appreciates the
efforts of our Secretary-General, who has taken a
personal interest in advancing the fight against the
epidemic.
The crisis created by HIV/AIDS has spawned
significant new social, political and economic
challenges, which have disproportionately affected the
developing world. The current realities faced by those
countries and regions most heavily affected by the
crisis have generated legitimate fears of a reversal of
decades of social and economic progress.

3

A/S-26/PV.8

In the Caribbean, the region which is most
seriously affected by HIV/AIDS after sub-Saharan
Africa, AIDS has become a major threat to the most
productive segment of the population. It is the leading
cause of death among men and women in the 15-to-44
age group. The potential for undermining the
productive capacity of crucial sectors such as
education, health, agriculture and business presents a
very real and formidable challenge to the sustainable
development of these small economies.
Jamaica is one of the largest islands of the
Caribbean, with a population of 2.5 million and a rate
of HIV infection of 1 to 2 per cent of the adult
population. New HIV infections in adolescents have
been increasing alarmingly since 1995, and adolescent
females have a three times higher risk of infection than
males of the same age. The overall case fatality rate for
AIDS is high, and it has contributed to an estimated
2,000 children being orphaned because of the loss of a
mother or of both parents to AIDS.
As part of its response, the Jamaican Government
has undertaken comprehensive measures to strengthen
the provision of health care services to those affected
by the illness and has intensified its campaign to
promote prevention. We believe that that should be our
primary response. Despite the serious financial
constraints we face, we have made notable progress in
important areas. The Ministry of Health has introduced
a pilot programme directed at reducing mother-to-child
transmission, with free HIV testing being provided to
all mothers in the pilot area, as well as free
antiretroviral drugs at the time of delivery and after
birth for the baby. Replacement feeding for infants for
up to six months is also included as part of a broadbased approach.
In the face of the costs associated with the
treatment of HIV/AIDS and the overall impact of the
epidemic on the economy, we will continue to make
prevention a primary focus. Among our achievements
in the area of prevention are gains made in lowering
the rates of infection for sexually transmitted diseases,
particularly infectious syphilis and congenital syphilis.
We have succeeded in maintaining a lower rate of HIV
infection than was suggested by the initial projections.
Yet we are aware that with increasing HIV prevalence
among our young people there is still urgent work to be
done in controlling the spread of the disease among our
population.

4

The
Pan-Caribbean
Partnership
against
HIV/AIDS and the Caribbean regional strategic plan of
action, which were recently adopted, promote the
widest participation among actors and stakeholders in
our region, with each making a major contribution to
the development of a comprehensive and aggressive
response to the epidemic. Despite the high-level
political response and the concrete multisectoral
approaches that we have undertaken, countries in the
region, like those in many other parts of the world, face
daunting constraints; they require assistance to build
capacity and to promote and sustain prevention, care
and treatment interventions. We therefore welcome the
proposed establishment of a global health and
HIV/AIDS fund, and we hope that the allocation of
resources from the fund will not be subject to
bureaucratic impediments which would limit timely
and adequate disbursement to those worst affected.
If we are to win the battle against this deadly
illness, adequate and sustained assistance to those in
need must also be accompanied by measures to
increase awareness and prevention efforts, reduce
stigmatization and limit the factors that make people
more vulnerable, including, of course, gender
inequality, social exclusion, conflict and economic
deprivation.
There are no alternatives. We must act. Let us
pledge to promote prevention, to ensure cheaper access
to drugs and health care, and to respect the rights of
those living with the disease. We must translate the
rhetoric on HIV/AIDS into action. There is a moral
imperative to do so. Let us pledge, therefore, to use this
occasion as a platform for strengthening our collective
efforts to reach concrete targets in the areas of
prevention, care, treatment, research and development,
and resource allocation.
There is a saying in the Caribbean: in the final
analysis, when all is said and done, more must be done
than said.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. José Serra, Minister of Health of
Brazil.
Mr. Serra (Brazil): Twenty years have gone by
since the first cases of what became known as AIDS
were identified. In that short time frame, the impact of
the epidemic has been devastating. Almost 60 million
people have been infected with HIV. Almost 22 million

A/S-26/PV.8

people have died. More than 36 million are living with
HIV/AIDS and need treatment.
Unfortunately, the spread of the epidemic and the
death rates related to AIDS are swiftly increasing in the
world, and that trend will not be reversed unless the
international community takes decisive action to face
the huge challenge. Last year, more than 5 million
people were infected, and 3 million died.
Until very recently, it was a commonplace to
affirm that HIV affected the human body’s immune
system in the same way as the epidemic affected a
country’s immune system, which is composed of its
people, its economy and its health and education
systems. Nowadays, however, that assertion does not
hold true anymore. Although we do not have a cure for
AIDS, we know that consistent and courageous policies
can halt the spread of the disease and can let those
infected with HIV live normal and dignified lives. To
meet those objectives, our commitment must contain
four essential elements: prevention, treatment, human
rights and resources.
Prevention and treatment are mutually reinforcing
and must be considered in an integrated approach. As
far as prevention is concerned, there is a wide range of
measures that have proved successful, such as
universal access to condoms, women’s empowerment,
the adoption of programmes relating to mother-to-child
transmission, the implementation of strategies directed
to the most vulnerable groups and to the groups at
highest risk of infection and, finally, the inclusion in
school curriculums of issues related to HIV/AIDS.
In Brazil, those policies have yielded excellent
results, allowing us to control the transmission rate.
The number of people living with HIV/AIDS now
amounts to less than half of what estimates used to
predict. Our integrated approach to prevention and
treatment was essential in reaching that success.
Because of our policy of ensuring free and universal
treatment, the population feels encouraged to accept
voluntary and confidential testing, improving
notification of AIDS in earlier stages, which otherwise
would be hidden.
Moreover, people living with HIV/AIDS are kept
in close contact with the health system, both the
governmental one and that of the non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). These people have access to
information, counselling and prevention supplies.
Following the anti-AIDS treatment, they have their

viral load brought down. Their self-esteem is raised.
They feel more able, and are more likely than in the
past to be more cautious in avoiding contaminating
other persons. Thus, treatment has a positive and
formidable impact on prevention, which has rightly
been recognized by this special session.
1996 represents a landmark in AIDS history. It
was the year in which the efficacy of the antiretroviral
therapy was proven. Since then, every Brazilian living
with HIV or AIDS has had free access thereto.
Nowadays, almost 100,000 people are taking these
drugs in Brazil. Our strategy has been paying off. The
death rate has fallen by approximately 50 per cent. The
hospitalization rate dropped 75 per cent, reducing
indirect
costs.
Opportunistic
diseases
have
substantially decreased. The epidemic has been
stabilized, and our public health services are much less
overburdened. Actually, providing adequate treatment
has even led us to upgrade those services.
The reason for the affordability of our policy is
clearly the local production of drugs. Brazil produces
eight generic versions of non-patented anti-AIDS drugs
at low costs. Most of the medicines provided by
Brazilian laboratories are much cheaper than those
imported. Last year, just two imported drugs amounted
to as much as 36 per cent of the whole purchase cost of
anti-AIDS medicines.
Nevertheless, effective or potential competition
from the local companies is inducing foreign industries
to bring their costs down by an average of 70 per cent.
It is also worth noting that local production is
controlled through the application of good
manufacturing
practices,
pharmaceutical
plant
inspections, and bio-equivalence testing. No problem
related to the quality of medicines produced in Brazil
has ever been reported.
Moreover, it is important to stress that this
production fully complies with the World Trade
Organization’s Trade-Related Intellectual Property
Rights Agreement (TRIPS). Brazil is a founding
member of this agreement and adapted its legislation
thereto in 1997, eight years before the 2005 deadline.
No one disputes the relevance of the international
agreements on intellectual property rights. Patent rules
strike a balance between two desirable objectives. On
the one hand, there is the private interest of individual
creators, needing funds for innovations and seeking
maximum opportunity to exploit their inventions; on

5

A/S-26/PV.8

the other hand, there is the public interest of immediate
and widespread dissemination of lifesaving technology.
We must balance the two sides. The TRIPS agreement
itself, for all its provisions on scientific knowledge
protection, contains measures allowing for the
promotion of public health. We are pleased that this
special session has acknowledged the efforts of
countries to develop domestic industries in order to
increase access to medicines and protect the health of
their populations. It has also recognized that the
affordability of drugs is a significant factor in the fight
against the epidemic.
Another essential factor in combating HIV/AIDS
is the strict respect of human rights. This approach
should be twofold. On the one hand, we must combat
the stigma that is unfortunately still associated with
HIV/AIDS, and eliminate other forms of discrimination
that contribute to the spread of the epidemic. On the
other hand, we must take into account that access to
medication is a fundamental element in achieving the
full realization of the human right to the enjoyment of
the highest standard of physical and mental health.
In Brazil, we have also learned that NGOs, in
particular those of people living with HIV/AIDS, must
fully participate in this huge effort. In the last seven
years, more than 1,500 partnerships with 600 nongovernmental organizations have been put in place.
This cooperation, in which the Government has
invested more than 40 million dollars annually, has
proven efficient and creative. Over 600 NGOs work
with the Government now, highlighting critical issues
and contributing to the elaboration and implementation
of public policies.
As a matter of fact, cooperation is fundamental
both at the national and the international levels. Based
on our national experience, the Brazilian Government
has carried out technical cooperation with Latin
American, Caribbean and African countries.
However, a stronger effort is expected from
developed countries, which can contribute more to
meeting the goals established in this special session. In
this regard, Brazil fully supports the establishment of a
global AIDS fund, whose resources should be
commensurate with the magnitude of our challenge, so
as to finance prevention and treatment, particularly for
those most in need. As a contribution in kind, we offer
to provide technical assistance, for both prevention and
treatment.

6

I am also pleased that the special session has
recognized the principle of differential pricing.
Developing countries should not pay as much as
developed countries for AIDS-related drugs. I hope
that the pharmaceutical companies will take this
principle into account.
Another initiative that should move forward, and
that has been successfully implemented in Brazil, is the
establishment of an Internet databank to disseminate
drug prices in different countries, which would
certainly lead to more competition and price reduction.
In concluding, let me emphasize that this special
session represents an important breakthrough, in that
the international community has agreed upon a set of
global principles and strategies regarding HIV/AIDS,
even though countries live in their different, particular
circumstances. This meeting has shown that there is a
way out, that it is possible to fight the epidemic even in
the poorest regions.
The special session should not be a final event.
On the contrary, it must be a starting point, or rather a
turning point, especially for the most affected
countries.
The final document of the special session will be
a declaration of commitment, and it actually all
depends on our commitment — a commitment to
human rights, a commitment to prevention, a
commitment to treatment and a commitment to
affordable medicines. In a word, a commitment to life.
The Acting President: I call on His Excellency
The Honourable Douglas Slater, Minister for Health
and the Environment of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines.
Mr. Slater (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
This meeting is very timely as it provides us with an
opportunity to again focus attention on the HIV/AIDS
epidemic. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines adds its
voice to the statements of congratulation expressed by
the delegations that have preceded us on the convening
of this special session to forge a collaborative approach
to an issue that is beginning to dominate our national
agendas.
The HIV/AIDS virus is a major developmental
problem. It is therefore uniquely devastating in terms
of increasing poverty, reversing human development
achievements and eroding the ability of Governments
to provide and maintain essential services, thereby

A/S-26/PV.8

reducing labour supply and productivity. The
widespread nature of the HIV/AIDS pandemic
continues to make a mockery of the objectives and
projections of the Millennium Declaration.
It is well known that the Caribbean is second to
sub-Sahara Africa in the rate of infection. Many
delegations have already listed the statistics, so I will
not repeat them. The Caribbean is faced with a gloomy
future if this rate of infection continues. Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines currently accounts for 50 per cent
of the reported new cases in the Organization of
Eastern Caribbean States.
The impact of AIDS on Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines has been similar to that of other small
developing countries. Our scarce and valuable human
resources have been depleted by the death of persons
whose skills and expertise have been difficult to
replace. The cost of training our citizens is high, and
the loss of our trained human resources places an
increasing burden on our already limited financial
resources. Women of childbearing age are the segment
of our society most at risk. This has serious
implications for our future generations. It is suggested
that half of all new cases of infection occur in young
people under the age of 25 years. Given that AIDS kills
most of all people in the 15 to 49 age group, it is
depriving families, communities and nations of their
most productive people.
I believe in the old adage that an ounce of
prevention is better than a pound of cure.
Consequently, we must continue to educate our
population by ensuring that they have adequate and
timely information so that they can engage in the best
possible practices. In Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, recognizing the strength of partnership, we
have taken on the challenge to promote participation in
the Caribbean regional strategy for the prevention and
treatment of HIV/AIDS. We are continuing our
educational programmes involving non-governmental
organizations, including community-based and cultural
organizations. Our Government is currently proposing
to provide treatment to HIV/AIDS-affected persons
within our limited financial capabilities. We have
already initiated a programme to reduce mother-tochild transmission in collaboration with the Kingston
Medical College, a private institution.
The cost of medication must not be allowed to
jeopardize the thrust to reduce the spread of

HIV/AIDS. The pharmaceutical industry must continue
to demonstrate good will in this regard by making
medicines more accessible and affordable. The public
health safeguards and the TRIPS agreement must
become a real option for developing States, and more
can be done on differential pricing.
We are facing a global emergency caused by the
HIV/AIDS pandemic. The global problem calls for a
global solution and actions to halt the spread of this
deadly disease. We must summon the political will and
leadership necessary to face this challenge head on, but
without the resources to do so, we are fighting a losing
battle. We acknowledge, with deep appreciation, the
efforts of UNAIDS in addressing this pandemic. We
welcome the establishment of a new global fund and
we applaud the countries that have committed
substantial resources to its creation.
We in the Caribbean are proud of our regional
institutions that have been coordinating the effort
against this disease, and we have many examples of
best practices that need to be systematically
documented and disseminated. Our institutions, such as
the Caribbean Epidemiology Centre, the Caribbean
Community
(CARICOM)
and
the
Caribbean
Development Bank, have a collection of highly trained
personnel willing and capable of leading the fight
against this disease in our Caribbean civilization.
CARICOM has been the coordinating institution on
many fronts in this battle and, along with the other
institutions mentioned, it should be the focal point for
distributing the resources allocated to our region by the
fund.
In countries like ours, whose natural beauty
makes it inviting for tourists seeking peace and
tranquillity, there is a tendency to avoid openly
discussing any health-related epidemic for fear that
vitally needed resources would not flow into our
economy. In Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, we feel
that the opposite is necessary. We must display
renewed vigour to inform our citizens and visitors to
our shores of the danger that is AIDS. We must fight
the stigmatization against those infected with or
affected by HIV. We need to strengthen the political
resolve to fight back.
Finally, AIDS is a threat to all mankind. It knows
no boundaries — colour, class or creed. It is only
through partnership, international cooperation and
active participation by all stakeholders that we would

7

A/S-26/PV.8

be able to curtail and arrest the spread of this disease.
No country, no region, no sector can do it alone, but
together now we can.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency The Honourable Amasone Kilei, Minister
for Health of Tuvalu.
Mr. Kilei (Tuvalu): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of my own country, Tuvalu,
and the other Pacific Islands Forum countries
represented in New York: Australia, Fiji, Federated
States of Micronesia, Marshall Islands, Nauru, New
Zealand, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon
Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu and the observer delegation
from the Cook Islands, which is attending the twentysixth special session of the General Assembly.
As this is Tuvalu’s maiden statement since
joining the United Nations last year and since the
establishment of its Permanent Mission in New York a
mere two weeks ago, please allow me first to reaffirm
Tuvalu’s confidence in the United Nations and in its
capacity to safeguard the fundamental rights and
survival of members of the international community,
particularly the most vulnerable, such as small island
and developing States.
Allow me also to record the Pacific delegation’s
most sincere thanks to the President and to his cofacilitators, Her Excellency Ambassador Penny
Wensley of Australia and His Excellency Mr. Ibra
Deguene Ka of Senegal, for the sterling work that they
have done in guiding and advancing the work for this
special session on HIV/AIDS.
HIV/AIDS has affected every region, including
my own. While the incidence of HIV/AIDS is
relatively low in the Pacific, it is nevertheless a major
issue of concern for our countries. We face a very high
risk of HIV/AIDS transmission, particularly because of
the increasing mobility of populations in the Pacific.
This demands an urgent response. Strong political
commitment at all levels is crucial in dealing with this
epidemic.
The small islands and developing States within
the Pacific region face particular challenges in
countering the spread of HIV/AIDS and in treating
those who are HIV-positive or have AIDS. The
approach to the disease therefore must take account of
the specific and unique situations of our member
countries. Lack of communications infrastructure and

8

overstretched health and education systems are factors
which have to be grappled with. The HIV/AIDS
epidemic adds a new and alarming source of
vulnerability to many small countries in our group,
further
exacerbating
existing
economic
and
environmental vulnerabilities.
Our delegations are of the firm view that
prevention should be the mainstay of combating
HIV/AIDS in the Pacific region. We know that the
relatively low number of reported HIV/AIDS cases in
our countries is not a reason for complacency. If the
disease takes hold, care and treatment would inevitably
be extremely difficult to afford.
We have developed plans that are specific to each
country, taking into account the range of vulnerable
groups that are relevant in their local conditions.
We recognize the need to involve and provide
support to all sectors in combating HIV/AIDS.
Community leaders, non-governmental organizations,
schools, workplaces, hospitals and church networks are
in a good position to support HIV/AIDS activities at
the national, provincial and district levels. Their
respective roles in awareness-raising could potentially
encourage positive changes in attitudes and behaviour,
and provide counselling services, access to condoms,
treatment and palliative care services.
Community-level action and strategies are crucial
tools in the battle against HIV/AIDS in the Pacific
region. Capacity-building is an essential need.
There also needs to be effective support for
regional organizations in developing regional strategies
to assist national efforts. We believe that the UNAIDS
presence in the Pacific region needs to be maintained.
UNAIDS must also review the modality of its
operations in our region. The regional ministerial
meeting on HIV/AIDS in the Asia-Pacific, to be held in
Melbourne in October, will be a further opportunity to
set regional priorities for our work on HIV/AIDS.
Prevention activities need to be culturally
sensitive, while at the same time overcoming cultural
barriers and social traditions which might work against
public education about HIV/AIDS. Prevention and care
strategies, and the declaration of commitment which
we hope to adopt at this special session, need to take
into account the diversity of vulnerable groups and to
target them with appropriate strategies. Multisectoral
approaches to prevention and care are crucial, as is

A/S-26/PV.8

respect for the human rights of those who are
vulnerable to, and who have contracted, HIV/AIDS.
There must be unflagging respect for women’s human
rights, including their reproductive and sexual rights, if
the global response to the pandemic is to be effective.
Access to safe blood supplies presents a
particular challenge in many of our member countries,
which rely upon “walking blood banks”. This raises the
need to ensure that blood transfusions are conducted
safely and do not transmit HIV/AIDS infection.
Our delegations welcome the establishment of a
global fund to combat HIV/AIDS. We express our
appreciation to those Governments, foundations and
individuals which have already committed support.
International strategies and plans for resource
mobilization must keep in mind the competing
priorities of, and the constraints faced by, developing
countries.
In this regard, we wish to request that the Pacific
island countries be assisted in their respective
programmes to ensure the current low rate of HIV
transmission and infection is contained and is
ultimately eradicated.
For the Pacific region, time is of the essence. We
do not want the situation to deteriorate further. We
need help. The good news is that as the populations are
small enough, comparatively small amounts of welltargeted funding support can help the Pacific region
stop the further spread of HIV/AIDS. We also envisage
that the global fund will be easily accessible and not
bureaucratically cumbersome.
Finally, our delegations have great expectations
that the declaration of commitment will be adopted by
this special session; that it will outline practical and
realistic opportunities to build and strengthen the
capacity of the most vulnerable, particularly the small
island developing States, including my own, to counter
the spread of the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Abdul Mejid Hussein, Chairman of the
delegation of Ethiopia.
Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia): I would like first of all
to take this opportunity to express my delegation’s
gratitude to Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his
commendable leadership in combating AIDS globally
and in Africa in particular.

My delegation’s appreciation also goes to the
facilitators and to UNAIDS for their relentless efforts
in the preparatory process for the session. It is my
sincere hope that this session will be a landmark for
securing global commitments and resources to address
this global crisis.
Although AIDS exists in every part of the world,
Africa, and in particular sub-Saharan Africa, is the
hardest hit. By now we are only too familiar with the
AIDS statistics affecting Africa, so I will not elaborate.
My country, a member of this subregion, is also
bearing the brunt of this terrible disease. The impact of
the epidemic on the economic and social sector has
been severe.
In response to the AIDS epidemic, my
Government, with its limited financial and trained
human resources capacity, had taken several measures
to address it.
Anti-AIDS campaign were launched in various
governmental sectoral ministries and other parastatals.
The mass media also played an important role in
raising public awareness of the importance of
behavioural change in the struggle against AIDS. We
also have anti-AIDS clubs established in our schools
throughout the country to sensitize the youth. A
national HIV/AIDS social policy was issued in 1998
with the overall objective of providing an enabling
environment for the prevention and control of
HIV/AIDS in the country.
In the last decade more Africans have perished
from AIDS than from famine, war and natural disasters
combined. Unfortunately, we can predict with tragic
certainty that if nothing drastic is done the situation
will be quite catastrophic. The pandemic is simply,
without qualification, the greatest existing threat to
humanity in general and Africa in particular. It is
reducing life expectancy dramatically. All the gains of
increased life expectancy in the latter decades of the
twentieth century have been wiped out at a stroke. The
disease is striking at the most productive age group, the
young adults. It is striking down huge numbers in
crucial occupations, including teachers, civil servants,
business people and medical professionals in the prime
of their life.
The challenge of HIV/AIDS is therefore
immense. It is truly a collective challenge which falls
on all of us across Africa and the world. There are

9

A/S-26/PV.8

many impressive and often inspiring efforts to contain
the pandemic, educate those at risk and care for those
who are HIV positive or who suffer from HIV/AIDS.
But the relentless spread of the virus tells us that
this is simply not enough. Our point of departure must
be an appreciation of the fact that while AIDS is a
disease that infects and kills individual human beings,
it is also a societal disaster. It attacks the weakest
points in our societies; it attacks where our societies
are secretive, hypocritical, abusive or unjust and, above
all, where the social fabric has been torn apart by a
relentless process of economic impoverishment.
Let us look at one or two ways damage has been
done to our societies’ immune system that have
allowed the HIV/AIDS virus to become pandemic. We
have poverty and inequality across Africa, if I take that
region of the world. The poorest people either do not
know how to protect themselves against HIV
transmission, or just cannot afford the protection. In
the long term, therefore, sustainable and equitable
economic development is an essential, I repeat it is an
essential, component in the struggle against HIV/AIDS.
Gender inequality: at the very centre of the
HIV/AIDS pandemic is the unequal treatment of
women. We all know that women tend to be more
conscious of their health, particularly with their
reproductive health, than are men. All the evidence
shows that women are quicker to understand and
appreciate messages about HIV and how to prevent it.
But it is shocking also to learn that the category of
people most highly at risk of contracting HIV is young
girls. The main reason is that these girls are almost
totally powerless when it comes to sexual relations.
They are raped, coerced, intimidated, manipulated and
often also simply bought.
Everybody here, I would say, is directly or
indirectly affected by HIV/AIDS, all of us here. Those
who are not themselves infected are stricken by the
wider repercussions of the pandemic, whether we like
it or not. Citizens, community leaders, civil society and
religious organizations, trade unions, businesses, in
fact every part of our society has the responsibility to
become part of a grand African and world coalition
against HIV/AIDS. No one should be demobilized from
this collective struggle: youth, women and people
living with HIV/AIDS should be at the forefront of this
coalition. This is a multifaceted struggle.

10

I will say, finally, that the crisis of HIV/AIDS is
crying out for political leadership — not just any
leadership, but one with vision and compassion.
Overcoming HIV is a task that will require leadership
at all levels, particularly within Africa and across all
social sectors all over the world. It is also, I would
repeat, an international challenge. HIV knows no
boundaries, as some of my colleagues earlier said. It
will be overcome by collective international action or
not at all. For that reason the African leaders who met
at Abuja last April called on all African countries to
make the containment of HIV/AIDS a priority.
The fact that the United Nations General
Assembly has convened this special session to discuss
this issue is a milestone. It is my delegation’s hope the
projected global fund for health and HIV/AIDS will
have a mechanism whereby all stakeholders — donor
countries and countries most affected, the United
Nations and others — will have a say in its
management. It goes without saying also that the
management and workings of such a fund have to be
transparent. I would like to call in particular on those
who like to call on all of us to be transparent to take
the lead, because usually they are not transparent
themselves when it comes to managing at the global
level important things like a fund like the one we hope
will be established.
The task therefore is certainly daunting, but we
have no choice other than to begin acting now. To the
youth and the children of Africa and the world, we
must pledge to do our utmost that they may live in
communities in which they are no longer plagued by
HIV/AIDS and in which basic health is available to all.
This is no utopia — and don’t confuse it with my
country, Ethiopia — but it is possible.
The Acting President: I give the floor to His
Excellency, Mr. Lamuel Stanislaus, Chairman of the
delegation of Grenada.
Mr. Stanislaus (Grenada): My delegation extends
to the President hearty congratulations and high praise
for his skilful and effective conduct of the special
session, which the Secretary-General has helped to
place on centre stage.
With respect with this global crisis posed by
HIV/AIDS, which has brought leaders from around the
world to address the pandemic, my delegation begins
by quoting the man of science and culture, Leonardo da
Vinci, who many centuries ago said that in times of

A/S-26/PV.8

crisis we should regard ourselves as passengers in the
same vessel, threatened by the same rough seas,
sharing the same common struggle and common
destiny.

result persons who may require HIV testing are
hesitant for fear that their identity might become
known, thereby exposing them to prejudice,
discrimination and rejection.

This global crisis has sounded the clarion call for
global action as the way forward. The leaders have
come to mobilize into partnership for action
Governments at the national, international and regional
levels, non-governmental organizations, the corporate
sector, foundations, the United Nations family and
other stakeholders. If we succeed — and we must —
humankind will be spared the scourge of this dreadful,
debilitating and baffling killer disease.

My Government has in place a national aids
programme for education, information, counselling and
advocacy, but it needs financial assistance in preparing
its priority and strategic action plans in order to have
access to large-scale HIV/AIDS funding.

Many victims of HIV/AIDS have found
themselves in this life-and-death struggle through no
fault of theirs, poverty, underdevelopment and
illiteracy, being the main contributing factors. The
major tragedy in all this, however, is the family —
especially orphans, widows, widowers and, to some
extent, grandparents, some of whom in their advanced
years are called upon to be parents again.
The grim statistics compiled globally make it
unmistakably clear that the Caribbean is second only to
sub-Saharan Africa in the incidence of HIV/AIDS
infection and mortality. According to UNAIDS and the
Caribbean Epidemiology Centre, the rate of HIV/AIDS
infection as a percentage of the population is 2.11.
AIDS is now the leading cause of death for those from
15 to 45 years old, and the number of cases is growing
exponentially, doubling every two to three years.
My country, Grenada, is no exception. With a
relatively small population, naturally the number of
cases reported is also small, but when it is considered
that in more than 75 per cent of the cases reported the
patient dies within two years, the statistical
significance is very obvious. Prevention, treatment and
care are sadly lacking due to the unavailability and
high cost of medication.
The surveillance of sexually transmitted
infections, particularly HIV/AIDS, is very limited in
Grenada. The national AIDS programme is hampered
when reporting even the cases diagnosed by both
public and private practitioners. There is also a lack of
cooperation in the area of contact tracing and partner
referrals for counselling and treatment. This hinders the
efficiency of HIV/AIDS surveillance and makes it
difficult to determine the extent of the disease. The
issue of confidentially is also a major concern, and as a

All of this having been said, it would seem that
the way forward globally is to follow the draft
declaration of commitments on HIV/AIDS which has
been meticulously prepared under the brilliant and
distinguished leadership of the two co-facilitators,
Ambassador Wensley of Australia and Ambassador Ka
of Senegal.
Let me touch briefly on just two elements in the
draft declaration: resources and prevention. Our
knowledge of the etiology and epidemiology of
HIV/AIDS is largely useless unless there is political
will and there is funding to confront the disease —
especially in the Caribbean, where there is the danger
that resources will be drawn from other critical publichealth and social needs.
It is estimated that the funding cost of HIV/AIDS
globally will be between $7 and $10 billion annually,
and, according to the University of the West Indies, the
cost of funding AIDS in the Caribbean will be in
excess of $360 million annually. It would seem,
therefore, that no potential contributor should be
ignored or rejected. This brings to mind the case of the
Republic of China on Taiwan, which is ready, willing
and able — financially, scientifically and otherwise —
to put its vast resources at the service of the United
Nations.
Prevention is the first and main defence against
HIV/AIDS. The maxim, “An ounce of prevention is
worth a pound of cure” is as old as it is true. My
delegation compliments UNAIDS for highlighting in a
holistic way the ABCs of AIDS prevention and care.
“A” stands for abstinence, “B” stands for “be faithful”
and “C” stands for “condomize”. The intent is to
emphasize each element in the equation. However, it
must be stated with undiplomatic candour that
abstinence is only given lip service.
Traditional institutions — home, school and
church — should be encouraged and assisted at every

11

A/S-26/PV.8

level to promote abstinence and fidelity as one of the
main measures for preventing HIV/AIDS, especially
among children. Abstinence makes good old common
sense and does not require attempts to teach morality,
moral rectitude or the theological virtues. Less early
sex among children means fewer chances of
contracting HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted
diseases.
I end now as I began with another quotation so
appropriate to the tragedy:
“There is a tide in the affairs of men
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
On such a full sea are we now afloat,
And we must take the current when it serves,
Or lose our ventures.” (William Shakespeare,
Julius Caesar, Act IV, Scene 3)
Let us take the floodtide, which this special
session brings to the fight against a modern-day
plague.
The Acting President: I now call on His
Excellency Mr. Agim Nesho, the Chairman of the
delegation of Albania.
Mr. Nesho (Albania): It is an honour for me to
address this special session on HIV/AIDS on behalf of
the Albanian Government. I would like to take this
opportunity to commend the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Kofi Annan, for convening this very
important meeting. His report gives us very important
recommendations for a strong and determined global
response to combat HIV/AIDS.
The participation of so many delegations in this
session testifies to the challenge that our countries face
today: HIV/AIDS, a challenge that cannot be met
except through joint efforts and with the provision of
adequate resources at the national and international
level.
After the fall of the totalitarian system in Albania
in 1992, Albania joined other countries of the region in
building democracy and a free-market economy. These
changes opened the country and gave Albanians the
opportunity to freely move abroad. Since then, our
country has been coping with many of the economic
challenges and social problems common to a free
society.

12

The first two HIV/AIDS cases were diagnosed
and reported in Albania in 1993. The total number of
AIDS cases registered between 1993 and 2000 is 52.
Thus Albania is among the countries with a low
prevalence of HIV/AIDS, though the prevalence may
tend to increase. This latter is because of the following
factors: the young average age of the Albanian
population; the high number of Albanian emigrants
who move each year to and from countries with a
higher prevalence of HIV/AIDS; these people’s youth
and low level of information and education; the
increasing number of intravenous drug users, according
to the studies of different governmental and nongovernmental institutions; the deficiencies in the
functioning of the Albanian health-care system
regarding
prevention
and
diagnosis;
and
unemployment, migration and poverty and so forth.
To deal with this situation, the Albanian
Government has made serious efforts to put in place a
national strategy to fight HIV/AIDS and to increase
public awareness of this issue. This strategy aims at
creating a strong partnership between the Ministry of
Health and non-governmental institutions, with the
technical and financial support of the international
specialized organizations.
In this context, two national conferences on
policies of prevention and control of the HIV/AIDS
epidemic in Albania have been held, which have
addressed this problem and have issued a series of
practical guidelines. The Albanian Ministry of Health,
with the assistance of the World Health Organization
(WHO), has established the HIV/AIDS national
programme, as well as a network of laboratories and
rapid-test centres nationwide.
The main objectives of the national programme
are preventing further spread of the HIV/AIDS
infection and its becoming an epidemic among the
general population, and ensuring the necessary services
for diagnosis, treatment, counselling, support and relief
for persons at risk and those living with the infection.
The implementation of these objectives is based
on the strategic elements of political commitment,
preventive measures, surveying, monitoring and
research treatment, and health care and support for
those living with the infection. Cooperation between
WHO and the national programme has helped in having
the necessary infrastructure to diagnose HIV/AIDS and
in giving the proper treatment to infected persons.

A/S-26/PV.8

Recently, the Albanian Government adopted a
law on preventing the spread of HIV/AIDS infections
in the Republic of Albania. Under this law, a national
inter-ministerial committee has been established that is
presided over by the Deputy Prime Minister. This
committee also includes a group of experts.
In conclusion, I would like to express the support
of the Albanian Government for the establishment of a
global HIV/AIDS and health fund proposed by the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan. We
believe that the Declaration of Commitment that will
soon be adopted by this body paves the way towards
having more resources, solidarity, responsibility and
cooperation globally in the fight against HIV/AIDS.
The Acting President: I give the floor to
Ms. Nuualofa Tuuau-Potoi, Deputy Director-General of
Health of Samoa.
Ms. Tuuau-Potoi (Samoa): It is a great honour
for me to speak on this auspicious occasion on behalf
of the Government and people of Samoa. I bring with
me the very best of wishes from my Government and
people for a successful outcome of this gathering and
heartfelt sympathies for the loss of lives, young and
old, to this deadly disease.
The convening of this special session emphasizes
the seriousness, commitment, determination and
courage that our respective countries attach to
combating the HIV/AIDS pandemic. We have heard
poignant and moving accounts of the human suffering,
anguish and losses in each and every country
represented at this special session, particularly in those
regions that are seriously afflicted. These were not easy
to listen to, yet this is the reality we are faced with
today — so many lives lost to an insidious disease that
knows no boundaries and respects no race, religion,
creed or gender.
The emergence and the identification of the virus
that caused AIDS twenty years ago and the ensuing
devastation that it has since caused have dramatically
altered the ways in which we live, in particular our
lifestyles. It has touched every society in many
different ways and could not be contained. It is as
much a social problem as it is a deadly disease. It has
been instructive to all of us, yet at a cost so high and
threatening to the very existence of humankind.
My country is not immune to this disease, either.
Our current population is approximately 170,000. Like

other developing countries, we have a young
population, with more than half below the age of 20.
The very first case of HIV/AIDS in Samoa was
recorded in 1990. Since then and up to the present, a
total of 12 HIV/AIDS cases have been recorded, most
of whom were infected by transmission through sexual
contact. The very fact that the prevalence of HIV/AIDS
is low in Samoa is not a reason for complacency on our
part. Experience in our own country, regionally and
internationally has shown that if we are to prevent the
further spread of HIV/AIDS, we must face and address
the challenging realities brought about by this
pandemic.
In anticipation of the emergence of HIV/AIDS in
Samoa, my Government proceeded to develop its
national HIV/AIDS prevention and control programme
in 1987. Its key strategic aims were directed at the
promotion of public awareness about the causes of
HIV/AIDS, its modes of transmission and the shortand long-term consequences for individuals, their
families and their communities and the nation as a
whole.
Subsequently, a national AIDS coordinating
council and the technical AIDS committee were
established, pursuant to a Cabinet decision, in 1987 and
1988 respectively. Their roles were threefold: to
manage the implementation and monitoring of the
national AIDS prevention and control programme and
to coordinate national efforts in the drive to prevent the
spread of HIV/AIDS in Samoa. While prevention
remains central, care is also important; hence an
optimal integration of prevention and care are of the
essence.
The Department of Health in Samoa is the
national focal point for HIV/AIDS management and
control. It also provides pertinent leadership and
professional and technical support to the national AIDS
coordinating council and to the technical AIDS
committee.
The very serious and real threats of HIV/AIDS
and its consequences demanded a committed and
coordinated national approach to the management and
implementation of our national HIV/AIDS programme.
The multisectoral nature of HIV/AIDS and its broad
national implications brought together various interest
groups and stakeholders in Samoa to develop a national
HIV/AIDS policy, which was approved at the
beginning of this year. The theme values of our

13

A/S-26/PV.8

national HIV/AIDS policy are: access to quality
services,
professionalism,
partnership,
equity,
sustainability, faithfulness, love and compassion. These
reflect our commitment to the healthy island concept
and the Pacific way of life.
Our national HIV/AIDS policy aims to provide an
overarching framework for coordinating national
efforts and monitoring the wide range of multisectoral
responses to HIV/AIDS. It also ensures that the most
current information on HIV/AIDS is produced and
disseminated widely to all persons, targeting in
particular our youth and families in the rural areas. We
wish to acknowledge with much gratitude the kind
assistance of the World Health Organization, UNAIDS,
the United Nations Population Fund, the Secretariat of
the Pacific Community and the Governments of
Australia, New Zealand and Japan for their continued
financial and technical support in this connection.
All present here today are fully cognizant of
which behaviours lead to the greatest risks of
transmission and infection. While the incidence of
HIV/AIDS in Samoa is low, we realize that we cannot
rest on our laurels while an aggressive regional and
global awareness campaign is under way. In Samoa,
our culture is central to our way of life. We have a
strong affinity to our land and sea, based on our love
and respect for our cultural values and strong Christian
principles. It is through this bond that we are able to
have
workable
and
successful
collaborative
partnerships with all key stakeholders, namely our
churches, village councils, women’s groups, youth
groups and non-governmental organizations on
reproductive health, including family planning and
sexual health programmes to promote healthy and
responsible sexual lifestyles.
For small island developing States like Samoa,
the impact of the uncontrolled and rapid transmission
of the HIV/AIDS virus would be catastrophic. We have
a small and young population. To be faced with the real
threat of extinction is indeed distressing. We want to
survive as a race into the next millennium. We want to
see our children and future generations enjoy a secure
future.
Like those who spoke before me, we welcome the
establishment of the global HIV/AIDS and health fund.
Timely access to the fund would be pertinent to our
prevention and care efforts, and we hope that the low
prevalence of HIV/AIDS in the Pacific region will not

14

hinder the provision of financial, technical and medical
assistance to our region. While the onus of resource
allocation is on the Government of Samoa, it is
important that the appropriate technical and financial
assistance will continue to be sought from the
appropriate donor agencies and development partners
from time to time, when justified needs arise.
Very recently, I was sent a compelling message
written by a young student. This was how the world is
perceived through the eyes of the young:
“The paradox of our time in history is that we
have taller buildings but shorter tempers; wider
freeways but narrower viewpoints; we spend
more but have less; we buy more but enjoy it less.
We have been all the way to the moon and back,
but we have trouble crossing the street to meet
our neighbour. We have conquered outer space
but not inner space; we have cleaned up the air
but polluted the soul; we have split the atom but
not our prejudice. We have higher incomes but
lower morals; we have become long on quantity
but short on quality. These are the times of tall
men and short character; steep profits and
shallow relationships. These are the times of
world peace but domestic warfare; more leisure
but less fun; more kinds of food but less nutrition.
These are the days of two incomes and more
divorce; of fancier houses but broken homes. It is
a time when there is too much in the show
window and nothing in the stockroom; a time
when technology can bring information to you at
the tap of a key; and a time when you can choose
either to make a difference or to just ignore it.”
We know where we stand today. We have
achieved so much, and yet we have failed in so many
ways. The historic Declaration of Commitment that I
trust will be adopted this afternoon should give rise to
more holistic, comprehensive and concerted efforts and
actions at all levels in the fight against HIV/AIDS. No
nation is immune to this disease, and no person will be
spared this experience. HIV/AIDS could make its
presence felt through your parents, brothers, sisters,
sons, daughters, nieces, nephews or friends. We know
what must be done at the global, regional, national and
local levels. The time for more action is now.
The Acting President (spoke in English): I now
give the floor to Mrs. Astrid Heiberg, President of the

A/S-26/PV.8

International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies.
Mrs. Heiberg (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): The Red Cross and
Red Crescent movement protects life and health. It
ensures respect for human beings. It supports those in
need, without discrimination. We have taken too long
to understand what that means in the context of HIV
and AIDS. For many years, we were blind to what was
happening, deaf to those who told us.
We used to believe that HIV-positive people and
people living with AIDS were someone else. We used
to think that the Red Cross and Red Crescent
movement counted 100,000 persons living with HIV
and AIDS among its members and volunteers. We were
wrong. All 100 million of us — volunteers, members
and staff — belong to a movement that lives with HIV
and AIDS. We are members of, and related to,
communities that are being devastated by the biggest
humanitarian catastrophe the world faces, and which
threatens the future of our children.
I have seen that devastation. I have seen how
HIV/AIDS turns communities upside down, how it
ravages the ranks of the adults, the adults who are not
there to take care of the young and the elderly, to
provide income, to teach responsibility and to transfer
knowledge, because they are dead or confined to
sickbeds. I have seen children who must steal in order
to care for their younger siblings. I have met tired,
overburdened grandmothers who are in charge of large
numbers of children, without income, without a
pension, because there is no one else.
It is in the communities that the battle against
HIV and AIDS is going to be won. That is where we,
the volunteers, reinforce structures around those
affected. Other programmes support and strengthen
families and communities so they can care for their
own members, so that they can keep the children, the
increasing number of orphans, in surroundings where
they belong. Volunteers help the communities cope
through home-based care and a range of measures that
relieve the older members of the families and
communities, who are taking up the responsibility of
the orphans. It is in the communities that we the
volunteers can use our unique network to promote
prevention, because volunteers are part of the
community. We speak the language, we know the
jokes. Volunteers are the friends, peers and leaders who

are able to change mindsets and to raise awareness.
Billboards and lectures will not provide a change in
behaviour. You change through the influence of your
peers. When they change, you are closer to change
yourself.
I am proud to state that our national societies are
committed to this important work. Last year, 53 Red
Cross and Red Crescent societies throughout Africa
pledged to mobilize 2 million volunteers against the
virus over the next 10 years. Many other national
societies all over the world have made pledges and
commitments in order to support our common fight
against HIV and AIDS.
We have made a commitment to reduce the
stigma associated with HIV and AIDS. Again, we must
start somewhere. We shall start by looking at ourselves,
at our own attitudes and prejudices, because that is the
first step in the fight against discrimination. We are not
free from it. We must state clearly that there is no room
for discrimination in the Red Cross movement, that we
will not tolerate any attempt to restrict or exclude
people living with HIV and AIDS.
We must extend the protection of our emblems.
The Red Cross and the Red Crescent are powerful.
They mean protection, also for people living with HIV
and AIDS.
We call for partnerships. The International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
has already established close cooperation with vital,
complementary and committed partners, such as
UNAIDS and the global network of people living with
HIV and AIDS.
Now we call on Governments to build
partnerships with national Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies and with other members of civil society to
protect and care for people living with HIV and AIDS.
We look to the United Nations system for partnerships,
and look to the private sector for alliances to secure
access to affordable treatment and to protect
employees.
Yesterday, five of our volunteers who are living
with HIV participated in a dialogue session with
Governments. They told about their work as peer
educators, community workers, providers of care and
psychological support. They told about the fear and the
scepticism they have met, faced and overcome; about
the need to cooperate, to forge alliances between

15

A/S-26/PV.8

Governments and civil society; about the need to
secure the rights of people living with HIV and AIDS;
and about their own victories: the many people they
have helped and supported. I am humbled by their
efforts and contributions, and words cannot express the
respect I feel for their courage and generosity and their
humanity. They, and all other volunteers, are parts of
the solution.
My job — and ours, and that of those here in the
Assembly Hall — is to support and to empower them.
The Acting President: I give the floor to
Mr. John Richardson, Chairman of the delegation of the
European Community.
Mr. Richardson (European Community): I would
like to begin by extending President Prodi’s thanks to
those countries that took the initiative to ask for this
historic special session and to Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, who has driven the process forward so ably.
The statistics presented over recent days show
convincingly that the world cannot ignore the AIDS
epidemic. In developing countries, where 90 per cent
of all HIV infections occur, AIDS is reversing the hardwon gains in improving the quality of life. The average
life expectancy in developing countries, which had
increased since the 1950s, is now tumbling again. Last
year in Africa, 10 times as many people died from
HIV/AIDS as were killed in conflicts.
In contrast, we in Europe are fortunate to be alive
at this moment in our history. Never before has our
world enjoyed so much prosperity with so few external
threats. Global society is calling on the international
community for its recognition of the magnitude of the
problem and for its support in combating it.
This is therefore the hour of global solidarity. The
West must increase its efforts to help more nations and
people to break the vicious cycle of disease and
poverty.
As the Swedish Presidency of the European
Union already stated, on Monday, Europe is fully
committed to further stepping up its efforts to face this
epidemic and to increasing its support for the fight
against the three major communicable diseases:
HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis. Together these
diseases are killing more than 5 million people each
year. They are all on the increase. They are all affecting
the poorest of the poor.

16

This is the context of our recent work in the
European Community (EC) on a policy framework and
a programme of action on the three communicable
diseases.
Preventing HIV from spreading is difficult, but it
is possible. Some countries have now proved this by
slowing the growth of the epidemic or even reversing
it. Countries such as Senegal, Uganda and Thailand are
showing the way forward by continuous prevention
efforts, care for people with HIV and careful design of
the introduction and monitoring of antiretroviral
therapy.
The EC has been part of those efforts since 1987.
We learned through this process that openness, political
leadership, respect for human dignity and nondiscrimination are at the core of success. Partnership at
all levels, but especially with the people living with
HIV and with the non-governmental organization
community, is also a condition for progress in the
confrontation with this epidemic. Governments
responsive to the needs of their populations are also
very much part of the solution.
The international community, of which the
European Community is part, must help remove the
roadblocks that slow the impact of all individual and
community efforts. The roadblocks are, for instance,
ignorance, gender inequality, denial, discrimination,
lack of resources and also the lack of credible
investment in the development of preventive methods
such as vaccines and microbicidal products.
The overarching international development goal
of the Millennium Declaration — to reduce by half the
number of people living in extreme poverty by 2015 —
cannot be achieved without greater investment in
health and slowing the spread of the three major killer
diseases.
The EC recognizes that to achieve these goals set
by the international community will require far higher
levels of investment in health than in the past. Global
annual official development assistance for health is
estimated at $5 billion to $6 billion. The World Health
Organization estimates that making a real difference
for Africa alone would require an additional $12 billion
to $15 billion annually for health in its totality.
Beyond higher and more efficient investments,
the EC also recognizes that more can be done and must
be done on the prices of products and the development

A/S-26/PV.8

of new vaccines through really innovative approaches
and partnerships. Lack of affordable and appropriate
pharmaceuticals is a serious problem in many
developing countries, and especially for the poorest.
Effective solutions require international cooperation
and the participation of both public and private sectors
in developed and developing countries.
The European Commission calls for a much
broader application of effective global tiered pricing
for the benefit of the poorest countries. This requires
close cooperation with all interested parties, including
the pharmaceutical industry, developing countries and
international organizations, as well as with industrial
countries. Above all it requires setting up mechanisms
to make such a system operational.
The European Community also underlines the
importance of global rules on intellectual property
rights in promoting investments in new medicines, and
especially vaccines, in order to render prevention
efforts more effective in the future.
At the same time, the European Community
recalls the right of the members of the World Trade
Organization, under its rules, to invoke the relevant
provisions of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) to address
national health-policy concerns. The possibility exists
under the TRIPS Agreement to address health concerns
by, inter alia, using discretion to grant compulsory
licences in certain exceptional circumstances, provided
that the conditions of article 31 of the TRIPS
Agreement are fulfilled. The EC and its member States
are committed to the discussions currently taking place
in the TRIPS Council on endorsing the initiative of the
Africa Group to examine the link between intellectual
property and access to medicines. In this context, the
EC is also ready to look at the extent to which
technical assistance can take into account health
concerns in the concerned countries.
It is also our intention to increase significantly
our financial support for research and development.
Finally, the EC welcomes the creation of a global
fund as an additional mechanism to channel support to
the people and countries most in need. We are actively
engaged in preparatory discussions on the fund, in
particular to ensure that it will operate as it should.
We have called for extensive consultations with
all stakeholders and especially with the recipient

countries. In our opinion the fund’s efforts should be
seen as additional to ongoing and future investment in
improving health in general. An effective fund should
deliver greater resources faster, through simpler
coordinated mechanisms, with reduced transaction
costs for both donors and beneficiaries. Resources
should be linked to the achievement of defined health
outcomes.
The European Community and the Commission
will spare no effort to bring this about in partnership
with the global community. Together we will overcome
this epidemic and move towards a healthy world
without poverty.
The Acting President: I give the floor to
Mr. Robert Shafer, Chargé d’affaires of the Permanent
Observer Mission of the Sovereign Military Order of
Malta.
Mr. Shafer (Sovereign Military Order of Malta):
We are indebted to the Secretary-General and to the
General Assembly for their leadership and vision in
calling this twenty-sixth special session of the General
Assembly, on HIV/AIDS. The Sovereign Military
Order of Malta, with its legacy of 900 years of service
to the sick and poor, enthusiastically supports this
special session as one dedicated to those we try to
serve. It is imperative that all our efforts to combat the
scourge of this disease are coordinated on a global
scale. Today’s scattered and variously inadequate
initiatives must coalesce into a concerted, effective
world programme. Only the United Nations can
provide that leadership and coordination.
The raw statistics alone furnish compelling
reasons for this special session. With 3 million AIDS
deaths last year and 5.3 million new HIV infections,
there are now more than 36 million victims living with
this disease worldwide. We gather here to join our
resources into one single commitment to reverse the
alarming rate of new infections.
How do we fight this pandemic with success?
There are several measures that are essential: basic
medical care, including widespread HIV testing at the
local level, especially where the disease is already
rampant; affordable medicines supplied to HIV/AIDS
victims; increased financial and technical assistance for
local, national and international health agencies
engaged in fighting HIV/AIDS; and prevention and
research efforts supported by national legislation, with
a strong emphasis on the development of a vaccine.

17

A/S-26/PV.8

We are at only the first step in the very long
journey to fight what the Secretary-General has called
the most formidable development challenge of our
time. We must have clear, feasible strategies to protect
and help infected individuals, with special regard for
the most vulnerable groups in our societies. Assisting
the sick and the suffering has been the special focus of
the Sovereign Military Order of Malta. Throughout its
900-year history, the Order has seen many epidemics,
but none more calamitous to humanity than HIV/AIDS.
Prevention of infection is a needed long-range
solution to the crisis. Public education must be a
component of that solution, along with medicines and
treatment. Even the developed countries must
understand that without decisive and significant
prevention programmes on their part, the number of
infected persons in their countries could reach figures
similar to those in countries where the disease is
already a pandemic.
The local production of antiretroviral drugs in
some countries has lowered the number of sick
persons. But all the social and legal measures taken in
the struggle against the AIDS epidemic must be
accompanied by education. Education in traditional
values of morality, abstinence and care for our fellow
citizens is the foundation of our society and must be
restored to eradicate this plague.
While prevention is critical, the only definitive
means of eliminating AIDS is through the development
of a vaccine. The heaviest concentration of AIDS is in
poor countries, and this has impeded this process. We
must call upon the Governments of developed
countries to increase funding for AIDS research and
facilitate vaccine development.
This pandemic particularly victimizes the young.
In Africa, more than 60 percent of new HIV infections
strike people aged 15 to 24, although this age group is
only 20 percent of the population. Lack of basic
information about the disease and lack of health
education and of health care all contribute to this
horror, which falls especially upon young adults.
One particularly heartbreaking group of victims is
the children orphaned by the AIDS virus. In Africa
alone, there are 8 million to 9 million such children,
according to Dr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of
UNAIDS. Such groups of child victims must be
considered priorities by national and international
health programmes.

18

The resources allocated thus far are insufficient to
develop vaccines and preventive treatment for all those
who need it. We are convinced that a global strategy —
planned, programmed and coordinated with the support
of all in the decision-making process — can be the
most effective way to combat the present danger. We
are eager to participate in this first step towards the
definitive eradication of HIV/AIDS. The United
Nations must take the lead in drawing that plan
together so that it may be a clear call for all peoples
and nations of goodwill.
The Sovereign Military Order of Malta is fighting
HIV/AIDS to the utmost. We know that the aid
provided by one community is a drop of water in an
arid desert, but we are proud to renew our commitment
to eliminate this disease. Today, we do so in solidarity
with all the Member States of the United Nations, with
the entire international community and with all willing
partners in this campaign.
The Acting President: I give the floor to
Mrs. Ndioro Ndiaye, Deputy Director General of the
International Organization for Migration.
Mrs. Ndiaye (International Organization for
Migration) (spoke in French): On behalf of the Director
General, Mr. Brunson McKinley, the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) would like to extend
its compliments to all the countries that have taken the
initiative to hold this session and to the SecretaryGeneral, Kofi Annan, for his organizational efforts. We
welcome the decisions that will ensue from this
session.
The International Organization for Migration
estimates that, as we meet here today, there are
throughout the world approximately 150 million people
who are migrants. Each year between 2 million and 4
million people emigrate for good. More than 15 million
people are refugees or asylum seekers who have
escaped wars or situations in which human rights are
not respected.
People emigrate for many reasons. During 2000
alone, we saw that nearly 7 million people from 24
different countries were forced to flee from their homes
to escape conflict, social violence, repression and
persecution. Others move with clearly more joyful
prospects. I am referring to those who try to rejoin their
families or who leave in search of a better life. It is sad
to have to say here today that each of these reasons can

A/S-26/PV.8

be accompanied by factors that could make the
migrants more vulnerable to HIV.
If we take just the example of people who
emigrate in search of work — and fortunately this is
not always the case, but for the majority of cases this is
so — when they obtain a job, immigrant workers often
find themselves limited to work that nobody else wants
to do. They are frequently young, far from their
families and isolated from the community in which
they are living. Loneliness is not often mentioned as a
vulnerability factor for HIV, but it is clearly such a
factor for migrant workers. An added risk factor is their
easy access to alcohol and sexual relations with
prostitutes. Women sometimes run a particular risk,
either as migrant workers themselves or as partners of
migrant workers who return home infected with HIV.
Some people who migrate in search of a better
life discover that they have made a mistake: there are
no jobs at the end of their journey. These would-be
migrant workers are even more isolated. They live on
the margins of society. Some of the only ways available
to support themselves, such as selling sex, may put
them at higher risk of HIV infection.
In recent years, the world has been alerted to the
growth in trafficking in human beings. Having been
ensnared in prostitution networks by traffickers is one
of the biggest vulnerability factors of all as far as HIV
is concerned. Girls and boys who have been trafficked
for sex work have very little control indeed over what
happens to them, including whether or not they will use
condoms.
Much can be done to reduce the HIV risks and
vulnerabilities faced by migrants and people who are
mobile. Governments, non-government organizations
and groups of migrants in almost every country are
working to prevent AIDS and to promote access to care
and support for mobile populations. IOM stresses
prevention in particular throughout the migration
process. It uses two means in particular. One is through
sporting and other events, which can be a useful way of
getting AIDS messages to people whose legal status in
the country might not be in order. IOM is also working
to find appropriate means and messages to reach
women and girls who are at risk of being trafficked to
Europe, in particular, for sex work. The main objective
is to prevent trafficking by providing information and
to assist trafficking victims through a project that helps
them to return home. In another project, IOM is

working with national and non-governmental
organizational partners in particular to set up mobile
units in risk zones along major transit routes. The units
offer information and voluntary counselling and testing
for HIV and other sexually transmitted infections to
mobile people and local residents.
National projects are important, but they are
clearly not sufficient. People move across borders and
efforts to reach out to them with HIV/AIDS prevention
and access to care must also cross borders. Several
regional initiatives for mobile populations have been
set up, for example in West Africa and in South East
Asia. These must be extended elsewhere. IOM has
recently helped officials in Caribbean and Balkan
countries come together to discuss the AIDS-related
needs of migrants and people who are mobile in their
regions.
The needs in this field are great. They include
improving the database that will help planners and
policy makers defend the need for action programmes.
They also include training people who might be able to
set up such programmes but do not know how to do so.
They include, finally, establishing regional centres of
expertise so that such knowledge can be shared. Public
health, knowledge and experience must be able to
move around the world just as easily as people now do.
Today, the problem of HIV/AIDS and population
mobility is not a national or even a regional issue. It is
a global issue. That is why IOM welcomes the creation
of a global fund to combat HIV/AIDS and strongly
believes that any such fund must take into account the
special vulnerability of migrant populations and
specifically provide for them.
Many of us in this Hall have travelled long
distances. We are lucky, because we will go back home
and families will still be there. We have jobs. We have
access to information and to health services. Not all
people who travel are so lucky.
The Acting President: I give the floor to
Ms. K. Burke Dillon, Executive Vice-President of the
Inter-American Development Bank.
Ms. Dillon (Inter-American Development Bank):
AIDS is a challenge to development that affects every
continent. The transformation of AIDS from health
concern to global development threat reflects the
rapidity with which HIV has spread and the magnitude
of its economic and social consequences. It also

19

A/S-26/PV.8

underscores the need for quick, decisive and sustained
actions. AIDS is radically changing our perspective on
the need for international cooperation because it cannot
be stopped without a coordinated and collaborative
global effort. That is why we are here today. This
special session provides the international community
with an opportunity to speak with one voice.
The Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) is
a committed partner in the international effort to halt
the spread of HIV/AIDS. In March of this year, at the
Summit of the Americas in Quebec, our heads of State
agreed that HIV/AIDS is a threat to the security of the
region and reaffirmed their resolve to combating the
disease and its consequences.
The challenges that face the countries of Latin
America and the Caribbean vary. They vary by HIV
prevalence; they vary by the nature of the societal and
political response and by the socio-economic context in
which the epidemic is occurring. Prevalence levels in
the Caribbean are the highest outside of sub-Saharan
Africa and in Central America the epidemic is growing
rapidly. On the other hand, in other subregions, overall
HIV/AIDS prevalence is still relatively low, with high
prevalence found only in specific sub-populations.
How can the IDB help? The IDB can facilitate the
regional dialogue on HIV/AIDS. It can provide
technical assistance and it can lend. There is still work
to be done in our region to raise awareness and to
increase information about HIV/AIDS. At the same
time, some of our countries have made important
progress in the fight against AIDS and these best
practices must be shared. The IDB can bring together
Governments, non-governmental organizations, the
networks of people living with AIDS, labour, religious
leaders and the private sector. We work with most of
these groups regularly. We stand ready to help our
Governments and civil society facilitate dialogue at the
local and national levels. In March 2002, at our annual
meeting in Fortaleza, Brazil, the IDB will host a major
seminar on HIV/AIDS.
However, as a development bank, our main
contribution in the fight against AIDS will be through
our technical assistance and our lending. For our
poorest member countries, we can lend on very
concessional terms. To provide significant grant
funding for AIDS, the IDB would have to raise the
money from donors. The IDB would coordinate any

20

such approach to donors with the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).
In our lending and our technical assistance, we
want to work with other agencies and not to duplicate
efforts. We want to find what we do best. One area
where we have extensive experience is the
strengthening of national health systems. As we have
heard in many discussions in the past two days, this is
critical to an effective response to AIDS. To date, we
have lent almost $2 billion to make national health
systems more effective and efficient.
Another area in which our experience could give
us a comparative advantage is that of programmes for
women, youth and socially excluded groups. However,
the Bank will look for opportunities to address
HIV/AIDS across the spectrum of our projects and in
our policy dialogue with Governments. As Peter Piot
told our Executive Board, investments that do not
consider AIDS are poor investments.
Success in the fight against HIV/AIDS requires
partnership. None of us can do it alone. We must
combine resources and efforts. The IDB will work
closely with UNAIDS, the Pan American Health
Organization and other agencies, and with civil society,
particularly the regional networks of people living with
AIDS.
The time is right to take the decisive step towards
a full-scale AIDS response. The IDB will play its part
to help ensure that there is such a response in Latin
America and the Caribbean. We are in a unique
position to understand and address the needs of our
region. We are conscious of this special mandate and
will actively support our Governments as they address
HIV/AIDS.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Ms. Rosemarie Paul, Deputy Director and Head of the
Health Department of the Commonwealth Secretariat.
Ms. Paul (Commonwealth Secretariat): Over the
past days, every country, through their representatives,
has publicly acknowledged that HIV/AIDS is a global
emergency requiring urgent and concerted action.
HIV/AIDS is robbing us of our precious human
resources, eroding our hard-won gains in health and
development and posing a serious threat to the lives of
individuals, families and whole communities. The
response to this crisis has been a unanimous
commitment at the national level to lead the vital,

A/S-26/PV.8

expanded and sustained actions that harness the
valuable potential of all sectors of society and address
the critical challenges identified by Secretary-General
Kofi Annan in his report to the fifty-fifth session of the
General Assembly.
The Commonwealth is a voluntary association of
54 sovereign States that share a history, a common
language, goals and principles, among which are those
relating to the dignity and rights of individuals. The
Commonwealth Secretariat is the inter-governmental
body serving this grouping of equal partners that, over
time, have developed, and use to mutual advantage,
mechanisms to address common challenges. These
challenges arise in many fields — including the
economic, legal, health and education fields, to
mention just a few. The responses take cognizance of
youth and include a gender perspective.
HIV/AIDS is undoubtedly a common challenge,
perhaps the greatest so far faced by Commonwealth
member States, which stretch across the globe, from
East to West and from North to South, with the vast
majority being developing countries in Africa, Asia
and the Caribbean. Commonwealth countries represent
approximately 30 per cent of the world’s population,
but they carry a disproportionate 60 per cent of the
world’s HIV/AIDS burden.
In 1999 the Commonwealth Heads of
Government, at their meeting in Durban, declared
HIV/AIDS to be a global emergency and called upon
all sectors to mount a coherent and concerted response.
They personally pledged to lead the fight — a pledge
that they have reiterated at various regional forums and
again here, at this special session. Since the Durban
meeting of Heads of Government, the Commonwealth
Secretariat has been steadily working, in partnership
with
the
Commonwealth
Foundation,
the
Commonwealth Business Council and Commonwealth
non-governmental organizations, using its advocacy,
brokerage and catalytic roles to assist member
countries in obtaining maximum benefit from readily
available resources, and also to leverage additional
resources to combat HIV/AIDS.
The global call to action has been sounded and
strategic action areas have been defined and agreed
upon. The Commonwealth Secretariat will continue to
work with all partners with, and for, the member
countries. Within the parameters of the agreed global
and national plans, it will identify its particular and

specific niche. It will not duplicate the efforts of, or
compete with, other organizations, but will work
collaboratively with all, using the special advantages
that result from Commonwealth fraternity and
commonalities to achieve synergies for the common
good.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Jimmie Rodgers, Deputy Director-General of the
Secretariat of the Pacific Community of the Pacific
Islands Forum.
Mr. Rodgers (Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat):
Allow me, first of all, to join the accolades of all
previous speakers in congratulating the SecretaryGeneral for leading this global initiative in our fight
against the spread of HIV/AIDS.
This special session of the United Nations
General Assembly is both timely and critical for our
countries. It is timely because, for the very first time in
the last 20 years, leaders of the world community are
prepared to stand up and say with one voice that we
will take on the fight against the scourge of HIV/AIDS.
We will take stock of our previous modalities for
containing and controlling the virus. We will look more
seriously at bringing resources to bear, both human and
financial, in all our countries — whether developing or
developed, large or small — in order to better position
ourselves to contain, control and, hopefully, ultimately
to eradicate HIV/AIDS.
Never before in the history of humanity have we
faced so formidable a foe, one that has the potential to
wipe out complete populations. Never before has
humankind’s right to exist been threatened to such an
extent that, if nothing is done to halt the rapid
transmission of this deadly virus, some countries could
be devoid of their entire populations within the next
two to three decades.
For the small developing island countries and
territories of the Pacific region, the impact of an
uncontrolled rapid transmission of the HIV/AIDS virus
would be disastrous. The Pacific region comprises 22
island countries and territories. Collectively they only
have about 8.5 million people and approximately just
over half a million square kilometres of land, scattered
over 33 million square kilometres of water. To put that
size into perspective, the whole of Europe can fit into
the Exclusive Economic Zone of French Polynesia,
with room to spare. A feature of the Pacific islands is
their geographical isolation in a huge ocean, which can

21

A/S-26/PV.8

be both an advantage and a disadvantage in our efforts
to control the HIV virus. Another feature of the Pacific
islands is that they account for more than 55 per cent of
the world’s languages. English literacy rates are low in
many of the Anglophone countries. These are some of
the challenges we face in the fight against the
HIV/AIDS virus.
However, vision and foresight are not lacking.
Many Pacific island countries have already developed
national integrated multisectoral strategic plans to
contain HIV/AIDS. In many of those strategic plans the
roles of non-governmental organizations, churches and
civil society groups are very important ingredients of
service delivery and outreach activities. Effective
partnership has been the key in those strategic plans,
whether with regard to prevention, education
awareness or care and support of HIV/AIDS patients.
Complementing the national service provision are
regional organizations that provide technical advice,
training, research and backstopping services to member
countries and territories. The secretariat of the Pacific
Community, where I have the privilege to serve, is the
lead regional technical agency in the Pacific that works
with Pacific island countries and territories on
HIV/AIDS. The Pacific region has, for the past four
years, had a regional strategy on HIV/AIDS. We are
now reviewing that regional strategy.
Like all countries represented here from other
regions of the world, Pacific island countries and
territories come to this special session with great
expectations. We welcome the establishment of the
global HIV/AIDS and health fund and, like other
countries, we hope that access to the fund will be easy
and timely and that equity based on merit will be a
feature in obtaining assistance from the fund.
Part of the solution in our fight against
HIV/AIDS must start from having a correct perception
of the nature of the enemy we are fighting. The major
reason for the low level of recognition, and therefore
priority, accorded to HIV/AIDS in many countries in
the past two decades is that HIV/AIDS was labelled in
many countries as purely a health problem. The
HIV/AIDS pandemic that we have heard about over the
past two and a half days has gone beyond health issues.
It is not merely a health problem. The fact that this
special session is honoured by the presence of heads of
State and Government, ministers and other high
officials bears witness to the fact that we are no longer

22

dealing with a mere health issue — we are dealing with
a global and national disaster, the worst of its kind that
has ever affected humankind.
The Pacific island countries have been greatly
encouraged by the statements of support and
commitment made by the developed countries both to
the global fund initiative as well as in their respective
national programmes to assist developing countries. I
wish to invite those countries to provide some focused
programme approach in the Pacific.
The challenge of HIV/AIDS is real. The fruits of
the declaration of commitment we will adopt can only
be seen in action — action that makes a difference. It is
the hope of all developing countries that we will walk
the walk and collectively take the fight to our
adversary. Time is of the essence. It took the world 20
years to put the HIV/AIDS epidemic at the very top of
its political agenda. In the past two and a half days, we
have seen and heard what HIV/AIDS has done in those
20 years. We have also heard what it will do in the
future. It is now time to act and possibly the only thing
that is worse than the HIV/AIDS epidemic itself is
inaction by the world community.
The Acting President: I give the floor to
Mr. Juan Somavía, Director-General of the
International Labour Organization.
Mr.
Somavía
(International
Labour
Organization): It is a particular pleasure to take the
floor under your guidance, Sir.
I am before the Assembly today to state that the
International Labour Organization (ILO) and its
tripartite constituents are team players in the global
effort to combat the HIV/AIDS pandemic. We
wholeheartedly support the leadership of SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan in his personal commitment to
spearheading the international community’s global
action against HIV/AIDS.
The ILO will implement in the workplace the
declaration of commitment of this General Assembly. It
contains many principles that reflect the core mandate
of the ILO’s non-discrimination, social protection,
gender and prevention strategies and its longstanding
commitment to protecting rights at work. HIV/AIDS is
not just a public health issue. It is a workplace issue —
and the international community has decided for the
first time that it is a workplace issue. It is also a

A/S-26/PV.8

development challenge and the source of widespread
insecurity.
ILO’s commitment to being a partner in this
challenge stems from its social mandate in the field of
rights at work, as well as the threat posed by the
pandemic to its primary goal of providing men and
women with decent and productive work in conditions
of freedom, equity, security and human dignity.
Initially, we have responded to this challenge by
developing a code of practice on HIV/AIDS in the
workplace, which was unanimously adopted by our
Governing Body last Friday, 22 June. It was formally
launched here in the United Nations on Monday on the
occasion of this conference, when I transmitted that
document to the Secretary-General. This code is a
pioneering and comprehensive blueprint for addressing
HIV/AIDS in the workplace. This has never been done;
this is a new instrument. It is the result of consensus
reached by Governments, employers and workers
representing all 175 States members of the ILO. It
constitutes a balanced approach to problems of
discrimination, confidentiality, employee benefits, care,
treatment and other AIDS-related workplace issues.
As we all know, HIV/AIDS is a major human
tragedy not only for those affected, but also for all of
us individually. Nobody — none of us — can look the
other way, although, unfortunately, denial continues to
be prevalent in so many attitudes. And yet, many
leaders are facing reality. I recall the address by a head
of State to this Assembly during the Millennium
Summit last year in which he shared with us the
dramatic fact that his country stands to lose half of its
population within a decade because of AIDS.
We must react to the crisis unfolding in so many
places where skilled and experienced workers are
dying; where children are forced to work and head
households because all the adults either are too sick to
work or have died (13 million children today head
households); and where there are no longer enough
teachers to keep school systems functioning or health
workers to take care of the sick. All of these examples
have been cited by speakers at this special session.
Hard won gains in terms of employment and
social protection are being reversed because of
HIV/AIDS. Even at the enterprise level, the effects of
AIDS include loss of earnings, loss of skills, reduced
productivity and the loss of markets as the consumer
base is whittled away.

The ILO’s new programme on HIV/AIDS in the
world of work is just beginning. Through it, we will
work with our tripartite constituents at the national and
regional levels to promote prevention in the workplace
and mitigate the social and economic impact of the
epidemic. The next step will be to prepare a manual on
information, education and communication to help
implement the code of practice so that people can know
how to use it.
Concern for HIV/AIDS is also reflected in other
ILO activities. The ILO International Programme on
the Elimination of Child Labour will expand its efforts
to address the needs of children orphaned by AIDS and
forced into the world of work. The gender dimensions
of HIV/AIDS will be addressed within the framework
of our programmes on gender and other activities to
help reduce the particular vulnerability of women and
girls to the disease and to discrimination. We want to
put the ILO’s unique tripartite structure and our
doctrine of social dialogue at the service of the global
struggle against HIV/AIDS. To this end, we have
decided to become a cosponsor of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, which will
strengthen the basis for partnerships with the other
cosponsors and organizations of the United Nations
system as a whole. I must note at this point the
incredible work that Peter Piot has carried out in order
to make this session a success in terms of its
preparation and of the care that he has given to dealing
with the complex and difficult issues and to bringing to
our attention the reality of these problems.
Thus, in the spirit of hope raised by the
Secretary-General, let us work together to implement
the declaration of commitment for the sake of all those
affected by HIV/AIDS, in the interest of protecting
development gains and social progress and in the hope
that future generations will feel that, today, we did the
right thing for them. It will be the children of today and
of tomorrow who will ultimately judge the
effectiveness of the plans being approved today. Let us
make sure that our actions of tomorrow will not let
them down.
The Acting President: I give the floor to
Ms. Anna Kajumulo Tibaijuka, Executive Director of
the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
(Habitat).
Ms. Tibaijuka (United Nations Centre for
Human Settlements (Habitat)): Earlier this month, the

23

A/S-26/PV.8

special session on Istanbul +5 adopted a Declaration on
Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New
Millennium, which resolves to intensify efforts at the
international and national levels against HIV/AIDS and
in particular to formulate and implement appropriate
policies and actions to address the impact of HIV/AIDS
on human settlements. It also recognizes the problem
of accessing financial resources for housing by
HIV/AIDS victims and the need for shelter solutions
for accommodating HIV/AIDS victims, especially
orphans and the terminally ill. The Declaration
therefore recognizes the relevance and role of housing
and shelter, or living environments, in the prevention,
care and treatment of HIV/AIDS.
As regards prevention, the link between poverty
and HIV/AIDS prevalence is now well established.
One characteristic of the circumstances of poor people
who are most vulnerable to HIV/AIDS infection is
inadequate shelter. Poor living conditions, including
overcrowding and, in extreme cases, homelessness,
undermine safety, privacy and efforts to promote selfrespect, human dignity and the attendant responsible
sexual behaviour. Young girls living in overcrowded
conditions are most at risk, and quite a number have
been subjected to incest, rape and associated HIV
infection.
Equally critical and often overlooked are the pace
and nature of population concentration processes in
cities, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, as a factor in
the spread of HIV/AIDS. The conditions of uprooted
migrants who are often income-seeking members of
once close-knit family units and communities; the dayto-day precariousness of first-income earners in cities;
the sense of solitude and helplessness that the first
impact of the big city invariably brings; and the lack of
social and psychological support in easing the
transition from rural to urban ways of life all combine
to create the perfect conditions for the spread of
HIV/AIDS.
Yet, cities are not only HIV/AIDS incubators;
they can also provide an opportunity for better
education and information on and prevention of its
risks. Public information is an essential component of
the good urban governance campaigns that the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) is
spearheading in many cities in all continents. As the
United Nations focal point for cities and local
authorities, Habitat will also encourage mayors and

24

world associations of cities to strengthen their efforts
in combating HIV/AIDS.
Beyond prevention, housing and adequate living
conditions have been established as critical in the
success of care and treatment regimes for HIV/AIDS.
A pioneering study recently released by Columbia
University has reached the conclusion that, in New
York, marginalized persons once deemed unlikely to
comply with difficult therapies can thrive on them
when they have secure housing with supportive
services responsive to their complex needs. A major
premise of the Bailey House model in New York is the
reciprocal nature of housing and supportive services.
Homelessness and conditions associated with
homelessness are barriers to accessing services and
adhering to service plans and treatment regimens; the
provision of housing facilitates access, utilization and
adherence.
These lessons are relevant to developed and
developing countries alike on the importance of shelter
in treatment and care for people living with HIV/AIDS.
Developed countries that have yet to do so could
emulate this Bailey House example, which is a clear
Habitat best practice. For the developing countries, the
findings of this study point to the double challenge not
only of access to antiretroviral drugs, but also of the
need to improve housing and supportive care,
especially for slum dwellers, who make up over 50 per
cent of the urban population in developing countries.
The President took the Chair.
Moreover, homelessness or unstable housing has
been established as one of the biggest risks for
continuous care. Individuals who are struggling with
housing issues are often in and out of care as other
more pressing needs compete for time and attention.
Most worrisome is the fact that, if antiretroviral
therapy is to be successful, adherence must be observed
strictly to avoid the development of treatment-resistant
strains of HIV. This clearly suggests that supporting
developing countries’ access to antiretroviral drugs as
well as requisite supportive housing and services are
now global public goods.
Let me end by emphasizing the importance of
giving priority to prevention in a comprehensive and
integrated strategy to fight the pandemic. In situations
where 25 per cent of the population is infected, we are
faced with disaster. As such, prevention information
and education campaigns, followed by prevention

A/S-26/PV.8

services, are a matter of life or death for society.
Economic, social and cultural realities in seriously
affected countries dictate, among other things, the
following principles for a preventive package: first,
household-to-household and institution-to-institution
campaigns on responsible sexual behaviour, including
safer sex; and secondly, comprehensive HIV testing
and counselling. The availability of antiretroviral drugs
is critical to promoting prevention because it has
provided an incentive for people to wish to know their
HIV status. If infected, they can at least take steps to
live positively with HIV/AIDS. If free of the virus,
they have greater reason to safeguard themselves
against infection.
In my intervention, I have outlined the shelter
dimension and the importance of a human settlementsbased approach to HIV/AIDS control, care and
treatment. Habitat, as part of the United Nations
Secretariat and under the guidance and leadership of
Secretary-General Kofi Annan within the framework of
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
system, is ready to play its part in the follow-up to this
special session.
The President: I give the floor to Ms. Thoraya A.
Obaid, Executive Director of the United Nations
Population Fund.
Ms. Obaid (United Nations Population Fund): I
am honoured to address the General Assembly for the
first time since my appointment on 1 January, but I am
sad that my first words here are on this tragic matter of
HIV/AIDS.
In the worst affected countries, the pandemic
threatens to destroy a whole generation of leaders,
workers and parents and to create a generation of
orphans. In many countries not yet fully aware of the
danger in all regions of the world beyond Africa, the
infection is creeping through the population.
HIV/AIDS is preparing to strike in full force.
Today we are striking back. Today AIDS has
brought us together. We are united in our purpose, and
unity offers the only prospect of success. We are united
today across all boundaries, barriers and cultures. The
negotiations have been long and difficult, but as we
study the draft declaration we know that all differences
were set aside for one common goal: to say “no” to the
spread of HIV/AIDS and to say “yes” to prevention,
care and treatment.

Consensus-building around social issues is
extremely difficult because it touches the identity of
nations, communities and individuals. Discussion of
social issues and social questions polarizes viewpoints
and may seem to widen the gap between cultures. But
in the end the overriding social purpose concentrates
our minds and enables us to bridge all cultural gaps,
not because we want to go home with an agreed
formulation of words, but because all of us, each in our
own way, want to save people’s lives.
The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) is
one of the seven sponsors of UNAIDS, a leading global
force and, I believe, one of the leading success stories
of inter-agency cooperation in the United Nations. We
all work together within our mandates, utilizing our
individual comparative advantages to contribute to a
comprehensive and synergistic response. For UNFPA,
our area of comparative advantage is prevention. We
have worked hard over the past 30 years with
Governments and civil society institutions and
international organizations to help countries provide
reproductive health information and services. Now
countries are using the experience and expertise gained
over a generation to deliver information, to train health
workers and to provide reproductive health services,
including prevention and treatment for HIV/AIDS. We
are putting HIV/AIDS in a health context that includes
other sexually transmitted diseases, as well as diseases
such as malaria and tuberculosis, which facilitate HIV
transmission.
We are also concerned with putting the pandemic
in a societal and development context, a context that
includes poverty, illiteracy and lack of access to health
services — basically, a context of inequality. Women
are increasingly the victims of this disease as a
consequence of their powerlessness and of
discrimination and lack of resources. Women need the
power to protect themselves from HIV infection. They
need information; they need services; and they need to
be empowered to exercise their right to say “no”.
UNFPA-supported programmes also reach out to
boys and men. Our experience shows that successful
programmes do not blame or exclude people. Leaders
at all levels, and especially community leaders, are
engaging men in dialogue to ensure responsible sexual
behaviour. They are discussing the need for men to
respect women and girls and to treat them as equals.
They are asking adult men to set a good example for
boys as they grow into manhood by respecting their

25

A/S-26/PV.8

partners, by empowering their daughters and by
educating all their children.
When it comes to adolescents and young people,
we may find it difficult to speak of such culturally
sensitive topics, but we must find a way. We live in a
rapidly changing environment. Cultures become
stronger when they adapt to change and learn to
manage that change while building on the wisdom of
elders and the energy of the young. The changing
environment requires that we listen to children and
young people, communicating with them about matters
that concern them and matters that may also confuse
them — matters that are culturally sensitive but that are
essential to their well being.
All of our different cultures have common
elements. One among those is of critical importance:
the value of knowledge. We should not fear that
information
about
sexuality
will
encourage
promiscuity, for ignorance is our worst enemy.
Hundreds of studies and long experience show that
when armed with information young people can, and
will, take the correct decisions to protect themselves.
But we must trust them, and we must provide them
with the necessary information and access to
counselling and appropriate services.
From our experience at the country level we
know that HIV prevention works, and it works most
effectively in partnerships. I would like to tell the
Assembly quickly about one specific partnership, the
African Youth Alliance, which brings together
Governments,
national
non-governmental
organizations, community and religious leaders,
UNFPA, international non-governmental organizations
and the private sector. With support from the Gates
Foundation, we are expanding programmes for youth
nationwide in four African countries — Botswana,
Ghana, Tanzania and Uganda. Those countries are all
committed to fighting HIV/AIDS, and we are helping
their young people to acquire the skills, information
and services they need to avoid infection. The project
is unprecedented in scale and will serve as a model for
other programmes in other regions of the world.
With our emphasis on prevention, UNFPA is at
the frontline of the battle against HIV/AIDS. With our
partners we have developed a global strategy for
reproductive health security. Implementing that
strategy will ensure that Governments and communities
have the essentials they need to protect the

26

reproductive health of their peoples. Funding is
urgently needed to implement the strategy. It is also
needed for education and awareness campaigns, for
training health care providers and counsellors and for
improving health systems.
Lastly, this special session on HIV/AIDS has
agreed on what needs to be done to prevent the further
spread of infection and how to do it. Now the task is to
translate the draft declaration into concrete actions in
each country and community in partnership with
national stakeholders. UNFPA is dedicated to this task.
We come from a wide spectrum of cultural
backgrounds and differences of approach, but we are
committed to one purpose: saving people’s lives.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Mark
Malloch Brown, Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme.
Mr.
Malloch
Brown
(United
Nations
Development Programme): In the closing hours of this
special session we can all accept that we are quite
simply facing the most devastating global epidemic in
modern history. The General Assembly has heard the
statistics this week that there are now 36 million people
living with HIV/AIDS and that, in the worst affected
parts of the world, more than one in four adults are
infected. But given the uncertain science of
forecasting, we have not so fully confronted what
happens if the disease is not checked: infection levels
reaching perhaps hundreds of millions, a generation
without parents, and economies collapsing as a slavetrade-like effect occurs, with the economically
productive generation lost and leaving behind it
societies of children and grandparents.
That is why this must be the year that the world
finally goes on a war-footing. Doing so requires us to
focus on three chief objectives: preventing new
infections and reversing the spread of the epidemic,
expanding equitable access to new HIV treatments, and
alleviating the disastrous impact of AIDS on human
development.
Whether we are able to succeed will depend on
mobilizing all elements of society — from international
organizations to political leaders, from businesses to
foundations and civil society groups — to tackle this
problem together. This General Assembly special
session gives us a framework to do this.

A/S-26/PV.8

This week all have agreed that HIV/AIDS is
much more than simply a public health concern.
Preventing its spread requires strong national political
leadership driving a range of initiatives, including sex
education in schools, public awareness campaigns,
programmes in the workplace, mobilization of religious
and community leaders, action to mitigate the impact
on poverty and essential social services, support for
orphans, and tough policy decisions in ministries of
finance to ensure optimal allocation of resources to
cope with the crisis.
The estimate that we have been discussing this
week for an adequate global response to HIV/AIDS is
$7 billion to $10 billion annually. That might sound
like a large sum of money, but even that will give us
only the tools to tackle the direct problems of
prevention and treatment on a limited basis. Without
increased development assistance and deeper debt
relief to support national poverty reduction efforts, and
without shoring up the provision of social services,
which is severely affected now by the loss of human
resources due to AIDS, efforts in the area of AIDS
alone will be built on sand. Poverty, ignorance, gender
inequalities and inadequate services remain among the
most serious factors fuelling the spread of the epidemic
and hindering access to treatment.

hope that the scale of our efforts lives up to the
challenge we all face.
The President: I now give the floor to
Ms. Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women.
Ms. Heyzer (United Nations Development Fund
for Women): We are gathered at the close of these
historic three days, when Governments of the world
convened as one body for the first time to address the
greatest crisis of our time. We in the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) feel a sense
of hope because of what our Governments have
managed to accomplish together in the draft declaration
that has emerged from this special session. If the strong
gender perspective that has been incorporated into this
joint draft declaration of commitment is reflected in all
policies, resource allocations and actions from this
point forward, we can truly turn the tide of HIV/AIDS.
I would like to very briefly summarize the outcome for
women and girls of this historic meeting in four overall
points.
First, the greater threat that HIV/AIDS poses for
women and girls — especially the young — and the
effects of the pandemic on women’s lives and futures
are now without question.

Under the leadership of the Secretary-General,
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
as part of the UNAIDS coalition, is absolutely
committed to ensuring that we achieve real results. Let
me just mention two things. We are putting together an
information and communications technology network
to ensure follow-up to this session, to ensure that
networks of practitioners are drawn together over the
Internet to share best practices and to ensure effective
follow-up.

Secondly, there is a fast-growing understanding
that gender inequality and power imbalances between
women and men in every society heighten the
vulnerability of women and girls to infection and leave
them with heavier burdens of care, especially when
HIV/AIDS enters households and communities. At the
same time, the world is gradually acknowledging that
because of their sex, women and girls have limited
access to information, prevention, treatment, care,
support and services.

Secondly, we in UNDP have this week sent out an
announcement to all our staff reminding them that
under our health insurance we are all covered for the
use of antiretroviral drugs in case of HIV infection. So,
for the 3,000 United Nations staff and families, many
of them in UNDP, we are determined to ensure that
they have the access to the best treatment, wherever in
the world they serve. We challenge the private sector to
match that in their provision of health care to their own
colleagues and employees.

Thirdly, there is a new level of awareness. We
have recognized that we need to deepen our
understanding of the gender perspective of HIV/AIDS.
In that way, we will be able to translate our declaration
into targeted plans and programmes and into equal
access to information, services, protection and concrete
results.

This is a terrible tragedy. This week we have
shown that we can come together to meet it. Let us

Finally, there is a sense of urgency. We leave this
special session with a new possibility. A global fund is
under construction, a clean slate on which we can
inscribe the lessons learned from two decades of
HIV/AIDS. If the gender issues highlighted this week

27

A/S-26/PV.8

are adequately addressed at this new starting point, and
if we as the international community involve women
equally in the design of the global fund and into the
decisions about its mechanisms, operation and
allocations, we can feel confident that we will have
learned from history, and will not be doomed to repeat
it.
As the HIV/AIDS crisis continues to unfold,
danger and opportunity are the two possibilities. The
outcome will depend in large part on whether we heed
this special session’s call — the call to recognize the
ways in which the epidemic has different causes and
consequences for males and females, and the call to
approach every policy, programme and plan from a
gender perspective.
What, in tangible terms, does a gender
perspective mean? Some data about AIDS, for
example, are well known. Other resources remain
invisible. We know that 22 million people have
succumbed to AIDS, but we tend not to notice the tens
of millions of women and girls who have had to feed,
nurse, clean and comfort those 22 million as death
approached. I would like to stress that we now have a
possibility of making a difference. A gender-responsive
global fund offers new promise to the women and girls
who care for the millions left sick and orphaned. It
provides an opportunity to design and reformulate
international cooperation that will assist all countries to
address the kind of issues that will make a difference to
women’s lives. Let me, very quickly, list what some of
those have to be.
We have to address the setting of realistic targets,
linking each directly to gender equality. We must
systematically involve women in the development of
all AIDS research policies, strategies and interventions.
We must separate all data by sex to increase our
understanding in every country of who is affected,
what factors help and hinder the spread of the virus,
who suffers most from its impact, what form that
suffering takes, and what kind of interventions are
required. We must undertake gender reviews of
national laws, policies and budgets related to HIV
prevention, treatment, care and impact. We need to
guarantee the rights of women and girls to legal
protection, including their rights to land and property,
as well as equal access to treatment and care and
freedom from stigma, silence and harmful practices and
customs. We must improve the availability of, and

28

access to, prevention services and resources, including
female and male condoms.
The new global fund will certainly be different in
size and scope. We have a chance to make it just as
unique in its philosophy, designed from the start to
ensure and to prove that gender equality need not
remain a lofty ideal, but can be a guiding principle. As
we succeed, our reward will be an increase in the
millions of women and men, girls and boys, living
longer, better, happier lives in a world made safer,
more just and more humane. We owe this to our
children.
The President: I now give the floor to
Ms. Beatrice Were, Key African Contact of the
International Community of Women Living with
HIV/AIDS.
Ms. Were (International Community of Women
Living with HIV/AIDS): On behalf of the millions of
women living with HIV and AIDS, I feel enormous
honour in speaking to the Assembly, especially on this
very critical topic. I feel most honoured to speak on
behalf of women. As a mother who has lived with HIV
for the last 10 years, I wish to voice the dilemmas that
HIV-positive women are challenged with in their daily
lives.
We are faced with very difficult decisions over
whether or not to have children. The majority of
women faced with this decision live in communities
where childbearing is still regarded as the highest merit
and measure of self-esteem and social security. We are
also faced with the dilemma of whether or not to
breastfeed our children, at the risk of societal
judgement and stigma. Access to treatment and care is
another dilemma that women with HIV continue to
face. We are also faced with the dilemma of dealing
with legal rights and the lack of rights to own and
inherit property. These conditions heighten our
vulnerability to HIV infection and the risk of
transmission.
My personal experience, both as a worker and as
a mother with HIV, has taught me two critical lessons
in dealing with this epidemic. One is that a person who
is not supported and who is not accepted can be a great
liability. The second lesson that I have learned is that a
person who is supported and accepted is a great asset
and role model. I stand here before the Assembly as
proof of the latter. The International Community of
Women Living with HIV/AIDS believes in the self-

A/S-26/PV.8

empowerment of women living with HIV/AIDS so as
to enhance our response to the epidemic by reducing
our vulnerability.
I would therefore like to commend those
countries whose delegations to this forum include
people living with HIV and AIDS, particularly women.
I am certainly dismayed by the prominent omission of
HIV-positive women in most Government delegations,
including that of my own country, which is regarded as
a role model in this fight.
It is important for Governments to acknowledge
that in order to understand the pain that HIV inflicts on
communities, we must place people living with HIV —
and women in particular — at the centre of all
interventions,
of
decision-making
and
of
implementation; for we know where it hurts most.
Negotiations like these normally tend to be highly
political and full of semantics. Allow me to draw the
attention of the Assembly to the fact that these
negotiations are not about mere statistics. They are not
just about people “over there”. As you deliberate,
remember that your are discussing and negotiating real
lives, our lives. These are the lives of millions of
women who are battling the cruelty of this virus. It is
the reality of these women that I bring to you today.
The world needs all its women, and it needs them
healthy and alive.
I would like to reiterate what an earlier speaker
said: that history will judge us by our actions. As HIVpositive women, we are organized in a strong network,
determined to bring meaning to our lives and those of
the members of our communities. We therefore call
upon the support of the Assembly and ask that it make
political commitment a reality by fully and
meaningfully involving women living with HIV and
AIDS at every level, particularly in managing and
monitoring the global AIDS fund. I count on the
impetus of this forum and on the Secretary-General’s
special effort.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Geeta
Rao Gupta, President of the International Centre for
Research on Women.
Ms. Gupta (International Centre for Research on
Women): Here we are, almost at the end of this special
session of the General Assembly, following all the
intensive work that led up to it. It seems appropriate to
use this moment to ask ourselves, what have we really

learned? Once we, as representatives of civil society,
Governments, international agencies and corporations,
leave this Hall and return to our respective worlds,
what must we do as we go forward?
From where I sit, as a representative of a civil
society organization, I believe that this special session
and the pandemic have taught us five key lessons that
we must draw upon to define our priorities as we move
forward. Many of them have been mentioned before,
but they bear repetition.
The first lesson is that we have learned that
prevention, treatment, care and support are mutually
reinforcing elements of an effective response to this
epidemic. It is not useful to pit prevention against
treatment or treatment against care because each of
these is an essential part of the required comprehensive
approach that must be used to fight HIV/AIDS.
Although we urgently need treatment, a vaccine and
other biomedical intervention, there is no single magic
bullet, and, sadly, there never will be. This is a
complex disease that will always require multiple
interventions,
simultaneously
implemented
and
available. So let us resolve to end useless discussions
that seek to identify which intervention is more
important. We have a lot to do, and we must work
together to garner the resources necessary to strengthen
prevention, treatment, care and support for all,
regardless of nationality, religion, sex, age, sexual
orientation or ethnicity.
The second lesson is that there can be no debate
after this session about the role that gender inequality
plays in the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Gender inequality
fuels this disease. Gender inequality is now fatal; it
kills our young, and our women and our men in their
most productive years. Gender norms that restrict
women’s access to productive resources create an
unequal balance of power in society that favours men.
By far the most disturbing form of male power is
violence against women, which is a gross violation of
women’s rights and acts as a significant deterrent to
prevention, treatment, care and support. In the coming
decade let us resolve that we will work harder to
provide the resources to protect women’s basic right to
safety and bodily integrity; that we will reduce the
gender gap in education and improve women’s access
to economic resources, assets and opportunities; and
that we will invest in making the female condom more
accessible and affordable, and in making microbicides
a reality. Let us resolve that we will invest in girls and

29

A/S-26/PV.8

women because it is the right thing to do and the smart
thing to do, for women, households, communities and
entire nations — and because without that investment
we will never contain this epidemic.
The third lesson is that we have learned that we
cannot hide behind a shroud of silence with regard to
sex and sexuality and its role in the spread of this
epidemic. The definition of male and female sexuality
in society greatly affects both women’s and men’s
vulnerability to HIV infection. We have talked some
about women’s vulnerability. Let me spend a moment
discussing the effect of masculinity on male
vulnerability.
We know that prevailing norms of masculinity
that dictate that variety in sexual partners is essential to
men’s nature as men puts men, particularly young men,
at risk because it coerces them into experimenting with
sex in unsafe ways to prove their manhood. Similarly,
the notion that sexual domination over women is the
defining characteristic of male sexuality contributes to
homophobia and exposes women to the risk of physical
and sexual violence.
Many countries have learned the hard way — by
losing lives — the cost of supporting a culture of
silence and stigma surrounding sex. We must openly
and without embarrassment discuss sex and sexuality
and we must foster an acceptance of diversity in
sexuality and in sexual experience. Homosexuality and
sex work are realities in every country. Stigmatizing
men who have sex with men or sex workers is a
violation of human rights and is the cause of enormous
human suffering and pain. Public health research has
shown that such stigma fuels the spread of HIV/AIDS.
We cannot and must not let our misguided morality —
or for that matter, our politics — stand in the way of
public health imperatives. Those who, after this special
session, continue to oppose a free discussion of sex and
an acceptance of all forms of sexuality must know that
history will judge them harshly and that the number of
lives lost to this epidemic will serve as witness to their
actions.
The fourth lesson is that we have learned that, as
adults, parents and decision makers, we must do all we
can to empower our children and youth in this
epidemic. They are our future and this epidemic is
rapidly threatening that future, but, more importantly,
they are, with us, experiencing this epidemic in the
present. The millions of orphans who are left behind

30

and burdened with the adult responsibility of taking
care of themselves and their siblings, or the infected
children who must suffer the agony of illness and
disease, or the young women and men who struggle to
discover and enjoy their new-found sexuality in a
world that is increasingly dangerous and deadly: all
these young people are in need and we must respond
because they need adults who they can trust and
depend on, adults who will respect their rights as
individuals, adults who will listen to them and value
their perspective. Let us resolve to empower our youth,
particularly girls, to allow them to participate and
organize, to provide them full and free access to
information and resources, to protect their rights and to
provide them all the social support they need as they
face a present and a future that are tainted by this
epidemic.
Finally, the fifth lesson we have learned is that, to
combat this epidemic, we need cooperation,
collaboration and a sharing of resources. We have
learned that, as Governments, civil society,
international
organizations
or
private
sector
corporations, as representatives of the North or the
global South, we have a lot to offer, but that on our
own we can achieve very little. Each of us has
resources that are uniquely ours. For example,
community-based organizations, because they are at
the forefront of this epidemic, have a wealth of
experience that is just as valuable as the financial
resources that donors and Governments have.
We must remember, however, that the efforts of
community-based organizations are greatly hindered by
a lack of funds. As Moustapha Gueye of the African
Council of AIDS Service Organizations said this
morning, community-based organizations need cash.
We must share our respective resources and coordinate
our efforts; none of us can afford to slacken our
commitment. We must operate transparently and in an
accountable manner. We must honestly debate, discuss
and respect each other’s perspective, and sometimes we
must compromise. This is not an epidemic about
others; it is about us.
We have spent these three days issuing to the
world a declaration of our commitment; now we are
accountable for acting upon that commitment together,
guided by the lessons that experience has taught us and
by the principles of non-discrimination, mutual respect,
humility and compassion.

A/S-26/PV.8

The President: I give the floor to Mr. Javier
Hourcade Bellocq of the Global Network of People
Living with HIV/AIDS.
Mr. Bellocq (Global Network of People Living
with HIV/AIDS) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Global Network of People Living with HIV/AIDS, we
wish to thank the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) for having promoted and
defended, together with a number of Member States,
the participation of civil society and of people living
with HIV/AIDS through the various phases of work
necessary to achieve the declaration of commitment.
Between the first draft and the text we are about
to adopt, there have been a great many improvements.
Terms, concepts, ideas and commitments have been
incorporated into it reflecting some of our most urgent
needs. Many of the more vital aspects of these issues,
however, have been left out. These gaps and omissions
have already been addressed by my colleagues in other
statements and by our organizations in all of the formal
and informal consultations, as well as on those
occasions when we have participated in the dialogue,
such as in the round tables. All these omissions weaken
the declaration because, 20 years after the epidemic
was identified and with over 35 million people infected
by the virus throughout the world, one element of
international diplomacy made the most strenuous
efforts to avoid hurting the national sensitivities of
some countries in the course of negotiations. This
process weakened the document to the point that it
enabled the achievement of consensus, albeit a
consensus on a neutral document.
The document will ultimately be signed and the
States Members of the United Nations, each in its own
way, will acknowledge in due time the severity of the
HIV/AIDS pandemic, undertaking commitments to
improve the terrible situation facing our communities.
The challenge, then, is to give life to this document
beyond its limitations. It is to move from words to
action, from rhetoric to commitment, from consensus
to leadership. Thus, perhaps in 2003, 2005 or 2010, we
will be able together to judge whether we have made a
difference with this initiative or whether we must
continue in impotence to describe our failures and the
advance of the systematic extermination of our
populations.

A hopeful civil society wishes to declare its
commitment to the declaration in the sense that we
wish to pursue our active participation with those who
feel it necessary for the document’s better
implementation. Those of us who live with HIV/AIDS
are ready to participate actively in all initiatives to
improve the quality of life of the community affected
by AIDS. This will be possible only if we reduce the
stigma and discrimination surrounding AIDS and
against people living with HIV/AIDS and those who
are at the greatest risk, and if we develop prevention
initiatives closely linked to comprehensive care for
people living with the disease. These three elements
are intrinsically linked and represent the way in which
we can begin to provide an effective national, regional
and global response to the problem.
In conclusion, allow me to say that living with
HIV/AIDS today is a privilege available to very few
people in very few countries. We stress the urgency of
promoting universal access to treatment. This cannot
be up for discussion; it is based on good science. We
must reduce the grotesque disparity between the
qualities of life of peoples. We cannot accept and
support national and international policies that have
generated two categories of human beings: on the one
hand, those who live with HIV/AIDS thanks to the
necessary antiretroviral treatment and have recovered
their capacity to work, to dream and to have a life; and,
on the other, the overwhelming majority, which,
without adequate treatment, will die of AIDS.
Civil society and people living HIV/AIDS adopt
this declaration, and we will continue, with a critical
eye, to work alongside and to actively support those
who want to make a difference, those who make a
political commitment and play a leadership role in
reducing the impact of HIV/AIDS on our lives. If they
wish to work in the right way, we are their best allies.
As I have said on many occasions for the past 10 years,
the people living with HIV/AIDS are not the problem,
we are part of the solution.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. William
Roedy, Chairman of the Global Business Council on
HIV/AIDS.
Mr. Roedy (Global Business Council on
HIV/AIDS): Thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me
to speak as a representative of the private sector. I am
encouraged by the progress this week. The business
response to AIDS has gained much momentum,

31

A/S-26/PV.8

particularly during the last few days. However, it must
be noted that the response to date of the business
community in the aggregate has been terribly
inadequate.
While there have been a broad range of very
good-quality responses, on the whole they have not
matched the magnitude of the epidemic, nor the
capability of the business community.
What is our capability? We have unique strengths
that we can deliver to fight AIDS. In fact, we are very
well suited to this fight. We have leadership. We have
influence globally and locally. We have marketing
expertise and sales expertise. We sell every single day.
We have communication skills. We have media outlets.
We have supply chains. We have distribution. We have
organization, and we have infrastructure — global
infrastructure. Most importantly, we have people. Quite
simply, we have the potential to reach every human
being on the earth. And HIV/AIDS affects business
every day in many, many different ways.
So, what to do? Well, here are some current
themes.
First, we must play to our strengths — each
company plays to its respective strengths. One size
does not fit all. For example, one half of new HIV
infections occur in people aged 25 or less. This is
MTV’S — my company’s — audience. We use our
global network to communicate prevention and combat
stigma. This is our obligation and responsibility.
Secondly, the Global Business Council’s
“Blueprint” can help guide programmes to suit
individual businesses. Just this week thousands of
copies have been sent out.
Thirdly, think about employees, customers and
their local communities: concentric circles. Employees
are our responsibility. It is not an option. But also we
need to think about our customers.
Fourthly, we must energize all businesses and
expand the Global Business Council to hundreds of
companies.
Fifthly, business leaders around the world must
join national business councils — chapters at the
national level. If such councils do not exist in a given
country, the Global Business Council will help start
one.

32

Most importantly, we must not tolerate
complacency. No lip service, no slowing down by
committees, and so forth, and so forth. We must get on
with it, as business is very capable of doing. We do it
every day with our own businesses, and HIV/AIDS
should be no exception.
We are also reaching out to Governments. We
need your partnerships. We need every partnership we
can get.
We thank Peter Piot and his wonderful colleagues
at UNAIDS for the guidance they have provided the
Global Business Council (GBC) and their partnership.
But I want to be very clear here. If
representatives take one message back to their
Government leaders, let it be this: members of the GBC
want to work with every Government represented in
this Hall today — every single one of them. Bring us
into their policy discussions; include us in everything.
Use us and challenge us. Governments’ leadership will
be invaluable, especially in endorsing our initiatives.
These initiatives include workplace programmes,
national business councils, getting businesses to play to
their strengths, and many, many more initiatives.
Governments’ endorsement can make a huge
difference.
Let us not get held back by cultural differences,
even though they exist. Let us not get held back by our
disagreements. Yes, the world is incredibly diverse, and
we must include different approaches. But, most
importantly, it is about action, getting on with it. This
is what we, business, commit to do.
Finally, business — in partnership, and only in
partnership, with Governments and non-governmental
organizations — must and will be a leader in this fight.
This is my promise. This is our pledge.
The President: I give the floor to Father
Christophe Benn, representative of the Commission of
the Churches on International Affairs of the World
Council of Churches.
Father Benn (Commission of the Churches on
International Affairs of the World Council of
Churches): The World Council of Churches wishes to
express its sincere appreciation to the United Nations
for organizing this special session and its deep
gratitude for being allowed to present this statement.

A/S-26/PV.8

I am standing here for Reverend Gideon
Byamugisha, an Anglican priest from Uganda who is
living with HIV/AIDS. He was supposed here to speak
on behalf of our delegation, but unfortunately today he
fell ill and cannot be with us. I would like us all to
remember Reverend Gideon in our thoughts and
prayers.
This incident actually demonstrates again how
this disease affects countless individuals around the
world. It also shows that churches are themselves in the
midst of the HIV/AIDS crisis. Many in the church
family are ill, infected or affected. There is no division
between us and them.
HIV/AIDS is an illness that violates God’s will
for his creation. Recognition of and respect for the
dignity of each human person, regardless of
circumstance, is fundamental to all our responses and
actions.
This dignity is best respected by protecting the
rights of people living with HIV/AIDS and promoting
an attitude of care and solidarity which rejects all
forms of stigmatization and discrimination. We must
fight HIV/AIDS and not its victims.
All persons infected and affected by HIV/AIDS
should be accepted in their own communities and
receive support and care, including access to treatment.
The churches are committed to using all their resources
to support these efforts.
High-risk and vulnerable groups — for example,
people with drug dependencies, prisoners, refugees,
migrant populations, internally displaced persons and
persons with a homosexual orientation — require
particular attention and accompaniment that fully
respects their essential human rights.
The particular risks of women must be addressed
through prevention, care and treatment. More
fundamentally, the social, political and economic
structures and systems which create their vulnerability
must be challenged. The particular needs and risks of
youth, including those not yet affected, must be
addressed with urgency.
Out of respect for life, abstinence and other
proven methods of preventing HIV/AIDS — for
example, in the form of delayed sexual activity in
young people, faithfulness in sexual relationships and
the use of condoms — should be promoted and
supported.

I would like to dismiss the widespread myth that
all churches and religious organizations are against the
use of condoms. The World Council of Churches, with
its 340 member churches all around the world, has
adopted an official policy acknowledging the use of
condoms as one option in the prevention of HIV/AIDS.
HIV/AIDS is understood as a poverty-related
disease. Economic, social and political structures and
systems, including international debt, that allow the
spread of HIV/AIDS must be addressed within that
context. Harmful beliefs, practices and traditions in
societies and in churches that increase the spread of
HIV/AIDS must be challenged.
Churches understand that governments at all
levels have a primary responsibility to ensure and
protect public health, and that that responsibility must
be reflected in funding patterns and demonstrated by
political will. But churches are prepared to work
cooperatively with all people of good will, which
includes other religious communities, communitybased organizations, Governments and United Nations
agencies, in responding to HIV/AIDS.
I am speaking here on behalf of the World
Council of Churches and cannot claim to speak for all
other faith-based organizations. But the World Council
has facilitated the formation of a broad coalition and
has issued a statement supported by many different
faiths and faith-based organizations, which has been
distributed at this special session on HIV/AIDS and
which will be send to the Secretary-General after the
session. Let me close by reading out the last paragraph
of that joint statement of faith-based organizations.
“The international community can take this
opportunity offered by the special session on
HIV/AIDS to build on the unique resources
offered by faith-based organizations, given our
local community presence, influence, spirit of
volunteerism and genuine compassion facilitated
by our spiritual mandate. Governments alone will
not be able to launch the broad-based approach
that is required to address this problem
decisively. This special session on HIV/AIDS
should lead to a broad coalition between
Governments, United Nations organizations, civil
society and non-governmental organizations,
including faith-based organizations. Given this
joint cooperation and the necessary resources, we
can make a tremendous difference to the fight

33

A/S-26/PV.8

against AIDS in terms of prevention, care and
treatment.
The
faith-based
organizations
represented at this special session on HIV/AIDS
and supporting this statement realize that we
cannot claim to speak for all world religions and
religious organizations. But we wish to express
our sincere commitment to continuing to work
within our own communities for the dignity and
rights of people living with HIV/AIDS, for an
attitude of care and solidarity that rejects all
forms of stigma and discrimination, for an open
atmosphere of dialogue in which the sensitive
root causes of HIV/AIDS can be addressed, and
for strong advocacy to mobilize all the necessary
resources for an effective global response to the
pandemic.”
Together, we can overcome.
The President: I give the floor next to
Mr. N. M. Samuel, board member of the International
AIDS Society.
Mr. Samuel (International AIDS Society): I bring
greetings from the International AIDS Society as a
member of its governing council. This special session
of the General Assembly to focus on HIV/AIDS is
commendable and timely. We not only congratulate
Mr. Kofi Annan and Mr. Peter Piot of UNAIDS, but we
thank them for their leadership and for organizing this
special session.
We need to stop the spread of HIV and use the
scientific insights already in our possession to prevent
HIV/AIDS. Prevention must be liked to care. Over the
past 20 years we have focused our attention on
prevention alone in the developing country scenario;
from today, let the future focus be on prevention that
includes care. As a professional medical doctor, I know
that we have treatment strategies available for
HIV/AIDS, and that the availability of drugs for
infected individuals is a basic human right. It is our
responsibility to provide appropriate treatment for
people under our care.
Whether HIV/AIDS patients are in the African
continent, or in the Asia-Pacific region, or in South
America, the message is clear and loud: we need to
provide antiretrovirals as part of the care for patients
infected with HIV. We need to allocate additional
resources, both at the national level and at the
international level, for the care of the infected.

34

The International AIDS Society has more than
12,000 members in more than 120 countries; it is a
society of scientists and health care and public health
workers engaged in HIV/AIDS prevention, control and
care. We are committed to bringing new scientific
advances to the centre stage of public health: vaccines,
microbicides and appropriate antiretroviral regimens,
and their implementation and monitoring. We need to
use currently available strategies to interrupt HIV
transmission. The only tools that are available at
present are antiretroviral drugs. They are pivotal in
reducing transmission and in improving the quality of
life of men, women and children.
I come from Tamil Nadu in India. Mother-tochild transmission programmes initiated nationally
show tremendous success in voluntary counselling and
testing and in the reduction of HIV transmission from
mothers to infants. In addition, those programmes have
increased risk perception among women. There is an
urgent need to explore alternate treatment strategies
appropriate for developing countries. And there is yet
another urgent need: not to delay the administration of
treatment until the perfect situation develops.
The training of health care teams, including
physicians, nurses, laboratory staff and village health
nurses, is yet another need. The International AIDS
Society is uniquely placed with its Share Programme,
working with local experts and public health officials
throughout the developing countries to provide
HIV/AIDS educational programmes that are locally
relevant.
We need to be bold, courageous and
compassionate to provide care to individuals who are
infected and are under our care. Therefore, let us all
commit ourselves to translating knowledge into action.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Richard
Burzynski, Executive Director of the International
Council of AIDS Service Organizations.
Mr. Burzynski (International Council of AIDS
Service Organizations): I stand here before the
Assembly on behalf of the International Council of
AIDS Service Organizations (ICASO), a global
network of non-governmental and community-based
organizations. We are the community groups
throughout the world that provide care to people living
with and affected by HIV/AIDS, that advocate for their
human rights, and that work to implement and, where

A/S-26/PV.8

necessary, create meaningful and sustainable public
policies and programmes.
ICASO has played a significant role in
coordinating and facilitating civil society inputs and
activities related to this special session. The vast
majority of us in civil society strongly believe that
what the General Assembly says and does is critical to
intensifying and accelerating the global response to
AIDS. That is why we have been working so hard over
the past months to influence the preparation of the draft
declaration of commitment.
Participants have been wrestling with issues that
have never before been raised in the General Assembly.
Indeed, it is important to acknowledge that this is the
first time that this body has convened specifically to
discuss AIDS. That is both an indictment of the
General Assembly’s inactivity over two decades and a
striking testimonial to the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the General Assembly.
If we are to turn back the tide of AIDS, if we are
to reverse HIV infection rates, if we are to save the
lives of millions of people — in fact, if we are to have
any effect on this pandemic at all — we cannot shy
away from being very specific about the groups that are
most vulnerable to infection, that need to be educated
about prevention and that need care and treatment. You
have decided that you cannot name them; I can. They
include men who have sex with men, injecting drug
users and their sexual partners, and sex workers and
their clients.
Religious beliefs and cultural practices cannot
impede the progress we have made thus far.
Governments that place religious tenets above a candid
and comprehensive response to the epidemic are
committing an egregious sin. No god, in any religion,
in any culture, could countenance the death and
devastation that this disease has caused. It is up to
us — not to any deity — to stop this thing now.
The Secretary-General has said, and popular
opinion agrees, that the financial resources needed to
accelerate and intensify a global response to AIDS
exist now. All that is needed is leadership and political
commitment to meet the targets. The Governments of
the world must act to mobilize those resources through
whatever mechanism is most efficient. If that
mechanism is the much-talked-about global fund for
AIDS, I urge them to include civil society in the
governance and administration of the fund and in its

monitoring and evaluation, and they must do all they
can to ensure that the money from the fund goes
directly to the community groups that need it most and
know best how to spend it. Civil society will pursue
this agenda aggressively in the coming weeks, as the
architecture of the fund is deliberated.
From our perspective, the draft declaration that
the Assembly has agreed on and will now adopt has all
the right targets, all the ambitions and all the ideology
required to become a powerful tool. We all know that
the United Nations system cannot realize alone the
objectives of this draft declaration. It needs partners,
and we stand ready. We have been working on this for
20 years, and we know what to do. The International
Council of AIDS Service Organizations intends to use
the draft declaration to call for better policies that lead
to more effective programmes at all levels. We will
hold Governments accountable to the commitments
made in this document, and we will be their allies in
making this more than just another global policy
statement. We will help to make this document a viable
programme of action that defines our collective
ambitions, provides Governments with reasonable,
attainable goals, and can be easily translated into more
effective and aggressive programmes. You have
provided a comprehensive global policy; now we will
be your partners and turn it into action.
One of the subtle ways in which AIDS is
devastating is its ability to divide us: North from
South, black from white, gay from straight, bureaucrat
from activist. We cannot let those divisions widen. If
we do not work together, AIDS will win.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Dulce Maria Pereira, Executive
Secretary of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries.
Ms. Pereira (Community of PortugueseSpeaking Countries) (spoke in Portuguese; English text
furnished by the delegation): I should like to begin by
congratulating the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on his initiative to convene this important
special session of the General Assembly devoted to the
fight against HIV/AIDS. I would also like to thank
UNAIDS and Dr. Peter Piot for their tireless work in
bringing together the most diverse protagonists to
create awareness of the urgent need to mobilize all the
resources possible in the fight against this scourge.

35

A/S-26/PV.8

The
Community
of
Portuguese-Speaking
Countries, formally created on 17 July 1996, is a
multilateral organization that includes Angola, Brazil,
Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal,
Sao Tome and Principe and East Timor, which will be
an observer until it becomes a nation State.

there will be 1 million new cases of HIV/AIDS, which
will result in life expectancy in that country being
reduced by five years. In Brazil — a country that has
been a pioneer in the fight against HIV/AIDS and in
the treatment of its population — 536,000 cases of HIV
were reported as of June 2000.

The objectives of this session are currently of
great concern to all countries, and I therefore believe it
appropriate to congratulate the organizers on the
relevance of the subjects proposed for discussion.

In the meantime, women continue to be among
the most vulnerable groups.

The question of HIV/AIDS is currently at the
forefront of the concerns of all countries, international
organizations,
non-governmental
organizations,
religious institutions and civil society groups in our
communities, because the consequences of the
epidemic are devastating and are capable of decimating
our populations. The HIV/AIDS virus, detected in the
1980s, has spread alarmingly in all countries,
particularly in those where the people are living in the
worst social and economic conditions. Africa and Asia
have been the most devastated continents. Because of
the lack of effective medication and the inability to
determine the true extent of the disease, we know that
the situation is much more serious than we had
previously thought.
Above all, we are concerned about new infections
resulting from transfusions of contaminated blood and
vertical transmission between mother and child.
Recently, researchers have detected a new virus —
HIV-I.
AIDS stopped being seen as a disease specific to
certain risk groups a long time ago. Its social impact is
today truly global, because it is affecting entire
families: children who become orphans; active young
people who are taken out of the productive system; and
elderly people who are obliged to take on the burden of
their grandchildren — children who are frequently also
carriers of the virus. It is obvious that all of these
situations have a negative impact on our nations’
economy, especially with regard to productivity levels,
and that has a negative effect on the development of
our countries.
For all of these reasons, the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking
Countries,
the
Executive
Secretariat of which I am honoured to direct, is
concentrating it efforts on fighting this terrible scourge
that is affecting its member States in very specific
ways. In Angola, it is believed that in the next 8 years

36

In Cape Verde, authorities are concerned about
the precarious condition of the health-care system,
which lacks the basic necessities to adequately treat the
population.
Guinea-Bissau has one of the highest rates of
HIV/AIDS infection in the world. In Mozambique,
World Health Organization estimates indicate that close
to 14.5 per cent of the population between 15 and 49
years of age is infected by HIV/AIDS. Also of concern
is the fact that the disease is spreading to children and
to women of all ages. It is predicted that 10 years the
virus will affect close to 60 per cent of the population,
which will reduce the life expectancy of the people of
Mozambique by 15 years.
In Portugal, 15,000 people are infected, half of
them drug users. That country’s scientific community
and our scientific community are concerned at the
results of screenings that have indicated the existence
of a possible new strain of the virus.
In Sao Tome and Principe, there is a high risk of
contamination by transfusion. Contaminated blood has
been used because of the lack of testing modalities.
In East Timor, despite the fact that it is currently
impossible to determine the extent of the spread of the
disease, we know that the population there is highly
vulnerable. To deal with this scourge, our Community
agreed on a pilot programme carefully designed by the
public authorities responsible for the fight against
HIV/AIDS. This rigorous and modular programme,
which cuts across gender lines, takes into account the
overall health situation of each member State and the
dramatic impact of malaria and tuberculosis. The
project also takes into consideration the realities of
conflict and post-conflict situations and ensures that
maximum efforts are deployed in that connection by
the health authorities of each country. Implementation
will take place through a multilateral agreement signed
among the member States this year.

A/S-26/PV.8

Among the programme’s objectives are the
development of key strategies that will make it possible
to provide antiretroviral medication and condoms to the
members of the Community. All of its member States
must have access to technology to detect HIV/AIDS
and other sexually transmitted diseases. The national
information and prevention structures will be
reinforced, and we will be trying to devise new
strategies to promote a better knowledge of the disease
among our peoples.
We can summarize our general objective as being
the institution of a general policy to fight against
HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases.
This policy is defined as a priority in the Declaration
issued by the heads of State of the member countries of
the Community — the Maputo Declaration — with a
view to comprehensive care and follow-up for the
peoples of the Portuguese-speaking community.
In December 2000, the Portuguese-speaking
African countries and the Executive Secretariat of the
CPSC
undertook
campaigns
to
ensure
the
dissemination of the concept that societies have the
basic right of access to medication, to care for their
citizens who are living with HIV/AIDS, and to a better
quality of life, while ensuring their right to access to
knowledge and the available technological advances.
All of the heads of State of our community are
committed to the implementation of this project.
Several of the bilateral agreements among the
member States are aimed at carrying out the transfer of
knowledge and at working together in the fight against
HIV/AIDS, which is transmitted through the most
intimate and private of human relations.
The situation of the member States justifies the
presence of the World Health Organization (WHO) and
UNAIDS in the African area in the fight against these
infectious diseases, particularly HIV/AIDS.
That is why that agency called, at the Abuja
Conference, for the creation of a common fund to allow
us to design a future scenario that will guarantee
continuity of care for our people. That common fund
must be used to support the least developed countries,
in order to allow them to overcome the terrible
vulnerability of their communities and the effects of
asymmetrical globalization. It must also be used to
fund the necessary actions and programmes to control
the spread of HIV/AIDS.

It is shameful that, despite all of the scientific and
technological possibilities available at this time in
human history, we are still immobilized by the lack of
accessible medication, vaccines and other instruments
and mechanisms for prevention.
We enthusiastically support the proposal of the
Secretary-General in connection with the creation of
the aforemenetioned fund, and we would urge that
cultural realities and imbalances between populations
with respect to access to information be considered in
the use of the fund.
The
Community
of
Portuguese-Speaking
Countries is convinced that a large part of the resources
used for war and other universal evils should be used to
save lives and guarantee the quality of life of our
peoples. We also express our determination to earmark
specific resources for the developing countries so that
they can implement programmes against HIV/AIDS.
Those resources should be allocated in a manner that
does not have any negative impact on the countries in
question. The community of Portuguese-speaking
countries will participate in the mobilization of State
resources and of social actors in order to fashion a
more positive destiny for humankind, fighting
energetically against the tragic reality of the epidemic
we are suffering.
The Portuguese-speaking community calls upon
the international community, especially the countries
and institutions that are relatively richer, to work
sincerely in the fight against HIV/AIDS and to reduce
the disastrous impact it is having on our societies.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on agenda item 7.
Oral presentations by the Chairpersons of the four
round tables
The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 55/242, we shall now hear oral
presentations by the Chairpersons of the four round
tables.
I give the floor to His Excellency The Right
Honourable Denzil Douglas, Prime Minister of Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Chairman of round table 1, held on
Monday afternoon, 25 June 2001.
Mr. Douglas (Saint Kitts and Nevis): The
prevention and care round table was a lively and
interactive discussion and brought out many issues and

37

A/S-26/PV.8

challenges to be addressed in order to scale up and
expand prevention and care interventions to a level that
will have a significant impact on the HIV/AIDS
epidemic.
The discussions can be summarized as follows.
All speakers were cognizant of the human catastrophe
at hand due to HIV/AIDS, especially in sub-Saharan
Africa and the Caribbean, the two hardest-hit regions
globally. It was echoed by many delegates at this round
table that prevention and care are inseparable and
mutually reinforcing integrals of a holistic response to
the HIV/AIDS pandemic that must go hand in hand.
Alongside the central role of prevention, there is an
escalating need for care and support for those who are
already infected and for their families, and a need to
deal with the societal and developmental impact of the
epidemic.
Representatives at this round table also felt that
there was a need to respond to the various scenarios of
the epidemic, taking on board the various sociocultural
and economic situations of the communities, in order to
promote a full spectrum of responses, from immediate
prevention, such as abstinence or condom use, to longterm behavioural change, including efforts to empower
women to say no to unsafe sex, to protect children from
infection and the impact of HIV/AIDS and to empower
our young people.
The critical need to empower communities to
fight HIV/AIDS was echoed at this round table, as was
the need for effective leadership at all levels. The
involvement and empowerment of people living with
HIV/AIDS and civil society were emphasized as a key
component of an effective response.
Concern was also expressed about the role of
poverty in fuelling the HIV/AIDS epidemic, deterring
prevention and care and increasing vulnerability,
particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, and the need for
urgent and concrete measures to break the povertyHIV/AIDS cycle.
Many representatives at this round table called
for the global fund to be established urgently to deal
with HIV/AIDS. Participants urged that mechanisms of
its operation should be clarified urgently, and that it
must give priority to combating HIV/AIDS in the most
heavily affected countries and regions. Interventions
must be culturally sensitive and responsive to the needs
of various groups, including women, young people,
orphans and other vulnerable groups, and must strive to

38

build the social fabric necessary to deal with this
terrible epidemic.
There is a need to institute preventive education
and information to promote responsible and safe sexual
behaviour and to enable individuals to make informed
decisions about their own health and their lives.
Early diagnosis of HIV provides opportunities for
prevention, and the introduction of effective treatment
and care was stressed. The need to expand voluntary
counselling and testing as an entry point for prevention
and care, coupled with access to treatment, was
highlighted as key in expanding the HIV/AIDS
response. Emphasis was also placed on the need to
strengthen the health sector within the multisectoral
response, in order to deliver existing interventions
more widely and effectively to those who need them
most, specifically our youth and our women.
Issues of treatment, care and support were
discussed at length at this round table. Many
representatives, including those of civil society,
emphasized the need for good-quality treatment and
care as critical elements of an effective HIV/AIDS
response and the role of care in strengthening
prevention efforts.
Many representatives at the round table noted
with concern the absence of affordable treatment and
care for HIV infection and AIDS-related conditions.
The need to implement interventions that had been
shown to work was emphasized, including prevention,
diagnosis and treatment of sexually transmitted
diseases; ensuring the safety of blood and blood
products; and universal precautions against infection
and prevention of HIV in pregnant women and its
transmission to their innocent children.
Very strong appeals were made to the
international community and to the pharmaceutical
industry to provide the necessary resources and
commodities to help build the infrastructure and
capacity that is needed to combat HIV/AIDS in highly
affected countries. It was emphasized in this round
table that HIV/AIDS treatment, including antiretroviral
therapy, can be implemented successfully, even in lowresource settings.
Representatives also emphasized the need to step
up investment and research into HIV vaccines,
especially those relevant to the strains of the virus
found in developing countries.

A/S-26/PV.8

Many representatives cited examples of
successful initiatives resulting from collaboration and
coordination at various levels — national and
community, public and private. The need for strategic
partnerships is key — and I stress this word, key — for
scaling up HIV/AIDS programmes. They highlighted
the need for South-to-South collaboration in tackling
HIV/AIDS.
It was felt that advocacy efforts must be
intensified to increase awareness, political commitment
and resources for combating HIV/AIDS and to deal
with stigma, gender inequities and other factors
contributing to the epidemic and its impact. The need
for capacity-building to enable service providers in all
sectors, including health and education, to meet the
challenges posed by HIV/AIDS and its impact was
thoroughly emphasized.
I am certain that I am speaking on behalf of all
participants in round table 1, on prevention and care, in
commending the Secretary-General for providing more
information on the structure and administration of the
global health fund since the first round table was
convened on Monday afternoon. It is clearly evident
that the ideas that have been generated at this special
session of the General Assembly are being translated
into action now — indeed, immediately. This augurs
well for the future.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Grzegorz Opala, Minister of Health of Poland,
Chairman of round table 2, held yesterday morning,
Tuesday, 26 June 2001.
Mr. Opala (Poland): Let me start my concluding
remarks by sharing with you my deep conviction that
the round table which I had the great honour to chair
gave us the opportunity for a truly open and creative
discussion.
I would like also to express my gratitude to all
participants for their significant contributions to the
discussion.
There was clear and broad agreement among
participants that respect for, and the promotion and
protection of, human rights is vital to the successful
fight against HIV/AIDS.
Let me underline four aspects of a human-rightsbased approach to the HIV/AIDS pandemic.

First, respect for human rights is vital in order to
prevent the further spread of the epidemic. When
human rights are respected, people are better able to
protect themselves from being infected. In addition, a
society that respects human rights offers more efficient
protection to those who are not infected.
Secondly, respect for human rights empowers
individuals by addressing social, cultural and legal
factors, thus reducing their vulnerability to infection.
Thirdly, respect for human rights reduces stigma
and discrimination. This helps to strengthen support
and improve care for individuals already infected, thus
reducing the negative impact.
Fourthly, respect for human rights allows
individuals and communities to better respond to the
epidemic. They are able to act effectively by
organizing themselves and accessing relevant
information for prevention and care.
Participants indicated that there was a vital link
between an effective and sustainable response to the
HIV/ AIDS crisis and respect for all human rights,
especially those that guarantee non-discrimination,
gender equality and the meaningful participation of
affected and vulnerable groups.
The human rights message is a positive one.
Many participants underlined that protecting the rights
of people with HIV/AIDS means treating them not as
victims, but rather as bearers of rights. Respect for
human dignity must be the core of our actions.
The need for accountability at all levels was
raised, from Governments to the international
community, not only for what we do, but also for what
we neglect to do.
Many spoke of how HIV/AIDS affects a series of
rights, including the right to the highest attainable
standards of physical and mental health; to nondiscrimination and gender equality; to privacy, to
freedom of expression and association; to education; to
information, including education about sex; and to
employment rights and the right to development.
The link between the spread of HIV/AIDS and
poverty was also acknowledged, with calls for the right
to development to be seriously addressed.
Participants noted that the protection of
intellectual property rights is important, but that this
should not override enjoyment of human rights,

39

A/S-26/PV.8

especially the right to adequate access to medication
and care.
During the debate, many delegations indicated
that the time had come to break the silence around
HIV/AIDS, calling for an open and blunt public
discourse about the factors that allow HIV/AIDS to
thrive, how it is transmitted and who is affected.
Governments were encouraged to lead open and
inclusive discussions. Only when the silence is broken
will problems and challenges be addressed and
effective solutions found.
An important aspect of breaking the silence
which was stressed repeatedly was the need to
challenge and redress stigma and discrimination,
especially with regard to gender, sexual behaviour,
inequality and justice.
The right to non-discrimination is a fundamental
human right. Discrimination and stigma — born of
ignorance — have driven the failure to meaningfully
address HIV/AIDS. It has built a wall that blocks
recognition of the extent of the crisis — blocking
access of the vulnerable, stopping those affected from
coming forward, blocking the provision of information,
and sidelining from participation those infected and
affected. The principle of non-discrimination is also the
basis for the effective realization of all other rights.
A number of delegations pointed to the need to
address gender inequality in a serious manner, to
empower women and girls, to ensure their right to
information, especially sex information, to ensure their
access to treatment and to ensure their protection from
violence and abuse. It was pointed out that failure to
respect women’s rights goes beyond an injustice — it is
fatal.
Gender inequality is fuelling the rapid spread of
HIV. Many women and girls are not in a position to say
no to unwanted sex, nor can they negotiate condom
use.
The power imbalances between men and women
are a major factor in driving the epidemic. Further,
women are increasingly taking on the burden of caring
for the sick and dying, as well as for the next
generation.
Many speakers addressed the right to participate
and the importance of ensuring that the response to the
epidemic is inclusive. A supportive environment
should be created for all individuals and communities

40

to effectively participate — that is, people living with
HIV/AIDS, children, women and other vulnerable
groups.
In conclusion, I should like to stress that it was
the common view that the right to non-discrimination,
equality and participation, which are reflected in the
draft declaration of commitment, are the starting point
for our actions. The declaration is an essential tool for
assisting Governments and civil society to address
human rights in the context of the epidemic at the
national, regional and international levels. It contains
measurable goals and targets to address human rights
issues. It emphasizes the need for strengthening
monitoring mechanisms for HIV/AIDS-related human
rights. It is also the first time a declaration on
HIV/AIDS has acknowledged the importance of
accountability.
Implementation of the Declaration requires the
full commitment of States to the principles of nondiscrimination, equality and participation in all
HIV/AIDS-related activities and programmes.
The President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Shamshad Ahmad, Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations, who,
on behalf of the Chairman of round table 3,
His Excellency Mr. Abdul Malik Kasi, Minister of
Health of Pakistan, will deliver an oral presentation
concerning the round table held yesterday afternoon,
Tuesday, 26 June 2001.
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): As the President has just
said, Pakistan’s Minister of Health, Mr. Abdul Malik
Kasi, presided over the third round table, on the socioeconomic impact of the epidemic and the strengthening
of national capacities to combat HIV/AIDS. Since the
minister had to leave New York earlier this afternoon,
it is my honour to present to the Assembly a summary
of the discussions in that round table.
The round table provided a useful opportunity for
an open and interactive thematic dialogue. Discussions
focused on the socio-economic issues identified in the
document prepared by the Secretariat for the round
table, on current levels of global response, and on the
four priority areas set out in the background paper as a
way forward for collective action.
All participants underscored the need for urgent
global action against HIV/AIDS and expressed their
keenness about evolving a common strategy to prevent

A/S-26/PV.8

and combat this unprecedented threat to humanity.
Representatives of States described their national and
regional programmes and strategies to fight the
epidemic and to reduce its socio-economic impact. It
was generally agreed that each country had to devise
its own strategy for prevention and for combating the
disease, and had to implement goal-oriented policies.
International involvement was to be limited to
advancement and to making available adequate
resources for affordable and sustainable treatment and
medicine for every victim of HIV/AIDS, without any
discrimination or selectivity.
Participants in the round table agreed that
HIV/AIDS and poverty were closely linked and that
poverty reduction had therefore to be an integral part of
the campaign against the epidemic. Debt relief and
increased flows of official development assistance were
essential to that effort, and more information was
sought about the operation of the global fund that had
recently been launched.
Participants also stressed the need for education
and information, including values-based information,
to change the behaviour of young people and to
provide social support for people living with
HIV/AIDS. One speaker suggested that faith-based
organizations could play an important role in those
efforts. Emphasis was placed also on broader access to
health care and treatment, including counselling and
testing, prevention of mother-to-child transmission and
management of related diseases and infections. Health
care infrastructure also needed to be strengthened.
Some speakers introduced the concept of social
capital, which was defined as a network of shared
values that strengthened the social fabric and in which
societies must invest. Participants agreed on the need
to place emphasis on vulnerable social groups,
including the poor, orphans, women, children and the
elderly, and to respect their rights and their dignity.
Participants stressed that, since this was a
common challenge, it must be fought with a unified
approach. In that regard, the view was expressed that
any common approach must show full respect for the
cultures, faiths and values of others. There should be
no attempt to impose the norms of one society on
others. The paramount need is to reduce poverty and
increase availability of resources for prevention, care
and treatment, which should be affordable for every
victim without discrimination or selectivity.

It was generally agreed that political commitment
at the highest level was needed in order to successfully
combat the epidemic. The gravity of the problem had
now been recognized and efforts were being made to
forge a common strategy.
Finally, I wish, on behalf of Pakistan’s Minister
of Health, to thank all participants in the round table
for their interest, their valuable views and their active
participation during the round table.
The President: I now give the floor to
Her Excellency The Honourable Anna Abdallah,
Minister of Health of the United Republic of Tanzania,
who, on behalf of the Chairman of round table 4,
His Excellency Mr. Benjamin William Mkapa,
President of the United Republic of Tanzania, will
deliver an oral presentation concerning the work of the
round table held this morning, Wednesday, 27 June
2001.
Ms. Abdallah (United Republic of Tanzania): I
have the honour to present an oral summary of the
work of round table 4, on international funding and
cooperation, on behalf of the Chairman of that round
table, His Excellency President Benjamin William
Mkapa, who, regrettably, could not join us this
evening.
In his introductory remarks, the Chairman said
that the challenge facing the international community
was to ascertain how to mobilize a level of resources
commensurate with the magnitude of the HIV/AIDS
crisis. It was a task that required partnerships among
Governments, civil society, the private sector, bilateral
and international agencies, foundations and community
groups.
The World Bank President, Mr. James
Wolfensohn, highlighted for discussion the following
issues, which were contained in the background paper
prepared for the round table:
First, each developing country needs to lead its
own effort against HIV/AIDS. All external partners
need to work together under the country’s leadership
and within the rubric of the country’s strategy;
Secondly, developing countries need to increase
their national investments in HIV/AIDS;
Thirdly, official, philanthropic and private
contributors need to multiply and speed disbursement
of their financial and technical commitments to

41

A/S-26/PV.8

HIV/AIDS. Partnerships also need to expand to include
more businesses and foundations;
Fourthly, civil society should be
involved in global cooperation and funding;

centrally

Fifthly, conclusion of negotiations on the global
fund.
The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) Administrator, Mr. Mark Malloch Brown, said
that the figure of $9.2 billion for the proposed global
fund represented a realistic and sober assessment of the
projected cost of an effective global campaign against
HIV/AIDS. Between a third and a half of that sum
needed to come from domestic sources, which meant a
major shift in the spending priorities of Governments
of AIDS-affected countries. The private sector with its
marketing skills, outreach and economic resources had
an important role to play, as did civil society and
foundations like the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation. Ultimately, however, the fight had to be
led by national decision makers at the country level,
since each country had a different set of priorities and
its own special characteristics.
In the general discussion that ensued, there was a
broad consensus that political commitment at the
highest level was of crucial importance. In that
connection, several speakers welcomed the Abuja
Declaration as a tangible expression of the commitment
of African leaders to the fight against HIV/AIDS. The
view was expressed that less affected countries, which
were generally the more affluent countries, had a moral
obligation to contribute to the alleviation of the human
suffering caused by the epidemic. It was also suggested
that a dynamic, not a static, approach to the problem
was needed, since the situation was constantly
evolving. Other speakers stressed the need to focus on
vulnerable social groups, including the poor, women,
children and orphans, and to take advantage of the best
practices and lessons learned in those countries, like
Brazil and Thailand, which had succeeded in reducing
the incidence of the epidemic.
On the question of the link between poverty and
HIV/AIDS, the representative of Botswana suggested
that his country might be studied to determine why its
rate of infection was so high, even though Botswana
was not a poor country.
On the subject of national leadership and the
integration of HIV/AIDS into national development

42

plans, emphasis was placed on the importance of strong
prevention programmes. It was noted, however, that the
countries of sub-Saharan Africa, in particular, which
were hard hit by the twin scourges of poverty and
HIV/AIDS, had little capacity to respond to the
challenges they faced. Funds were needed for the
implementation of programmes and the strengthening
of health institutions and delivery systems. A spirited
appeal was made by the representative of the African
Council of AIDS Service Organizations for
disbursement procedures to be streamlined and made
more transparent and for donors to listen to local
community groups when they articulated their needs on
the ground. Participants generally agreed that both
national authorities and their partners needed to do
more to integrate HIV/AIDS into national development
plans and poverty reduction strategies, to build
capacity to address HIV/AIDS in all sectors, and to
strengthen health systems and infrastructure.
On the need for developing countries to increase
their national investments in HIV/AIDS, a number of
speakers pointed to the difficult choices faced by
resource-constrained
developing
countries.
The
representative of Dominica, for example, noted that the
cost of caring for an HIV-infected person was equal to
the cost of educating 10 young persons for productive
roles in society. It was nevertheless recognized that,
despite the difficulties, Governments must translate
their
political
commitment
into
budgetary
commitments. The role of external assistance, however,
including through debt relief, continued to be of crucial
importance.
On the question of expansion of partnerships to
include more businesses, philanthropic and private
contributors and foundations, the representative of the
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation urged grant makers
the world over to make HIV/AIDS a priority and to
address the immediate emergency. However, they also
had a responsibility to think in the longer term. If a
long-term approach to prevention and research had
been adopted 20 years previously, perhaps an
HIV/AIDS vaccine would have already been found and
meetings like the current special session would not
have been necessary.
It was generally agreed that civil society had
played a pivotal role in all countries that had had
success against HIV/AIDS and that every effort should
be made to take advantage of the comparative
advantages offered by the various civil actors. That

A/S-26/PV.8

participation should be broad-based and include
persons living with HIV/AIDS and representing the
voices of women, men, adults and youth. At the
country level, civil society should have a direct role in
AIDS governing bodies, and those bodies should
channel a significant share of HIV/AIDS resources
directly to the community level and to civil society
organizations.
A good part of the discussion focussed on the
conclusion of negotiations on the global fund. Some
speakers called for technical studies to be conducted
and relevant data collected as inputs for a global master
plan. Others questioned how the figure of $US 9.2
billion had been arrived at. The representative of
France favoured the creation of a fund which, though
not a United Nations fund, would have broad
involvement of United Nations specialized agencies.
Other participants felt that, because of its broad
experience, UNAIDS should be the lead management
agency of the fund, while yet others felt that it should
be managed by an intergovernmental body of the
General Assembly. The fund should be participatory,
transparent and equitable in its rules and operation and
should not be used to impose the norms and values of
one society on another. Many speakers stressed that the
fund’s resources should be additional to the resources
currently allocated to HIV/AIDS and that a large
portion of those resources should be in the form of
grants rather than loans. A number of participants
pointed out that, in addition to the proposed fund,
developed countries should grant greater access to their
markets for the products of developing countries to
enable them to assume a greater share of the
responsibility for the fight against HIV/AIDS.
All participants agreed that it was essential to
conclude the negotiations on the global fund as soon as
possible, and if possible by the end of 2001.
In his concluding remarks, Mr. Malloch Brown
reminded participants that trust in developing-country
stakeholders was pivotal to the success of the proposed
fund. Without that trust, bureaucracy would doom the
global fund to failure.

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Review of the problem of human immunodeficiency
virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(HIV/AIDS) in all its aspects
Agenda item 8 (continued)
Adoption of the final document
The President: In connection with agenda item 7,
the General Assembly has before it a draft resolution
issued as document A/S-26/L.2, containing the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Jin Yongjian (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services):
The Secretariat has been informed that there are
technical errors and omissions in the Arabic, French
and Spanish translations of the Declaration before
participants. The Secretariat wishes to assure
delegations that the corrections will be made and will
be reflected in the final version of the Declaration.
The President: As members are fully aware, the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS, contained
in the draft resolution, is the outcome of a long and
onerous negotiation process conducted by the two cofacilitators I appointed pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 55/13, namely Her Excellency Ms. Penny
Wensley, Permanent Representative of Australia to the
United Nations, and His Excellency Mr. Ibra Deguène
Ka, Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United
Nations.
I should like to express my most sincere thanks to
Ambassador Penny Wensley and Ambassador Ibra
Deguène Ka for their time, patience, perseverance and
leadership.
With
their
help
and
invaluable
contributions, the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS contained in draft resolution A/S-26/L.2 is
ready now for action by the Assembly.
I am sure that members of the Assembly join me
in expressing our heartfelt appreciation and thanks.
I give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Penny
Wensley of Australia.

43

A/S-26/PV.8

Ms. Wensley (Australia): It is an honour for me
and for the Government and country I represent —
Australia — that I have been asked to present this
landmark document to delegations for their approval
and adoption. Just as it was an honour to be asked by
you, Mr. President, to serve as co-facilitator of the
preparatory process for this historic special session on
HIV/AIDS.
It has been my privilege to work with you and
your staff, with the dedicated secretariats of the
General Assembly and of UNAIDS, with my fellow
facilitator, Ambassador Ka of Senegal, with the
agencies and departments within the United Nations
system that deal with HIV/AIDS and, above all, with
the delegates, the representatives of Member and
Observer States, to produce the declaration that is the
principal product of the session and which commits the
international community to taking purposeful action to
address this devastating disease and the threat that its
continuing growth and spread represents to mankind.
The Declaration, included as an annex to the
resolution contained in document A/S-26/L.2, is not a
perfect text, but it is a good text — action-oriented and
practical.
It comprises a comprehensive preambular section
and 11 separate sections, as you all see them listed in
the document, starting with what everybody recognizes
as the most important, leadership, and ending with
follow up. My fellow facilitator and dear friend
Ambassador Ka will speak in a little more detail about
each of the sections.
Each section begins with a caption, or in some
cases captions, designed to send a clear, simple,
striking message about the critical area being
addressed, whether this be resources, children
orphaned and made vulnerable by HIV/AIDS, or
research and development. The drafters were acutely
aware that one of the main purposes of this special
session was to raise international awareness of
HIV/AIDS, and we wanted to produce a text that was
not only readable but that drove the message home.
Each section in the Declaration identifies
priorities, sets broad goals and, in as many cases as
possible, specific targets for action, with specific
timetables for that action, in a framework of three, five
or ten years. And in each section, effort has been made
to show where the primary responsibility for taking the
action lies: whether it is with national Governments, at

44

the regional or international level, or a combination of
these.
All the recommendations and specific goals and
targets are firmly based on technical advice, drawing in
particular on the expertise and the experience of
UNAIDS and its cosponsoring agencies — and what
remarkable people they all are — as well as on the
practical, direct experience of Governments and others
who have been dealing or living with the pandemic.
Significant effort has been made to find the right
balance — and I believe that we have achieved that —
between prevention and care, treatment and support,
and to ensure a truly global approach, with proper
emphasis on the worst affected countries and regions
and those that are at most risk, while recognizing that
countries or communities not yet seriously affected
must be protected. As such, we believe that the
Declaration strikes new ground for preventive
approaches.
Other significant features are the strong emphasis
on human rights and gender issues and on coordination,
cooperation and partnership.
Particular emphasis is given throughout the whole
document to the role of people living with HIV/AIDS
and to civil society. It is no accident that the final
words of this governmental document refer to civil
society. The document takes account of different
cultural perspectives and values and acknowledges the
very different situations and circumstances that
confront individual countries.
That was not just necessary in order to achieve
agreement among 189 Member States; it was
fundamentally important to enable us together to
present the draft declaration to our Governments and to
our leaders, and to the international community as a
whole, as one which defines genuinely agreed common
priorities and commitments which all of us can endorse
and which, together, all of us can now work to
implement. For, once it has been adopted, it is only in
implementation that our commitment will be
meaningful, that the worth of the document will be
tested, that the lives of the millions of people now at
risk of HIV/AIDS may have a chance of being saved
and that the suffering and the pain of those already
infected or affected may be eased, their future, their
hope and their faith in humanity restored and their
belief in the United Nations as a compassionate
organization committed to the protection of the rights

A/S-26/PV.8

of all people, and especially of the weak and the
vulnerable, justified.

elements of an effective response in combating the
epidemic.

I commend the draft declaration of commitment
on HIV/AIDS for adoption by consensus.

The next section is headed HIV/AIDS and human
rights. Its commitments are based on the fact that
realization of fundamental human rights is essential to
reduce vulnerability to HIV/AIDS by enabling
members of vulnerable groups fully to enjoy their
human rights, inter alia by empowering women to
protect themselves against risk of infection.

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ibra Deguène Ka of Senegal.
Mr. Ka (Senegal) (spoke in French): It is a great
honour for my country, Senegal, and for me personally
to introduce to the General Assembly draft resolution
A/S-26/L.2, to which is annexed the draft declaration
of commitment on HIV/AIDS, “Global crisis — global
action”.
As members know, in the light of the devastating
scale and impact of HIV/AIDS, the Millennium
Assembly decided that urgent, coordinated world
action at all levels was needed to combat the epidemic.
The draft declaration is the global response of all
members of the international community to the world
crisis of the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Let me now
summarize that global response, whose commitments
are set out in 11 sections.
The preambular part of the draft declaration
consists of 36 paragraphs, which review previous
commitments and draw attention to all the aspects of
this disease that have the gravest effects on life, human
dignity and the exercise of fundamental human rights.
The next section focuses on shared leadership and
calls for proactive measures. Here, the proposed
commitments are based on a recognition that an
effective response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic requires
proactive measures, personal commitment, concrete
actions and strategies at the national, regional,
subregional and global levels. But such leadership also
depends on commitment by civil society, business and
the private sector working hand in hand with
Government.
The commitments set out in the section on
prevention are based on the belief that prevention must
be the mainstay of our global response in reducing the
incidence of HIV/AIDS among adolescents and young
men and women in the most affected countries through
prevention, information, education and communication
programmes.
The commitments in the next section focus on
care, support and treatment, which are fundamental

The commitments set out in the section on
reducing vulnerability focus on the belief that the
vulnerable must be given priority in the response, and
on working towards greater empowerment of women.
The next section focuses on children orphaned
and made vulnerable by HIV/AIDS. Its commitments
are aimed at providing special assistance for the ever
growing number of children orphaned and affected by
HIV/AIDS by creating a supportive environment and
protecting them from all forms of abuse.
The commitments set out in the section on
alleviating social and economic impact are intended to
establish the connection between the fight against
HIV/AIDS and investment in productivity and
economic growth.
The next section is on research and development.
Its commitments are intended to increase investment
and accelerate research on the development of HIV
vaccines, while building national research capacity,
especially in developing countries.
The commitments contained in the section on
HIV/AIDS in conflict and disaster affected regions
reflect the fact that natural disasters and humanitarian
emergencies are often fertile breeding grounds for the
spread of HIV/AIDS. Here, measures are proposed to
protect affected populations, including refugees,
internally displaced persons, women and children, from
the risk of infection.
The commitments proposed in the important
section on resources are aimed at ensuring that
additional, new and sustainable resources are drawn
from all possible sources in order to carry out the
crusade against HIV/AIDS. If we are to fight
effectively against this daunting epidemic that daily
causes further devastation, substantial resources must
be available. Between now and 2005, an annual global
expenditure of between $7 billion and $10 billion
should be progressively mobilized to combat

45

A/S-26/PV.8

HIV/AIDS. These resources will come primarily from
donor countries, national budgets, official development
assistance and the measures taken as part of the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative. Those
funds will also come from measures to alleviate
effectively and concertedly the debt burden of least
developed countries and low- to medium-income
countries. Increased investment in research is also
recommended in order to develop affordable
sustainable prevention technologies.
The section on resources draws, above all, on the
idea of creating, as a matter of priority, a global fund to
combat AIDS and to promote health. In particular, the
purpose would be to fund far-reaching and urgent
efforts to fight the epidemic.
Finally, the draft Declaration pays tribute to all
those who have involved themselves in the effort to
combat AIDS, first and foremost the SecretaryGeneral. It also requests them to take appropriate steps
to implement the commitments made in the course of
the special session.
Throughout the 36 paragraphs of the draft
Declaration’s preambular part and its 11 sections
containing the commitments, the exceptional situation
in Africa, and in particular in the sub-Saharan region,
has received particular attention, as has that of the
Caribbean and other seriously affected countries of the
world. The resources of all these countries to fight the
epidemic are extremely limited.
The draft resolution I have just summarized for
the Assembly was the subject of lengthy negotiations.
Launched on 15 December 2000, those negotiations
achieved overall consensus only late yesterday
afternoon, 26 June 2001. Between those two dates, two
sessions of informal intergovernmental consultations
and numerous other informal meetings took place,
reflecting the demanding nature of the task to which all
delegations devoted themselves. During that same
period an ongoing dialogue that took many forms was
held in both governmental and non-governmental
organizations. I must say that their participation
throughout the entire preparatory process was both
positive and extremely enriching.
But the negotiations were also difficult because,
over and above the differences in approach that are
inevitably involved when dealing with different
national contexts, convictions and situations, the
consideration of the issue of HIV/AIDS in all its

46

aspects revealed that there was extreme sensitivity with
regard to certain issues, and at times this raised doubts
about the actual possibility of agreement on core
issues. However, thanks to the ability of people on both
sides to rise above their differences, and thanks also to
the profound desire of all delegations involved in the
preparatory process to give more hope to the millions
of people infected throughout the world, we have
reached agreement today.
In the hope that this draft resolution will be
adopted by consensus, I would like, on behalf of my
friend and co-facilitator Ambassador Penny Wensley of
Australia, and on my own behalf, to appeal to our
leaders gathered here to see to it that the specific
commitments we are all about to enter into as part of
this global partnership against HIV/AIDS are
scrupulously respected.
I cannot conclude without saying how pleasant it
has been for Penny Wensley and me to work under
your leadership, Mr. President and to have been guided
by your valuable advice. I must also single out the
effective, competent and sustained support provided
both by the secretariat of UNAIDS and the team of the
General Assembly Affairs Division. Thanks are due to
one and all for the tremendous efforts they have made.
Of course, I also wish to thank our interpreters, on
whom we frequently inflicted difficult, if not painful,
working hours.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS, contained in draft resolution A/S-26/L.2.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
the draft Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS,
contained in draft resolution A/S-26/L.2?
Draft resolution A/S-26/L.2
(resolution S-26/2).

was

adopted

The President: I call on the representative of
Nepal, who wishes to speak in explanation of position.
May I remind delegations that explanations of
position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Sharma (Nepal): On behalf of my delegation
and on my own behalf, I wish to congratulate you, Sir,
the Secretary-General, Ambassador Wensley and
Ambassador Ka for the successful conclusion of this
special session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS.

A/S-26/PV.8

It has been possible only because of the wisdom and
dedication with which you and so many others have
worked day and night to bring us to this happy state,
when we have just adopted the historic document.
Overall, we are very happy with the final
outcome of this special session on HIV/AIDS. I hope
that this special session will make a real difference in
the lives of the victims of HIV/AIDS, of those who are
at risk and of ordinary people like you and me. Having
said this, my delegation would like to place the
following statement on record.
War against the pandemic of HIV/AIDS has
always remained high among our priorities.
Accordingly, my delegation has been actively engaged
ever since the preparatory process of the special
session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS began
in February. It has been evidently clear during the
process that winning the war against the menace of
HIV/AIDS is contingent entirely on the concerted
efforts of national Governments, civil society and the
private sector, as well as development partners,
philanthropic foundations and the community at large.
Among other things, the availability of new and
additional resources will be critical to implementing
the final document we have just adopted. The
deliberations, both in the plenary and at the interactive
round tables of this special session during the past
three days, have only strongly endorsed this reality.
Nepal’s constructive proposal to include in the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS a clear
reference to the commitment to fulfil official
development assistance targets was based on that fact
of life. We strongly believe that such a reference would
have been only appropriate in the fight against
HIV/AIDS, which has increasingly grown into a
development challenge of global scale, and especially
in light of the explicit agreement at the Third United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries,
concluded in Brussels only last month.
However, despite our best efforts in the spirit of
cooperation and understanding, our proposal remains
unaccommodated in the Declaration. Our intention all
along was to strengthen the Declaration and not to
stand in the way of the consensus that is so essential to
such a collective effort.
Nepal would have certainly preferred to have the
spirit, if not the exact formulation, of the Programme
of Action for the Least Developed Countries, 2001-

2010, on official development assistance in the
Declaration before us. Nevertheless, we have joined the
consensus in the belief that the developed countries
will continue to follow the spirit of the Third
Conference on the Least Developed Countries, while
allocating their resources for combating HIV/AIDS to
that group of countries, and that the wording contained
in paragraph 83 of the Declaration will not be used or
cited as a precedent in future negotiations on official
development assistance commitment to the least
developed countries.
The President: I call on the observer of the Holy
See.
Reverend Monsignor Frontiero (Holy See): My
delegation wishes to offer our sincere appreciation to
all of those who spent countless hours in discussing
and negotiating this outcome document. In this regard,
the Holy See wishes to give special commendation to
Ambassador Wensley of Australia and Ambassador Ka
of Senegal, as well as to the experts from the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, for their
tireless efforts.
The Holy See welcomes the consensus decision
of the special session and the adoption of the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS, and offers
the following statement of interpretation. I would ask
that the text of this statement, which includes the
official position of the Holy See, as follows, be
included in the report of the twenty-sixth special
session of the General Assembly.
As demonstrated by the calling of this special
session and revealed by the due attention given to the
pandemic, the family of nations has stated its resolve to
address the needs of those whose lives have been
ravaged by this horrible disease. The Holy See, in
taking part in these discussions, joins in that resolve
and in that commitment. The Holy See, in conformity
with its nature and particular mission, reaffirms all of
the reservations that it has previously expressed at the
conclusion of the various United Nations conferences
and summits, as well as the special sessions of the
General Assembly for the review of those meetings.
Nothing that the Holy See did during the
discussions leading up to the adoption of the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS should be
understood or interpreted as an endorsement of
concepts that it cannot support for moral reasons.
Regarding the terms “sexual health”, “reproductive

47

A/S-26/PV.8

health” and “sexual and reproductive health”, the Holy
See considers these terms as applying to a holistic
concept of health which embraces the person in the
entirety of his or her personality, mind and body and
which fosters the achievement of personal maturity in
sexuality and in the mutual love and decision-making
that characterize the conjugal relationship, in
accordance with moral norms.
The Holy See wishes to emphasize that, with
regard to the use of condoms as a means of preventing
HIV/AIDS infection, it has in no way changed its
moral position.
The Holy See regrets that not enough emphasis
has been given to an understanding of the relationship
between the promotion and protection of human rights,
based upon a recognition of the human dignity in
which all human beings share, and the ability to be
protected from the irresponsible behaviour of others. It
is only through respect and mutual understanding that
people can truly be empowered to protect themselves
and others from HIV infection. The Holy See also
regrets that irresponsible, unsafe and high-risk or risky
behaviour was not adequately discussed and addressed
in preparing this Declaration.
Finally, the Holy See continues to call attention to
the undeniable fact that the only safe and completely
reliable method of preventing the sexual transmission
of HIV is abstinence before marriage and respect and
mutual fidelity within marriage. The Holy See believes
that this is, and must always be, the foundation of any
discussion of prevention and support.
The Holy See asks that this statement of
interpretation be included in the report of this special
session.
The President: I call on the representative of
Mexico on a point of order.
Ms. Uribe (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
say on behalf of the Spanish-speaking delegations that
we are pleased that the Secretariat has detected the
omissions and translation and editing errors in the
Spanish version of the document adopted by the
General Assembly. In support of this, we will deliver to
the Secretariat a written version of the corrections of
the Spanish text that are necessary for it to faithfully
follow the adopted version. We request that the official
version in Spanish be corrected in accordance with the
comments that we are going to submit in due time.

48

The President: I call on the representative of
France on a point of order.
Mr. Gaubert (France) (spoke in French): In line
with the comments of the previous speaker, I am going
to make a very brief statement which has the support of
the following French-speaking countries: Belgium,
Benin, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada,
Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Gabon, Haiti, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Morocco, Poland, Romania, Switzerland
and Togo.
We are pleased that the Secretariat is taking the
initiative of undertaking a technical revision of the
translation, particularly in French, of the Declaration of
Commitment. We will submit to the Secretariat as soon
as possible suggestions that, in our view, will improve
the faithfulness of the French translation to the English
text.
The President: This concludes the statements
after the adoption of the Declaration.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
7 and 8?
It was so decided.
Closing statement by the President
The President: A historic special session of the
General Assembly has come to an end.
Three days ago we gathered here in New York to
unite in a massive global commitment to combat the
HIV/AIDS epidemic, responding to a global crisis of
unprecedented scale. Despite the overwhelming
statistics I highlighted on Monday, and the human
suffering they represent, there is hope. Speakers in the
plenary and in the round tables emphasized that we
have clearly reached a turning point: either we will
reach out to those who need this hope most, or we will
be held responsible for not acting when we have the
chance.
This special session is also historic in the sense
that it takes place only six months after the General
Assembly decided to convene the session to mount an
urgent response to this global crisis. An enormous
amount of work has been put in by all of us to make
this happen.
During these three days
intergovernmental organizations,

Member States,
United Nations

A/S-26/PV.8

agencies, civil society and private sector partners came
together — in round table discussions, panels,
workshops and countless meetings in corridors and
cafes — to share experiences, make new contacts and
explore potential collaboration in mounting an
expanded response to the epidemic.
This special session gave ample evidence of how
the United Nations can benefit from working with
partners in civil society and the private sector.
The Declaration of Commitment just adopted by
Member States is the first global battle plan against
AIDS. It contains concrete targets for all of us to
implement. It also contains mechanisms to follow up
on how those targets are to be reached. The beauty and
significance of this Declaration of Commitment lie in
its pragmatic and straightforward approach.
By adopting the Declaration, the world has made
a commitment to scale up efforts, with specific targets
and time frames in all critical areas, including
prevention, care, treatment and support. The
Declaration is a call for leadership and commitment at
all levels in all countries; it is a framework for broad
partnerships and a tool for specific strategies —
involving communities, young people and people
living with HIV/AIDS — to turn the tide of the
epidemic.
The Declaration is also a global call for the
resources that we so urgently need. In this regard, the
establishment of a global fund has been welcomed, and
a number of countries have announced pledges both to
the fund and to the fight against AIDS.

In closing, I should like to extend once again my
special thanks to the two facilitators, Ambassador
Wensley of Australia and Ambassador Ka of Senegal.
Their commitment and unyielding determination,
matched by the tireless efforts of all the representatives
here, and their resolve to find a solution to difficult and
sensitive issues, brought us to a positive conclusion of
this special session. Let me also express my
appreciation to the Chairmen of the round tables.
I should also like to thank the secretariats, the
Department of General Assembly Affairs and
Conference Services and the UNAIDS team for all
their hard work, as well as every other department in
this house that worked countless hours to make this
special session of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS
very special indeed.
Let me finish by saying that we worked hard, but
in fact, the real work starts only now — with new
determination and vision.
We have now come to the end of the twenty-sixth
special session of the General Assembly. May I invite
representatives to stand and observe one minute of
silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
Closure of the twenty-sixth special session
The President: I declare closed the twenty-sixth
special session of the General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 8.30 p.m.

49
