General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

236

request of the Economic and Social Council, and the
related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;"
2. Decides to terminate the activities identified in the
Secretary-General's report as obsolete, ineffective or of
marginal usefulness, taking into consideration the opinions of competent bodies;
3. Approves the proposals of the Set:retary-General
that an integrated and comprehensive procedure for the
identification of completed, obsolete, ineffective and
marginally useful activities should be established within
the framework of the planning, programming and
budgeting cycles of the United Nations:
4. Requests, to this end, the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination at its twenty-first session to
undertake, in the context of its consideration of programme priority setting, a comprehensive study of this
subject and to submit its conclusions to the Economic
and Social Council at its second regular session of 1981
and to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session:
5. Transmits the report of the Secretary-General to
the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination for
further consideration at its twenty-first session:
6. Requests the Secretary-General in the meantime
to identify obsolete, marginally useful and ineffective activities, in the preparation of the programme budget for
the biennium 1982-1983, for the consideration of the
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions in their examinations of the programme budget proposals;
7. Endorses the recommendation of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions that the submission of a full and 1:omprehensive
report on the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 3534 (XXX) and subsequent resolutions
affirming it, requested by the Assembly in its resolution
34/225, be deferred until the thirty-seventh session.

99th plenary meeting
I 7 December I 980
35 /210.

Personnel questions

The General Assembly.
Conscious of the importance that Member States attach to the personnel questions of the Organization.
Recalling the personnel policy and policy reform
measures set out in its resolutions 1436 (XIV) of
5 December 1959, 31/26 of 29 November 1976, 32/17 of
11 November 1977, 33/143 of 20 December 1978 and
34/219 of 20 December 1979,
Having examined the reports of the Secretary-General
on the composition of the Secretariat" and on the
implementation of personnel policy reforms."'
Taking nole of the reports of the Joint Inspection
Unit on the implementation of the personnel policy
reforms approved by the General Assembly in 1974 1 and on the status of women in the Professional category
and above in the United Nations system, 1 '
Concerned about the limited progress achieved in the
establishment of a coherent personnel policy, as well as
14

A/35/709.
"A/35/528.
"A/C.5/35/10.
"See A/35/418.
"See A/35/182

in the implementation of the measures set out in the
above-mentioned resolutions,
Noting the suggestions made by Member States during the deliberations of the Fifth Committee on this
question at the thirty-fifth session,
Convinced that the effective and consistent implementation of the personnel policy and policy reform
measures adopted by the General Assembly calls for an
integrated approach to the personnel management
requirements of the Organization,
Reafjinning that, as set out in Article IOI, paragraph 3,
of the Charter of the United Nations, the paramount
consideration in the employment of staff at every level is
the need for the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, and convinced that this is compatible with the principle of equitable geographical
distribution,
Recalling Article 8 of the Charter on the equality of
opportunity for men and women to participate in the
work of the Organiwtion,

I. Requests the Secretary-General to continue toestahlish a target of 40 per cent of all vacancies arising in
Professional posts subject to geographical distribution
during the period 1981-1982 for the appointment of
nationals of unrepresented and under-represented countries. in order to ensure that all such countries achieve
their desirable ranges during that biennium. while ensuring that the representation of countries which are within
desirable ranges does not decrease;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to establish and
pursue an active recruitment policy in order to raise the
levels of personnel recruited from unrepresented and
under-represented countries and countries below the
midpoint of their desirable ranges to the extent possible
towards this midpl)int:
3. Reaffirms that no post should be considered the
exclusive preserve of any Member State, or group of
States, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
this principle is applied faithfully in accordance with the
principle of equitable geographical distribution;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
permit replacement by candidates of the same nationality within a reasonable time-frame in respect of posts
held by staff members on fixed-term contracts, whenever this is necessary to ensure that the representation of
Member States whose nationals serve primarily on
fixed-term contracts is not adversely affected;
5. Reqffinns the need to increase the representation
of developing countries in senior and policy-formulating
posts, while safeguarding the principle of equitable
geographical distribution in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
6. Reaffirms the need to apply the regulations
regarding the age of retirement and not to grant exceptions beyond six months after the established age of
retirement:

II
Having considerf'd the report of the Secretary-General
on the geographica I distribution of Professional staff in
the Secretariat.'"
I. Requests the Secretary-General to calculate new
desirable ranges for all Member States, to apply from

VIII.

237

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

January 198 I, on the basis of the following initial
criteria:
(a) The base figure for the calculations will be 3,350
posts;
(b) The membership factor will be based on 7.75 as
the midpoint of the minimum desirable range:
(c) The population factor, to which 240 posts shall
be allocated, will be directly related to the populations
of the various regions and be distributed among the
regions in proportion to their populations:
(d) The contribution factor will be based on the distribution of the remaining posts in proportion to the
scale of assessments;
(e) The upper and lower limits of each range will be
based on a flexibility of 15 per cent up or down from the
midpoint but not less than 5.75 posts up or down:
2. Decides that, in future, 10 out of every additional
I00 posts shall be added to the population factor, and
the remaining posts shall be assigned equally to the
membership and contribution factors:
3. Decides further to review at its forty-first session
the question of desirable ranges, taking into account the
concept of parity between the membership and contribution factors and discussions on this concept at the
thirty-fifth session:
III
Conscious of the need to define objective methods of
recruitment in order to ensure the full implementation
of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
Requests the Secretary-General to implement the
procedures and mechanisms for recruitment and appointment described in the annex to the present resolution and to report to the General Assembly annually on
their implementation:
IV

Recalling its resolution 1436 (XIV) of 5 December
1959, in which it recommended, inter a/ia, that the
Secretary-General's endeavours to increase the number
of the Secretariat staff appointed on fixed-term contracts should be continued and encouraged,
Noting the growing tendency to increase the number
of fixed-term appointments of staff in various organizations of the United Nations system,
Concerned about the limited progress in the establishment of a policy of career development,
A ware of the divergent views on such matters as
various concepts of career, types of appointment and
career development expressed, inter alia, in the reports
of the Joint Inspection Unit and the International Civil
Service Commission,
Recognizing the need to study further those matters
and their impact on the implementation of Article IOI of
the Charter of the United Nations and personnel policy
reforms,
l. Requests the International Civil Service Commission and the Joint Inspection Unit to study further the
subjects of the concepts of career, types of appointment, career development and related questions and to
submit separate reports thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session:
2. Invites the International Civil Service Commission and the Joint Inspection Unit to co-operate in the
drafting of those two reports:

V

Noting resolution 24 adopted by the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women 40 and
the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the status of
women in the Professional category and above in the
United Nations system, 1 '
Expressing deep concern at the lack of progress in increasmg the proportion of women in the Secretariat,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
take the necessary measures to implement fully the
provisions of section III of General Assembly resolution 33 / 143;
2. Calls upon Member States to continue their endeavours to assist the United Nations and the specialized agencies to increase the proportion of women in the
Professional category and above, inter alia, by nominating more women candidates;
3. Calls upon the Secretary-General and the executive heads of the other organizations of the United
Nations system to end all forms of discrimination based
upon sex in recruitment, conditions of employment,
assignment, training and promotion;
4. Requests the Secretary-General and the executive
heads of the other organizations of the United Nations
system, in pursuit of these objectives:
(a) To increase the proportion of women, particularly at the senior levels, in accordance with the principle of equitable geographical distribution, and on personnel advisory and administrative boards, so as to meet
the target set in General Assembly resolution 33/143
and in resolution 24 of the World Conference o the
United Nations Decade for Women;
(h) To amend staff rules which inbihit the employment of spouses in the same organization or duty station
and to extend the practice of part-time employment and
flexible working hours as soon as possible;
(c) To ensure that staff members employed in
organizations of the United Nations system are not subject to sexual harassment in their place of work or in
connexion with their work:
(d) To ensure further that women employed in the
organizations of the United Nations system are not discriminated against because of their sex;
(e) To intensify efforts to eliminate prejudices and
other factors which work against the recognition of
women's capabilities and the improvement of their
status within organizations of the United Nations
system;
5. Requests the Secretary-General and the executive
heads of the other organizations of the United Nations
system to examine additional measures that will advance
the attainment of the policy directives concerning the
appointment, promotion and assignment of women in
the secretariats, including the possibility of designating a
senior official to co-ordinate these functions;
6. Requests the Joint Inspection Unit to continue to
monitor developments and to report to the General
Assembly not later than at its thirty-seventh session:
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as
Chairman of the Administrative Committee on Coordination, to report to the General Assembly, at its
thirty-sixth session, on progress made in the organiza. "' See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality. Development and Peace, Copenhagen, 14-30 July
/980 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum). chap. I, sect. B.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

238

tions of the United Nations system in the recruitment,
conditions of employment, career development and
promotion of women in the Professional category and
above;

(b) Regular recruitment missions composed of officials from both
the Office of Personnel Services and the substantive departments shall
be sent.

II.

VI
I. Decides that the application of the provision of
General Assembly resolutions dealing with mandatory
retirement at the age of 60 shall not be rigorously applied to locally recruited General Service staff who were
already employed by the Organization prior to December 1978 and will have less than 20 years' contributory
service in the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
at the age of 60;
2. Takes note of the work of the Panel to Investigate Allegations of Discriminatory Treatment in the
United Nations Se~retariat and requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to provide the Panel with the necessary facilities for its activities;
3. Reiterates its requests to the Secretary-General
that Professional staff of the United Nations should be
encouraged to work at more than one duty station and
that satisfactory performance during such tours of duty
should be considered an additional positive factor in
evaluating them for promotion.

99th plenary meeting
17 December 1980

ANNEX

Recruitment procedures for posts subject to geographical
distribution in the United Nations Secretariat

I.

BASIC PRELIMINARY REQUIREMENTS

1. All posts shall be classified at each level of grades by occupation, this concept meaning "posts having largely comparable functions and the same entrance level qualifications". This classification
shall be published.
2.

Distinction shall be made between:

Occupations for which it is reasonable to expect several vacancies each year;
(a)

(b) Those for which recruitmenl will be open only at widely spaced
intervals.

3. For posts falling under category 2 (a), job descriptions shall be
complemented by an "occupational description•·, which will outline
the main functions, the minimum level of qualifications and the
desirable supplementary qualifications.
4. The vacancy announcement for all posts shall incorporate the
existing job description. All changes in existing job descriptions and
the content of job descriptions of new posts shall be submitted for approval to the Office of Personnel Services, justified by references to
changes in programmes approved by intergovernmental bodies.

5.

All pending departures of staff shall be made known to the Office of Personnel Services by the substantive departments as far in advance as possible of the actual departure date.
6. No prior commitments for appointments shall be made by the
substantive departments.

ANNl·Al. WORK PI.AN 0~ RECRUITMENT

8. In order to facilitate the search for and the appointment of
qualified candidates, particularly from unrepresented and underrepresented countries and from among women, an annual work plan
of recruitment shall be established. The plan shall indicate:
(a) General data on the estimated number of recruitments by
grade and broad occupational groups:

(b) The targets to be reached during the year as to the number of
candidates to be recruited from unrepresented and under-represented
countries and among women, in accordance with the targets established by the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
(c) The various means by which recruitment will be undertaken.
such as competitive examinations, publicity or recruitment missions.

9. The Secretary-General will report to the General Assembly each
year on the implementation of the plan.

Ill.

USH)f COMPETITIV!c MEl HODS AT TfH. P-1
AND P-2 LEVELS

IO. At the P-1 and P-2 levels, recruitment shall be made as a rule
through competitive examinations. This principle shall be applied as
follows:
(a) Movement of staff from the General Service category to the
Professional category shall continue to be limited to 30 per cent of the
total number of posts available for appointment at these levels and is
to be regulated exclusively through competitive examinations under
the conditions outlined in section I. paragraphs I (g) and (i), of
General Assembly resolution 33 / 143 of 20 December 1978. No exceptions shall be authorized.

(b) For the remaining 70 per cent of posts at the P-1 and P-2 levels.
a transitional plan ending 3 I December I 982 shall be established for
applying progressively the method of competitive examination, with
due regard paid to the principle of equitable geographical distribution.
(c) Competitive examinations under the plan shall be devised on a
national basis, in consultation with the Governments concerned. They
shall contain measures to protect the confidentiality and objectivity of
the methods of selection and to ensure that the methods of testing take
into account the cultural and linguistic diversity of the membership of
the United Nations. They shall be geared to candidates with at least a
first-level university degree. The examinations should be based on
written tests in one of the official languages of the United Nations, including a general test, specialized examination by occupational groups
and personal interview. They may be organized simultaneously by
groups of countries, but a given number of vacancies should be
defined and offered to each country in advance, taking into account
the geographical representation of each Member State. A reserve list
shall be established from which all P-1 and P-2 posts will be filled.

IV.

M!-THOIJSOI· Rl:CRlllTMFNTATTfff P-J I l'VEI ANIJABOVF

11. The list of occupations for which it is reasonable to expect
several vacancies each year, as stated in section I. paragraph 2 (a).
above, shall be communicated to Member States, together with the
corresponding "occupation description" not later than I October of
the preceding year, and applications for candidatures shall be requested on this basis.

7. In order to increase the number of candidates from unrepresented and under-represented countries and of women candidates:

12. Vacancy announcements for all posts shall t,, ;ssued without
delay as soon as vacancies are known.

(a) Timely and frequent publicity shall be made regarding vacancies and recruitment of personnel, in co-operation with Member
States, through information media, United Nations offices, universities and professional organizations, including women's organizations whenever appropriate, so as to enable the Office of Personnel
Services to implement the personnel and recruitment policies adopted
by States Members of the Organization:

I 3. All applications received from candidates meeting the
minimum standards established by the Office of Personnel Services for
posts and occupations shall be put into the roster of external candidates. This roster shall be modernized rapidly and rendered operable
and efficient. A roster of internal candidates should be developed and
organized along the same lines and used in accordance with the Staff
Regulations and R ulcs of the United Nations.

V111.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

14. For each post open to recruitment a dossier shall be established comprising:
(a) A list of all potential qualified candidates, indicating name,
nationality, sex, age and qualifica•· ~<- this list shall be drawn from
the roster;

Their ranking by -rder of preference established by the substantive department concerned in consultation with lhe Office of Personnel Services;
(b)

(c) A summary of the interviews of the candidates considered most
suitable.
This dossier shall be made available to the Appointment and
Promotion Committee and the Appc,int,nent and Promotion Board.
15. For the evaluations of the candida, ·s, the Office of Personnel
Services, in consultation with the substantive c ·;,artments concerned,
shall take into account the t.argets indicated in the annual recruitment
work plan.
16, If the substantive department and the Office of Personnel Services agree on the selection of one candidate, this recommended candidate will be proposed for appointment, in accordance with the Staff
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations. If there is no agreement,
the matter shall be submitted for advice to lhe Appointment and
Promotion Committee and the Appointment and Promotion Board. If
no solution is found, the Secretary-General or his designated representative will take the final decision.
17, The qualifications, nationality and sex of selected candidates
shall be indicated on a list to be published twice a year and communicated to the delegations of Member States.

35 /211.

Establishment of the Committee of Governmental Experts to Evaluate the Present Structure of the Secretariat in the Administrative,
Finance and Personnel Areas

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the letter dated 8 November 1980 from
the Secretary-General to the Chairman of the Fifth
Committee, 41 in which he indicated that a committee of
experts should be established to evaluate the preseTit administrative structure of the Secretariat,
I. Decides, as an exception to its resolution 35/5 of
20 October 1980, to establish a Committee of Governmental Experts to Evaluate the Present Structure of the
Secretariat in the Administrative, Finance and Personnel Areas, which should submit a report prior to the
thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint sc:venteen experts through consultations with regional groups
and with due regard to equitable geographical distribution;
3. Requests the Committee to take fully into account
the views expressed in the Fifth Committee during the
discussions of the relevant items on the agenda of the
thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, pending and
without prejudice to the decision to be taken by the
General Assembly during its thirty-sixth session on the
above-mentioned report, to take such interim measures,
within the existing administrative structure, as to ensure
that the Office of Personnel Services has the authority
necessary to implement effectively the personnel policies
outlined in the relevant resolutions of the Assembly.

35/212.

Respect for the privileges and immunities of officials of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the statement by the Administrative
Committee on Co-ordination in annex I to its annual
overview report for I 979 /80, 42
Mindful of Article 100 of the Charter of the United
Nations, under which each Member State has undertaken to respect the exclusively international character
of responsibilities of the Secretary-General and the staff
and not to seek to influence them in the discharge of
their responsibilities,
Mindful also that under the same Article of the Charter the Secretary-General and the staff shall not, in the
performance of their duties, seek or receive instructions
from any Government or from any other authority external to the Organization,
Reaffirming the relevant Staff Regulations of the
United Nations,
A ware of the absolute necessity that staff members be
enabled to discharge their tasks as assigned to them by
the Secretary-General without interference on the part
of any Member State or any other authority external to
the Organization,
Recalling that, under Article I 05 of the Charter, officials of the Organization shall enjoy in the territory of
each of its Member States such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the independent exercise of their
functions in connexion with the Organization, which is
indispensable for the proper drscharge of their duties,
Realizing that staff member~ of the specialized agencies enjoy similar privileges and immunities,
Mindful of the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations of 13 February I 946';
and of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies of 21 November 1947,4'
Concerned about reports alleging that the privileges
and immunities of officials of these organizations have
been encroached upon,
I. Appeals to all Member States to respect the
privileges and immunities accorded to officials of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies by the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United
Nations of 13 February 1946 and by the Convention on
the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies of 21 November 1947;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system with the
request to furnish information on cases in which there
are clear indications that the status of the staff members
of such organizations has not been fully respected;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, on behalf of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination,
a report to the General Assembly containing any cases
in which the international status of the staff members of
the United Nations or of the specialized agencies has not
been fully respected.
99th plenary meeting
17 December 1980

99th plenary meeting
/ 7 December 1980
'

1

A/C.5/35/48.

239

,, E/1980/34.
'' Resolution 22 A (I).
" Resolution 179 (II)
