88

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

fourth session, a Committee on Conferences, consisting
of fifteen Member States ;
2. Decides further that this Committee shall have
the following functions :
(a) To submit to the General Assembly at each
regular session a calendar of meetings and conferences
for the following year for the competent organs of the
United Nations, including the subsidiary organs of
the General Assembly;
( b) To undertake such other tasks in this general
field as may be requested by the General Assembly;
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to designate the Member States, on the basis of broad
equitable geographical distribution, to serve on the
Committee fo: three years ;
4. Requests the members of the Committee to nominate representatives with wide experience in the work
of the United N'ations;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To consult with the other members of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, in accordance
with the recommendation in chapter IX of the second
report of the Ad H oc Commitee of Experts to Examine
the Finances of the United Nations and the Specialized
Agencies, and to draw up in August of each year, for
submission to the General Assembly, in his capacity
as Chairman of the Administrative Committee on Coordination, the provisional calendar of meetings and
conferences planned by the entire United Nations
family of organizations for the two fallowing calendar
years;
( b) To prepare at the same time, in his capacity as
chief administrative officer of the United Nations, a
complete statement of the existing resources and of
the additional resources which would be required far
the proposed schedule of meetings and conferences of
the Organization for the two following calendar years;
( c) To transmit this material, together with an indication of any difficulties foreseen in reconciling the
resources available and the proposed schedule, to the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions and to the Committee on Conferences;
6. Invites the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions to examine, early in its
autumn session, the material provided by the SecretaryGeneral and to forward its comments to the Committee
on Conferences;
7. Requests the Comrnittee on Conferences to meet
as necessary to perform its functions, and:
(a) Early in the regular session of the General
Assembly, to review the infarmation submitted to it
and formulate recommendations on proposals for new
meetings and conferences under consideration by the
Assembly, far transmission to the appropriate Main
Committee;
( b) In the course of the regular session, to examine
any further proposals for new meetings and conferences
and submit its recommendations to the Main Committee
concerned;
(e) In the closing stages of the regular session, and
in consultation with the Chairmen of the principal
or~ns and of the Main Committees, to draw up the
calendar of United ;-J ations mcetings and conferem.:es
for the following year, with recommendations concerning the schedule for the succeeding year, and to transmit

this calendar to the General Assembly for final approval;
8. Requests that the action required in sub-paragraphs 7 ( b) and ( c) above be taken in sufficient time
to enable the Secretary-General, and in turn the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions and the Fifth Cornmittee, to recommend the
inclusion of funds for carrying out the approved calendar
in the regular budget estimates for the fallowing year;
9. Rccommends that all competent organs of the
United Nations, including subsidiary organs of the
General Assernbly, should bear in mind that proposals
involving new rneetings and conferences would be
subject to the recommendations of the Committee on
Conferences and to final approval by the Assembly;
10. Invites thc Secretary-General of the United
N ations and the executive heads of the specialized
agencies and of the International Atomic Energy
Agency to give the Committee on Conferences whatever
assistance it may require in discharging its responsibilities.
1501st plenary meeting,
20 Dece111ber 1966.

*

*

•

The President of the General Assembly, in p1,rsuance of
paragraph 3 of the above resolution, designated the members
of the Committee on Conferences.27
The Coinmittee on Co11ferences will be composed of the
following Member States: ALGERIA, BURMA, CONGO (DEMOCRATIC fuPUBLIC OF), CzECHOSLOVAKIA, FRANCE, INDIA, JAMAICA, JAPAN, NEw ZEALANo, SPAIN, UNION OF SovIET SoCIALisT REPUBLICS, UNITED K.lNGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN ANO
NORTHERN lRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, VENEZUELA
amf ZAMBIA.

2240 (XXI). Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations

The General Assembly
Resolves that:
(a) For the year 1967, the rates of assessment for
the States admitted to mernbership in the United
N ations at thc twenty-first session of the General AJ;,sembly shall be as follows:
Member State

Rate of a.r.ressnient

Barbados
Botswana
Guyana . . .

0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04

Lesotho
And for Indonesia, which resumed full
participation in the Organizaticn on
28 September 1966 . . .

0.39

These rates shall be added to the scale of assessments
for 1967 as established in General Assembly resolution
2118 (XX) of 21 December 1965;
(b) For the year 1966, Guyana, which became a
Member of the United Nations on 20 September 1966,
Botswana and Lesotho, which became Members on 17
October 1966, and Barbados, which became a Member
on 9 December 1966, shall contribute an amount equal
to one ninth of their rates of assessment for 1967, applied to the net budget for 1966;
27 See A/6634.

89

Rcsolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committec
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~ ~ ------

~

l. Believes that, as a temporary measure and under
the existing conditions, increased recruitment on the
basis of fixed-term contracts, especially in tbe case of
developing countries, might help to achieve a balanced
geographical distribution;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to give preference
to candi dates from inadequately represented countries;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to study the
question of determining the desirable ranges of posts
for individual countries, taking into account tbe level
of appointment togetber witb tbe number of posts;
4. Further invites tbe Secretary-General, in bis
capacity as Chairman of the Administrative Committee
on Co-ordination, to draw the attention of tbe competent
authorities of tbe specialized agencies to tbis problem
at a forthcoming session of that Committee ;
5. Requests tbe Secretary-General to take tbe present
resolution into account in his future reports on the
composition of the Secretariat.
1501st plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

(e) Tbe four new Members-Barbados, Botswana,
Guyana and Lesotho-and Indonesia shall make advanees to tbe Working Capital Fund at their rates of
assessment for 1967 applied to the authorized amount
of the Fund for that year.
1501st plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2241 (XXI). Composition of the Secretariat
A

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind tbe considerable cbanges wbicb bave
occurred in tbe membersbip of the United Nations and
the specialized agencies,
Recalling tbe provisions of Articles 100 and 101 of
tbe Cbarter of the United Nations,
Recalling further its resolution 1928 (XVIII) of 11
December 1963 on this question,
N oting that in tbe determination of tbe recruitment
priorities tbe Secretary-General bears in mind the
need for a more equitable distribution of staff among
the Member States witbin the various regions, in
particular at tbe levels of ·senior posts,
Noting with satisfaction tbe efforts already made by
tbe Secretary-General to improve the geograpbical distribution of posts in tbe Secretariat and mentioned in
his report on tbe composition of the Secretariat, 28
Considering nevertbeless that arrangements sbould
be made to ensure an even more equitable distribution
of posts,
Recognizing tbe need for a large proportion of
permanent contracts and fixed-term contracts of longer
duration to ensure tbe stability and efficient operation
of the Secretariat, and noting the statement of tbe
Secretary-General in paragrapb 14 of his report,

B
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind rule 51 of the rules of procedure of
tbe General Assembly,
N oting tbe statement by tbe Secretary-General in
paragraph 3 of his report on tbe composition of the
Secretariat,28
Recognizing tbe limitations in regard to the recruitment of staff wbicb result from language considerations,
Requests the Secretary-General to study the methods
which should be used to ensure a more equitable use
of the working. languages of the Organization and a
better balance among those languages in the recruitment of staff at ali levels, and in particular at the higher
levels, of tbe Secretariat, and to include bis conclusions
on this question in bis future reports.
1501st plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

28 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Stssion, Annexes, agenda ítem 81, document A/6487.

2242 (XXI). Budget for the financia} year 1967
A
BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 1967

The General Assembly
Resolves that for tbé financia! year 1967:
l. An amount of $US 130,314,230 is appropriated for the following purposes:
Section
([·s dollars)

I. Sessions of the General Assembly, the councils, commissions and committees; special meetings and conferences

PART

l. Travel and other expenses of representatives and members oí commissions,
committees and otber subsidiary bodies
............... .
2. Special meetings and conferences
....... .
TOTAL, PART
PART

1,241,750
l,8IR,150

I

3,059,900

II. Staff costs and related expenses

3. Salaries and wages .................................................. .
4. Common staff costs ................................................. .

57,046,500
13,572,700
