UNITED

NATIQNS

SECURITY

COU

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2605th

MEETING:

13 SEPTEMBER 1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.. ... .. ... .... .. .. .... ... ... .. .... ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 11 September 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17456) . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2605)

S/PV.2605

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2605th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
President: Sir John’ THOMSON
(United Kingdom
Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

13 September

accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

of

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian
Arab Republic) took the place reserved for him at the side of
the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT:
I should also like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 12 September
1985 from the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the.Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which
reads as follows:

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2605)
1. Adoption

1985, at 3.15 p.m.

of the agenda

2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 11 September 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Qatar to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17456)

“I have the honour to request that I be allowed to
participate in the Security Council’s consideration of
the item entitled ‘The situation in the occupied Arab
territories*, in accordance with the provisions of rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure, in my capacity as
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian people.**

The meeting was called to order at 3.55 p.m.
Adoption of tbe agenda

4. On previous occasions the Security Coun:il has
extended invitations to representatives of other bodies of
the United Nations in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda, In accordance with past practice in
this matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
pursuant to rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian people.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 11 September 1985 from tbe Permanent
Representative of Qatar to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17456)

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the 2604th meeting, I invite the representative
of Qatar and the observer for the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) to take seats at the Council table; I
invite the representatives of Israel and Jordan to take
the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

It was so decided.
5. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council to document S/17462,
which contains the text of a letter dated 12 September
1985 from the representative of Jordan to the SecretaryGeneral.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. AI-Kawari
(Qatar) and Mr. Mansour (Palestine Liberation Qrganization) took a place at the Council table: Mr. Netanyahu
(Israel) and Mr. Salah (Jordan) took the places reserved
for them at the side pf the Council chamber.

6. The first sneaker on my list is Mr. Clovis Maksoud,
Observer of the League of A-mb States, to whom the Council extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure at the 2604th meeting. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in

7. Mr. MAKSOUD:
I should like to convey to you, Mr.
President, and through you to the members of the Security
Council the deep appreciation of the League of Arab
States for the kind invitation extended to me to make a
statement today.
1

I

I

8. We in the Arab world detect at times a measure of
impatience with our repeated resort to the Security Council. The degree of impatience varies from those who think
we are testing their friendship to those who feel that we are
forcing a veto on a simple draft resolution to prove a
point. We in the Arab world are not oblivious to the view
that repeated resolutions tend to be devalued in their
meaning, -that it is easier to ignore them, and that they
transform this body into an arena in which confrontation
is more important than results.

,14. I should like to call those facts a “Kahanization” of7
the Israeli body politic. Of course, at this moment some
Israelis would deny that Kahane represents anything more
than a lunatic fringe, but it was once said that Sharon too
represented a lunatic fringe; General Eytan represented a
lunatic fringe; Shamir, Begin and others have at one time
or another represented fringe groups in the overall Zionist
body politic. It is our submission that inherent in Zionist
policy and in Israeli behaviour is the potential “Kahanization” of the body politic.

9. That view has been expressed to us, in one form or
another, throughout the past months in order to limit the
usefulness of this body as the proper mechanism for conflict
resolution, especially in the Middle East, but also with
regard to the questions of apartheid and of Namibia. In
other words, some-particularly
in some Western countries-would prefer that the anachronistic Israel and apartheid South Africa were provided with an immunity which
would prevent the imposition against them of the necessary
sanctions flowing from condemnation of their behaviour,
practices and racist policies.

15. We have seen how exuulsion
becomes a matter of
*
ideological fulfilment. That is why, when we have recourse
to the Security ,Council it is in order to arrest this process.
The prospects for a just and comprehensive peace in the
area are undermined if there is a certain level of permissiveness’ for one single settler. If these militarily-equipped
settlers in the various occupied territories of Palestine are
the target of guerrilla acts from within the occupied territories, the Israeli representative calls them “civilian targets”.
What constitutes a civilian target? Is not the establishment
and ‘proliferation of settlements in the occupied territories
illegal? Is not the object of those settlements to preempt
forever the right of the Palestinians to self-determinationa right which has been recognised by everybody?

10. I want to make that statement in order to impress
upon members of the Council that we-whether PLO,
Lebanon or any other Arab country-are aware of our
responsibilities when we come to the Security Council to
seek redress for some of our legitimate grievances.

16. When the Israelis label resistance activities in the
West Bank and Gaza “acts of terrorism”, it is identical to
Mr. Botha in South Africa denouncing acts of legitimate
resistance as “terrorism”. Israel and South Africa are the
two remaining entities in the world able to defy the United
Nations, international law and the Charter of the United
Nations; this is because they feel that they arc shielded and
immune from any sanctions against their actions.

11. It has been said-indeed, it was said in this Chamber
yesterday--that from the complaint to the Security Council one would think that we had turned to the Council
because hundreds of thousands of Palestinians had been
expelled. Let me make it very clear that this was done
upon the initiative of the,collective Arab Group. All the
Arab States met and decided to come to the Security
Council. Of course, we know that the expulsions, the restrictive measures, the deportations and the coercive measures that have been undertaken in the occupied Palestinian
territories are part of a pattern. The measures taken in the
last few weeks are probably the latest manifestation of an
unfolding process.

17. Thus, unless the situation heats to the boiling point,
it is the intention of the Arab States to resort to the Security Council in order to prevent the further escalation of a
pattern which provokes a cycle of violence. We do so, not
to devalue United Nations resolutions, but to enhance the
value of the Security Council. We do so, knowing full well
what awaits us; knowing full well that there are members
of the Council reluctant to accept our assessmentalthough they might accept it when it is too late. There are
members which intend to block any deterrence that this
Council can apply in order to establish a climate of peace
conducive to a just and comprehensive peace in the area.

12 For us, the question has been: Do we arrest this process?Can we invoke the authority of the Security Council
and the United Nations and its machinery to arrest Israel’s
continued arrogation to itself of the right not only to
undertake the demographic and geographic mutilation of
the West Bank and Gaza, but also to deny the people in
these areas a territory within which they can articulate
their national identity and their political -rights?

18. We in the League of Arab States are aware that what
is taking place today exemplifies what has been done in the
past by the Israeli occupation authorities and, more important, is a sample of what might take place in the future if
the process is not arrested at the proper moment. Inherent
in this situation are incalculable dangers, with crisismanagement becoming more and more difficult and ultimately impossible, with polarization reaching acute
dimensions which could threaten not only peace in the
region, but the basic rights of peoples everywhere. The
ideology of violence has been spreading like an infection,
and we have been trying to halt it. The resolutions of the
Arab League summits are an investment in the option of
peace.

13. The question is much more profound than mere acts
of deportation-than
mere acts of destroying houses. It
reveals a situation which is pregnant with great dangers for
the future. We see today a growing polarization, with
colonial settlers in the West Bank and Gaza undertaking
militaristic activities. Not only are they seeking to annihilate the integrity of the territory on which the Palestinians
can express self-determination, but they are also proceeding to establish new facts.
2

19. That is why we believe the Security Council can prepare the ground for something that is vital-the convening
of an international conference, under United Nations auspices, where all the issues that emerge from the ArabIsraeli conff ict would be dealt with simultaneously in so far
as they impact upon each other. Therefore, we think that a
proper resolution that would deter and arrest the flow of
violations by Israel in the occupied territories might be an
investment in a comprehensive settlement of the ArabIsraeli conflict in a manner that would guarantee for the
Palestinians the right to self-determination and the return
of the occupied territories, and so we consider this meeting
to be a very important path towards the ultimate resolution of the conflict.

.

20. However. if that uath is not taken, if there is further
escalation, the-problems will become more complex, and
what we are witnessing in what I call the “Kahanimtion”
of Israel might continue, because the whole evolution of
the Israeli body politic has proved that what is apparently
perceived to be extreme to&y becomes the policy of
tomorrow, unless it is arrested by the invocation of the
credibility and effectiveness of the machinery of the United
Nations and particularly of the Security Council.
21. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, Mr. Massamba SarrC. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
22. Mr. SARRE (Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People)
(interpretation from French): “United
Nations for a
better world” -what a fine theme. In a few days’ time, at
the opening of the fortieth session of the General Assembly, we shall begin our work with that as our theme-a
theme, but also a fine. ideal, and, as with every ideal, it is
rather asymptotic, but what is important is that we should
do everything in our power to achieve it. That means putting aside passion and confrontation and trying to solve
every conflict, whatever its scope, in a spirit of cooperation and understanding, In his report on the work of
the Organization,’ the Secretary-General has already set
that tone, and I am sure that the ideas he has developed
will be very much borne in mind, not only by the General
Assembly, but above all by the Security Council, which is
holding its last meeting before that great event to which we
all look forward.
23. I wish first, Sir, to congratulate you most sincerely on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of September. We are personally familiar with your
qualities as a diplomat well versed in international relations, coming as you do from a country that has shown the
way as regards democracy and respect for human rights.
We are also personally familiar with your devotion to the
ideals of the United Nations. I am therefore convinced that
under your leadership our work will be successful,
24. I wish also to take the opportunity, Sir, to pay tribute
to your predecessor, Mr. Oleg Troyanovsky, representa-

tive of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, for the
exemplary manner in which he conducted the Council’s
proceedings in August.
.
25. I also thank all the members of the Council for having permitted me, as Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, to take part in the debate on Israeli practices
against the population of the occupied Palestinian
territories.
26. For all the members of our Committee the question
before us, which goes to the very heart of our mandate, is all
the more a cause of concern because it directly affects
not only the future of the Palestinian population in the
occupied territories but also international peace and security. The very fact that the Security Council is meeting to
consider those practices confirms the profound concern of
the international community about what is happening in
the occupied territories and its consequences, which are
very serious, to say the least.
27. In my letter to the Secretary-General of 11 September [S/174553, I gave details of the serious measures
recently taken by the Israeli military authorities against the
Palestinian population in the occupied territories. In an
earlier letter, &ted 8 August [S/1739z], the Acting Chairman of the Committee had already expressed the Committee’s deep concern about the decision taken by Israel to
reinstate its policies of “administrative detention”, detention that can last for as long as six months without trial,
deportation of those considered to be a “threat to security”,
the tightening of censorship and other repressive measures
against the Palestinian population.
28. According to several recent press reports, the military
authorities have launched a.massive campaign of detaining
Palestinians under the policy that I have just described, and
they are currently holding more than 50 people on the West
Bank, 20 of whom were arrested on 2 September. Several
people have also been arrested in Gaza. A curfew has been
imposed in a number of towns-Jenin, Tulkarm, Nablus,
Hebron, Gaza and others-and in a number of Palestinian
refugee camps.
29. Three days ago, again according to press reports,
Israeli army soldiers fired on four young Arabs, including
a boy of 12, in Hebron; all were wounded.
30. Those measures have been taken in an atmosphere of
growing provocation by Jewish settlers living in the occupied Palestinian territories, provocation clearly aimed at
forcing the local population to emigrate. In all objectivity,
we are compelled to point out that those acts of provocation have even been denounced by some of the occupying
authorities.
31. After that brief survey of the situation-which
has
already been also made by preceding speakers-I wish
simply to say that in the current year, in accordance with
its mandate, the Committee has continued to follow

closely events directly affecting the question of Palestine
and the rights of the Palestinians. In that regard it has
spared no effort to promote the implementation of its
recommendations. We have noted with growing concern
that the situation in the occupied territories has continued
to deteriorate.

37. In this regard, I should mention that during seminars
and symposiums on the question of Palestine held by nongovernmental organizations under the aegis of the Committee, participants vigorously stressed the high priority to
be attached to this Conference, since it should open the
way to a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the
question.

32. As Chairman of the Committee, I have repeatedly
and urgently drawn the attention of the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council to violations of
the fundamental rights of the Palestinians by the Israeli
authorities, in defiance of international law and relevant
United Nations resolutions.
,

38. On behalf of the Committee, I stress that the Palestine question has now reached a critical phase. We urge
members of the Council to redouble their efforts to produce a just and lasting solution to this question.
39. For that purpose, what is needed is a debate free
from all passion connected with immediate self-interests.
First and foremost, this debate should be about the ways
and means of convening the International Peace Conference on the Middle East.

33. It is high time that the facts were faced. In the
absence of any just and lasting solution to the Palestinian
question-indeed,
to the question of the Middle Easttension and violence will only increase in the Palestinian
territories and the other occupied territories. The Committee has constantly stressed that the situation will only continue to deteriorate as long as the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people are not fully recognized. The United
Nations without any doubt has the responsibility to ensure
the fulfilment of these rights, as well as the physical protection of the Palestinians in the occupied territories and of
other peoples of the region.

40. The Committee is convinced that the International
Peace Conference on the Middle Fast, which enjoys almost
unanimous support, offers all the interested parties tremendous possibilities of participation in negotiations,
which in their turn should lead to a just and lasting solution to the question. In the face of the constant deterioriation of the situation in the occupied territories, we appeal
once again to the Council to take appropriate measures to
revive, on the basis of the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations and the relevant resolutions
of the Organization, the policy of dialogue among all the
parties, in order to put an end to this tragic situation that
has lasted all too long and to establish the just and lasting
peace so long awaited by all the States and peoples of the
Middle East.

34. We believe that it is now up to the Council to give
effect to the recommendations of the Committee and the
recommendations adopted by consensus at the Intemational Conference on the Question of Palestine, held at
Geneva from 29 August to 7 September 1983. We would
recall once again that these recommendations are solidly
based on the internationally recognized fundamental principles regarding the Palestine question, which is the very
heart of the Arab-Israeli conflict.

41. Mr. MOHAMMED
(Trinidad and Tobago): It is
indeed a pleasure for my delegation to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of September. Your well-known diplomatic
skills, together with your experience, will serve us in good
stead this month.

s35. That is why, in its programme of work for this year,
our Committee decided to continue, as a matter of priority, to do everything in its power to bring about the rapid
convening of the International Peace Conference on the
Middle East, in accordance with the recommendations of
the Geneva Conference and General Assembly resolutions
38158 C of 13 December 1983 and 39/49 D of 11 December
1984.

42. My delegation also wishes to pay a tribute to Mr.
Oleg Troyanovsky, the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, for the excellent manner in
which he conducted the affairs of the Council during the
month of August.

36. With that aim in view, the Committee, as the Council
is aware, sent delegations to the capitals of several States
members of the Council to consider the best ways of furthering the implementation of these recommendations. During those exchanges of views with Governments, the
Committee stressed the overriding necessity to convene the
Conference as soon as possible, and laid stress on the
important role to be played by the Council in this field.
The Committee was very much encouraged by the positive
reaction of the Governments concerned, by their understanding of the need to take concrete measures urgently,
and by their determination to contribute actively to the
efforts to bring about a comprehensive and just settlement
of the Palestine question, under the auspices of the United
Nations.

43. The Security Council and the General Assembly
have been seized of the problems of the Middle East for
decades now. There is need -for a comprehensive peace
settlement in the Middle East. We believe that two essential elements of such a settlement are the right of the Palestinian people to statehood and a corresponding right of all
States in the Middle East to live in peace and stability
within secure borders. My delegation is of the view that
positive efforts should be made to attain these objectives
and we are concerned and disturbed by recent evidence
which indicates that certain actions being taken would frustrate their attainment. My delegation considers such actions
to be a threat to international peace and security and as such
to require the attention of the Council.
4

44. Specific cases of curfews, detentions, deportations
and repressive measures in the territories occupied by
Israel, especially in the West Bank and Gaza, have been
communicated to the Security Council; they have also
been reported in the international media. My Government
views these repressive measures in a wider context. If these
actions are considered within the context of Israeli expropriation of land and the establishment of settlements, this
would seem to indicate that the Israeli authorities are instituting a programme to change the very nature and character of these occupied territories and further frustrate the
just aspirations of the Palestinian people. Such action in
the occupied territories is contrary to international law and
is unacceptable to the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago.

politicians, would extend from the Nile to the Euphrates.
Were it not for this ideology, together with Israel’s policies
and well-planned schemes, the Middle East crisis, the crux
of which is the Palestinian question, would never have
arisen. All members of the Council-indeed,
all the
Member States-have no doubt that this crisis constitutes
a threat to international peace and security.
51. Therefore, we Arabs find ourselves in a life-anddeath conflict with Israel, which still occupies our territories, displaces our people and seeks by every means to
expel the indigenous population from their territory
through the creation of circumstances which Israel
believes-mistakenly-will
force the Arabs to forego their
struggle, surrender and leave their homeland. However,
this Israeli wish is not being realized, since the popular
uprising we are witnessing in occupied Palestine, the
Golan Heights and southern Lebanon is but the natural
response to the policy of invasion, expansion and occupation, with its accompanying practices, the like of which
have not been seen since the expansionist and racist nazism
during the Second World War. The only similarity at present is the war being’ waged by the white minority regime in
South Africa against our African brethren, who form 90
per cent of that country’s population, and the revolt of its
masses against the settler colonialists is escalating and
broadening day by day.

45. My delegation calls upon Israel to abide scrupulously
by the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949.2
46. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
47.

Mr. EL-FA’ITAL

(Syrian Arab Republic) (inferpre-

tarion from Arabic): I have the pleasure at the outset of

conveying to you, Sir, our best wishes and congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency for this month. In
view of your country’s great knowledge of the problems of
the Middle East and of the crises that beset this vital
region, we are confident that you will impart your wellknown wisdom to the Council’s business.

52. One wonders why millions of Africans have still not
succeeded in destroying apartheid and dismantling the
minority rGgime and why the Arabs-with
their great
potential in every field-cannot
confront the persistent
Israeli invasion, despite their recognized absolute rights to
self-defence and the liberation of their land which they can
exercise by all means. The answer is that the two racist
regimes in Pretoria and Tel Aviv are protected, supported
and financed by United States imperialism, whose reach
extends to many regions of our globe. Thus we Arabs in
our region and the African people in South Africa find
ourselves in an ongoing confrontation with those who support and protect those racist regimes.

48. We have the pleasure also of expressing our deep
appreciation to Mr. Troyanovsky, representative of the
Soviet Union-a country with which we maintain strong
bonds of friendship and mutual respect. We congratulate
him on the exemplary and objective manner in which he
guided the Council’s work during the past month.

53. The patriotic uprisings in the occupied Arab territories, on the one hand, and in South Africa, on the other,
constitute the beginning of a full-scale struggle by the peoples of those two regions to rid themselves once and for all
of injustice and foreign domination, regardless of the
power of those protecting the racist regimes. Resistance,
martyrdom and the protection of rights by all means available are the only alternative in opposing the racists, be it in
South Africa, occupied Palestine, the Golan Heights or
southern Lebanon, in order to defeat the invaders and
occupiers.

49. The subject before the Council is not new. It is closely
connected with the racist expansionist nature of Israel.
Every racist expansionist entity must use violence, terrorism and repression in order to achieve its sinister objectives. Undoubtedly Israel, as its spokesmen themselves
state, is the embodiment of settler colonialism, which can
be carried out only through expulsion and displacement of
hundreds of thousands of Arabs from the territories Israel
occupies and the subjugation of those who remain by
means of the iron fst, enslavement and humiliation. As
members are well aware, such expulsion and displacement
and the Judaization of these territories to create a so-called
exclusively Jewish State have formed the ideological basis
of the Zionist movement since the middle of the past
century.

54. We are proud to pay tribute from thii rostrum to the
struggle of those who fall on the battlefield, be it in South
Africa, Palestine, the Golan Heights or southern Lebanon.
We pay tribute also to their determination in opposing
invasion regardless of sacrifice. Victory shall reward those
who fight in defence of their homelands, their existence
and their dignity. Victory for the peoples is a historic
inevitability.

50. Since its establishment through aggression, and in
pursuit of this ideology, Israel has consistently perpetrated
the most heinous crimes so as to create an exclusively
Jewish State which, in the view of Israeli theoreticians and
5

55. Until quite recently. fabrications and lies have been
heard from imperialist quarters to the effect that the socalled constitutional reforms in South Africa were capable
of preempting the African revolution. But such concoctions, which were wrapped in the slogan of “constructive
engagement”, did not fool the masses, which lit the fires of
the revolution to defend their human and national rights,
56. As for the Middle East-where resistance is intensifying,and expanding-imperialism
is trying to deflect the
Arab national revolution by putting forth ideas intended
only to preempt that revolution and that of the Palestinian ‘people against the Zionist settler invasion, from
which the region has suffered so much. But the struggling
masses will continue their tight for liberation, because they
are well aware of the nature of the racist aggressor and of
the schemes to sow despair among the Arab people, thus
putting out the flame of resistance in its soul. What is
taking place in the West Bank, Gam, the Golan Heights
and southern Lebanon shows that the determinations to
resist is stronger than ever and follows the logic of history.
57. It is regrettable ‘that successive American Administrations-in particular the current Administration, which
has failed abysmally in its African policy-have
made
attempts at salvaging aparrheid while keeping Israel-the
equivalent of South Africa-afloat
by marketing Israel
under the guise of “democratic values*‘. But that racist
entity has been forcibly transplanted into our region by
means of trampling underfoot the Palestinian people. In
the Senate, the House of Representatives, all the branches
of Government and the well-known media, Washington is
widely propagating the lie of wide-scale democracy in
Israel despite the fact that that “democracy*’ has displaced
and continues to displace millions of Arabs, is occupying
their territories, has besieged Beirut and still occupies parts
of Lebanese territory and is planning more aggression and
expansion, not to mention the killings, displacement,
expulsion and exile. Perhaps one of the virtures of the
socalled Israeli democracy is its endless greed for Arab
territory and its unquenchable thirst for Arab blood. One
example of the marketing of Israeli “democracy”, so as to
deceive the American people and take more of its money
in taxes to support the racist, expansionist entity is what
the United States Secretary of State said in Crystal City,
Virginia, in a statement on 21 April 1985 at the Annual
Conference of the American-Israeli Committee on Public
Affairs. Mr. Shultz referred to one of the greatest American Presidents and said:
‘When Lincoln spoke at Gettysburg of rededication
to the cause of freedom, he was saying that the survival
of liberty .depended on people’s faith in liberty.‘**
That is true, but he went on to say:
“Israel’s success as a thriving democracy helps sustain
our faith in the democratic way of life not only in Amer
ica but throughout the world. Today, the principles of
freedom and democracy are more alive than when
*Quoted

in English

by the speaker.

Israel was founded. The number of countries around
the world that are democratic or on the road to democracy is growing, I believe the example of Israel and the
United States has something to do with this heartening
trend.*‘*
58. What can we deduce from the words of Mr. Shultz?
We know what to deduce. But what does an American
layman deduce from what was said by the United States
Secretary of State? What he deduces is very dangerous; it
harms the Arab and Arab-American relations and also
undermines international peace and security. What Mr.
Shultz is driving at is that the more Israel expands and the
fiercer it gets, the more it becomes free and democratic.
The more the status of democracy improves in the world
and the more Israel practises the policies of oppression,
occupation, displacement and aggression, the more similar
to the United States Israel becomes, for they are both
democracies. Mr. Shultz continued:
“No wonder, then, that the friendship between the
American people and the people of Israel has grown so
strong over the years.“*
59. According to him,, one of the most important aspects
of the consolidation of this special organic relationship
with Israel is that the latter is
“‘a vital.strategic ally in an important part of the world.
The moral and personal bonds that tie us together have
strengthened us both”.*
What democracy indeed if they are mutually strengthened
by oppressing and killing others?
60. The Secretary of State of that super-Power continued
to emphasize the organic relationship of his country with
usurper Israel and its unlimited commitment to the expansionist and aggressive Israeli policies. He went even further
and said:
“Through our material’and moral support for Israel,
our votes in the United Nations, and our efforts for
peace . . . we are a permanent, steadfast and unshakeable ally of the State of Israel.
“Every year we provide more securitv assistance to
Israel than to any other nation. We consider that aid to
be one of the best investments we could make-not
only for Israel’s security but for ours as well.*‘*
61. As opposed to the absolute support for Israel, we
find in the same statement made by Mr. Shultz a remarkable contempt of Arab reason and of the dignity of all
Arabs when he says: “Both Arabs and Israelis trust us, and
they seek our help.” I wonder, is there an Arab who had
asked for their help to consolidate the occupation of our
territories and the humiliation of our citizens? We answer
Mr. Shultz by saying that we cannot place our trust in the
United States, which, as is well known, has made available
all its unlimited resources for the consolidation of Israeli

occupation and the annexation of Arab territories, beginning’ with Jerusalem and the Golan Heights, thus encouraging Israel to pursue its acts of aggression and invasion
against our nation.

that by virtue of articles49 and I47.-of the Convention,.
expulsion and deportation, whether individual or collective, constitute war crimes.
65. We should like to remind the Council that honesty
dictates recognition of the fact that Israel caused the
forced exodus of about a million people in 1948 and of
half a million people in 1967. It forcibly removed about
128,000 citizens from the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights and 30,000 people from the Demilitarized
Zones which were under the supervision of the United
Nations. Up to now these people have not been allowed
to exercise their right of return in accordance with article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention.

62. In answer to Mr. Shultz’s comment about the expansionist, racist nature of Israel-the Israel which the American Administration is trying to protect and market in the
United States and in other places-1 would merely quote
the Israeli journalist, Danny Rubinstein, who wrote in 2%
New York Zmes of 16 July 1985:
“The truth is that there is no consensus on the fundamental question facing Israel today: whether we are
willing to sacrifice democracy for the sake of holding on
to the territories. The national consensus for condemning Rabbi Kahane and teaching democratic values
merely allows us to evade this more difftcult issue.

66. The statement of the representative of the enemy in
his letter dated 9 September [S/17448] was only an
attempt to categorize Bethlehem, El-Bireh, Jerusalem,
Nablus, and Tulkarm, as Israeli cities, faking forgetfulness
of article 47 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which
strictly prohibits the annexation of occupied territories, in
whole or in part. We suggest he read page 275 of the 1958
edition of the Commentary on the Fourth Geneva
Convention-specifically
article 47, which sprang from the
con_science of the nations as a result of Nazi Germany’s
annexation of a number of countries during the Second
World War.

“Meanwhile, daily life in Israel teaches just the opposite of democratic values. The 1.5 million Arabs in the
territories have been living under Israeli occupation for
18 years-living alongside Israelis without sharing their
rights. Our young people have grown up believing that
nationalist struggle, terrorism and lawful discrimination
are facts of life. Under such circumstances, how can one
hope to teach democracy?“*
The same journalist revealed the racist prejudice in Israel
against Arabs by recounting an incident that occurred during the strike of the stevedores in Israel:

67. Israel is responsible not only for its crimes resulting
from the expulsion of the inhabitants of the occupied Arab
territories, but for the crime of transferring the foreign
settlers to the occupied territories. That, too, is a war
crime, under the provisions of the aforementioned Convention and its Additional Protocol I.3

“Several years ago, during a crackdown on a stevedore strike, the leader of the striking union appeared on
television and criticized the police. ‘How dare they treat
us like this. ,Are we Arabs from the territories?“**

68. One of these days we must apply against the Israeli
officials, whether individually or collectively, the punitive
measures envisaged in articles 146, 147, and 148 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention.

63. There is a un&sally recognized principle according
to which occupation in itself is an act of aggression, in
addition to its being a blatant violation of human and
national rights in occupied territories. Therefore, whatever
is taking place under the Zionist settler occupation must be
seen through the inevitability of this oppression, which is
in fact the reactor, the dynamo that moves the instincts of
the racist society that is built on hatred of its victim. Therefore, an unconditional, speedy end must be put to the
occupation. Thii necessitates the full Israeli withdrawal
from all the occupied Arab territories and the exercise by
the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights, foremost
among which is its right of return, its right to selfdetermination and its right to the establishment of an independent State on its national soil. Until then, the
international community must support the struggle of the
Palestinian people to restore its usurped rights.

69. The Security Council must once again compel Israel
to respect the Fourth Geneva Convention whose applicability Israel altogether denies and yet its representatives
turn round and invoke it at the Security Council. By not
acknowledging that it applies to the occupied Arab territories, they threaten the international legal structure which is
universally applied to civilians under occupation, Selective
invocation and quotation of portions of articles of ,the
Geneva Convention shows a lack of respect for the intelligence of the international community and constitutes a
violation of the Council’s norms of behaviour and
morality.
70. We wish finally to observe that the provisions of the
draft resolution before the Council [S/17&q,
are not
commensurate with the gravity of the situation created by
Israel in the West Bank, Gaza and other occupied territories through its oppressive measures, which violate the
most elementary rules of international law governing foreign occupation. We believe that the draft resolution
should have contained an explicit condemnation of Israel
for its actions, and a strong condemnation of all acts of

64. We say to the representative of the enemy that his
invocation of articles 49 and 78 of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949: was specious-a mere attempt at
misleading. The Council is duty-bound to stress to him
*Quoted

in English

by the speaker.

7

terrorism carried out by Israel against the Arabs, especially
individual and official Israeli terrorism and the mass punishment and killing of innocent people. We would have
expected also to see in the draft resolution a paragraph
paying tribute to the heroic Arab resistance against Israeli
occupation.

unchanging truth also motivates and strengthens
tinian resistance in the occupied territories.

Pales-

78. The establishment of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East requires, first of all, the solution of the Palestinian problem. To that end, Israel should be realistic and
courageous and decide to recognize the identity of the
Palestinian people, and should negotiate with it through its
sole, authentic representative, the PLO. Once that prerequisite is satisfied, we can hope at last for an end to the
violence and insecurity which are the daily lot of the States
and peoples of the region.

71. Mr. ZIDOUEMBA
(Burkina Faso) (interpretation
from French): Permit me first of all, Sir, to congratulate
you on behalf of my delegation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of September.
Your qualities as an able diplomat and negotiator are well
known to all, and in our view guarantee the success of our
deliberations.

79. On the basis of that conviction, we have joined other
non-aligned countries members of the Council in sponsoring the draft resolution contained in document S/17459. In
that text the Council deplores the measures recently taken
by Israel against civilian Palestinian populations in the
occupied Arab territories, and calls upon Israel immediately to cease all repressive measures in accordance with
the Geneva Convention on the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,2 That is the least
the Council can expect of any State, including Israel. For
that reason, my delegation hopes that the Council will be
able without any difficulty to adopt this draft resolution
unanimously.

72. I wish also to express my delegation’s thanks to Mr.
Oleg Troyanovsky, representative of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, for the skill, wisdom and ability with
which he presided over the Council last month.
73. It take this opportunity further to welcome, on behalf
of the delegation of Burkina Faso, the representatives of
the People’s Republic of China and Peru, countries with
which Burkina Faso maintains excellent relations of cooperation.
74. For some weeks now, the violence of the Israeli occupation has again had a brutal impact upon the civilian
population of the Arab territories illegally placed by Israel
under its domination, particularly the inhabitants of the
West Bank and Gaza.

80. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Jordan. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
81. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
As the Security Council considers the situation in the West
Bank and Gaza, which is deteriorating as a result of the
intensification of Israel’s arbitrary practices against the
Palestinian population in that area, it should not lose sight
of two fundamental facts.

75. After having reinstated in those territories the law of
so-called preventive detention, the Israeli military forces
have since 4 August been engaging in a series of repressive
measures, including the imposition of curfews, arbitrary
arrests, expulsions and administrative detentions without
trial.

82. First, Israel’s occupation of these territories is entering its eighteenth year. The nature and philosophy of this
occupation are different from those of any other similar
occupation, owing to the fact that by this philosophy the
Israeli occupation authorities consider the indigenous population, to which the territory legitimately belongs, to be
foreigners, with no right to their own country and land.
The Palestinians’ presence there being merely “temportheir
ary”, the Israelis therefore have the “right”-in
view-to
make free with those territories and settle them
by force, encroaching on the inhabitants’ means of livelihood and even on their very existence on their own land.
The escalating provocation against those Palestinians has
reached such a level that groups of Israeli fanatics, led by a
member of the Israeli Knesset, have called publicly for the
expulsion of all Palestinians from the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip.

76. Moreover, the Israeli authorities have announced
their intention to take military action against countries in
the region harbouring offices of the PLO. The detailed
information provided yesterday [2604th meeting] by the
representative of Qatar and the observer for the PLO
clearly shows the seriousness of the situation which brings
us together here today. With its measures and its threats,
Israel is seeking by intimidation totally to destroy the will
to resist in the populations of the occupied territories.
Their resistance is a legitimate one, which Israel and its
friends stubbornly liken to simple acts of terrorism.
77. No one can honestly describe as terrorism the struggle of an oppressed and exploited people against its oppressor. That was true during the Second World War, when
resistance movements were formed all over the world to
tight against nazi domination and oppression. It was also
true of colonized peoples in their liberation struggle
against the colonial Powers, and is true today in South
Africa, where 24 million Blacks, Coloureds and Indians
have mobilized to rid South African society of racism and
exploitation based on the vile system of apartheid. This

83. Secondly, there is a new generation of Palestinian
young people who were born under that hateful occupation and have lived under it; and some of them are already
18. They know only the Israeli military authorities, the
forces of occupation and the extremist settlers, who deal

8

provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949:; thirdly, the preservation of the safety and security
of the civilian population; and, fourthly, the rejection of
Israeli practices based on the policy of collective punishment, administrative detention and the expulsion and
deportation of citizens.

with this generation and the population in general through
the logic of force, terror and humiliation. That generation
spontaneously resists the occupation because of the practices perpetrated against it, as has been confirmed by some
Israelis.
84. In that connection, I wish to quote the Israeli professor Mark Heller, of the Institute for Strategic Studies at the
University of Tel Aviv, in a recent interview with an American newspaper:

87. We believe that if the Council had insisted on Israel’s
compliance with those resolutions it would not have found
itself facing such a deteriorating situation in the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip. The only solution to the suffering of
the Palestinian population in those territories is an end to
the occupation, through the establishment of a just and
comprehensive peace, as called for by all international
resolutions.

“But Professor Heller added that perhaps the most
important factor, and the one that explains why so
many young Palestinians seem to be ready to take up
violence against Israelis without any apparent directives
from the PLO, is the coming of age in the West Bank of
a new generation of Arabs that ‘has known no other
administration than the Israeli military government.‘*‘*

88. Jordan, which real&s more than others the magnitude of the suffering of the Palestinian people under occupation, has emphasized consistently and continuously the
necessity of achieving a comprehensive, peaceful settlement. Jordan seeks actively to revive the peace endeavours, which would put an end to the continued Israeli
occupation and guarantee the rights of the peoples of all
the States of the region to live in security and peace. The
Jordanian-Palestinian agreement, which was based on the
principles acknowledged by the Council and was ratified
by Jordan and the PLO on 11 February 1985, was the
embodiment of that faith and a commitment to achieving
a comprehensive settlement, with the participation of the
PLO, as the legitimate representative of the Palestinians, in
the peace process.

Professor Heller came to the following conclusion about
that generation:
“They are themselves in a direct political conflict with
Israel. It is not that they believe what they are doing will
necessarily make a difference; it is rather that they don’t
have any faith in anyone else anymore or have any
other methods.“*
85. One can understand the truth of the situation of the
Palestinian population in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip only by realizing the magnitude of the frustration,
suffering and despair it is experiencing as a result of the
continued brutality of the occupation and the weakening
of its belief in the possibility of its salvation through a just
and comprehensive peace. Despite those self-evident facts,
the Israeli officials continue to adhere to their usual tactic
of blaming others and considering them to be responsible.
The least that can be said about such a policy is that it is
the policy of burying one’s head in the sand and failing to
face up to reality. Persistence with such a policy leads to
obstruction of the peace endeavours under way and the
creation of tension and turmoil in the region, which serves
only the enemies of peace and the forces of extremism and
terrorism.

89. We hope that the Council will adopt the draft resolution [S/17&j,
since that is the least it &n do to maintain
the security and safety of the population of the occupied
territories at this stage.
90. Mr. LI LUYE (China) (interprerutionficm Chinese): I
warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for this month. I have no doubt that, with your
outstanding diplomatic skills, you will be able to guide the
Council efficiently to accomplish its tasks. I also thank you
and other representatives for the welcome extended to me.
In discharging my duties and functions as a member of the
Council, I shall spare no effort to cooperate closely with
you and my other colleagues.

86. I shall not recount Israel’s practices of oppression,
which have escalated recently in the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip. Previous speakers have spoken about them,
and the details of those practices are to be found in numerous letters distributed to members of the Council. But I
wish to point out that the Security Council and the General Assembly have already adopted a number of resolutions on the situation in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
and on the Israeli practices. Those resolutions emphasize
the following points and principles: first, the illegality and
illegitimacy of the Israeli actions aimed at altering the
demographic and geographic status of the occupied territories, including the building of Israeli settlements, which
were declared to be a grave obstacle on the path to peace;
secondly, the necessity of Israel’s fully complying with the
,* Q&ted

in English

91. Your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky, presided
dynamically over the proceedings of the Council last
month, and I take this opportunity to thank him.
92. Since 4 August this year, when the Israeli authorities
declared the reintroduction of administrative detention in
the West Bank and Gaza, they have taken a series of
repressive actions in the occupied territories, trampling on
the fundamental right to survival of the Palestinian and
other Arab peoples and intlicting loss of life and property.
93. In his statement on 12 September [260&h meehg]
the observer for the PLO thoroughly exposed and
denounced these illegal activities of the Israeli authorities.

by the speaker.

9

The Chinese Government is deeply concerned ‘over the
deterioration of the situation in the occupied territories
caused by the Israeli authorities and extends its profound
sympathy and support to the Palestinian and other Arab
peoples there, who are faced tHith serious difficulties.
94. The Chinese delegation holds that the decision by
Israel to carry out administrative detentions and deportations is in violation of the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949,’ and should therefore be repealed immediately. The Israeli authorities must also stop forthwith all
their repression and intimidation against the Palestinian
and other Arab peoples and ensure to them their legitimate
right of existence.

representative of the People’s Republic of China, as-well as
to my neighbour on the left, the representative of Peru,
with whom I have already had the honour and privilege of
working here in the United Nations, ~
100. The decision taken on 4 August by the Israeli
authorities to apply once again in the occupied Palestinian
territories a series of measures already regarded as illegal
has led to the foreseeable reactions and, because of their
nature and scope, has threatened international peace and
security. The representative of Qatar,’ Chairman of the
Group of Arab States for the month of September, therefore quite rightly requested, in his letter of 11 September,
the immediate convening of the Council.

95. It is both reasonable and justifiable for the Palestinian people and the Arab countries to demand that Israel
stop its illegal activities in the occupied Arab territories
and implement the relevant provisions contained in’ the
aforementioned Geneva Convention. The Security Council should render them its support in this regard. The Chinese delegation therefore supports the draft resolution on
this issue proposed by the non-‘&gned caucus [S/Z7459).

101. The facts are known. They have been reported in’
detail by previous speakers, in particular the.Observer of
the PLO [260&h meeting]. The measures taken by the
Israeli occupying authorities include administrative deten- c
tion that can last as long as six months and the deportation
of persons considered to be a threat to security. But it
would seem that the judicial protection against arbitrary
action that has been set before us is only illusory, because
recourse to it can be considered bnly as suspensions of.
these measures.

96. It is our consistent’belief that the Palestinian issue is
thecrux of the Middle East problem, having a direct bearing on peace and stability in the Middle East region. The
key factors to the solution of the Middle East question are
that the national rights of the Palestinian people must be
restored and that Israel must withdraw from all the Arab
territories it has occupied since 1967, including Arab Jerusalem. This is the only basis on which a comprehensive, just
and durable peace can be achieved in the Middle Past. The
Security Council should make further efforts towards this
goal.

102. In fact, the Israeli authorities could have confined
themselves to police measures to keep the peace and maintain order. But, as was to be expected, they chose-faithful
to their policies of escalation and extremism-to engage in
the military or paramilitary operations which have resulted
in a systematic campaign of massive detention of Palestinians on the West Bank and’in Gaza and iti the establishment of curfews as well as the carrying out of collective
punishments.

97.

Mr.

RABETAFIKA
(Madagascar) (interpretation
from French): I do not necessarily wish to surrender to a
tradition that could. easily become a mere ritual, but I wish
in all sincerity and simplicity to say how happy my delegation is, Sir, that you have assumed the presidency of the
Council for the month of September. It is said that history
is strewn with imponderables. If a century ago your
Government had not shown such a predilection for the
spices of Zanzibar, I should perhaps have been able to
address you today in the language of Shakespeare. However that may be, and without wishing to harm the excellent past and present relations between our two peoples
and Governments, I would ask you to allow me to make
my observations and to express our best wishes to ‘you in
the language of Comeille and Racine.
98. Mr. Oleg Alexandrovich Troyanovsky, the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, we
express our gratitude for the equanimity, objectivity and
method with which he discharged his functions aS President of the Council last month. We found in him a very.
attentive listener to our ,aspirations and concerns-always
out of a concern to preserve concord among us.
99. Finally, I take this opportunity, on behalf of my delegation and on my own behalf, to bid welcome to the new

103.. Together with this, there is the Israeli threat to
launch direct military operations against the offices of the
PLO in Amman and other places, as well as growing provocations by the Israeli settlers, encouraged by extreme
statements by some Israeli authorities with regard to the
very presence of Palestinians in Palestine. All those measures, the members of the Council will understand, serve
only to exacerbate tension in. the region, and it is quite
clear that the Palestinians are in no way responsible for
this.
104. The General Assembly, particularly in resolution
35/122 of 11 December 1980, as well as the Security Council in its resolutions 468 (1980), 469 (1980) and 484 (1980),
confirmed the’applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Tie of War,
of 12 August 1949,’ to the Arab territories that have been
occupied by Israel since 1967. The first paragraph of article
49 of that Convention expressly states that:
“Individual
or mass forcible transfers, as well as .,
deportations of protected persons from occupied territory to the territory of the Qccupying Power or to that
of any other country, occupied or not, are prohibited,
regardless of their motive.”
‘,.
and I stress the words “regardless of their motive”. _.
10 I

105.

No imperatives

of eea-ity.

or of public

O&T

should be a reflection of the Council’s concern over the
worsening of security in the area.

CIUI

legitimize Israeli practices in the occupied Arab territories,
since the incidents reported in the region and invoked to
justify these measures derive from the very fact of Israel.
Israel’s persistence in applying and intensifying its settlement policy provokes the resistance of the Palestinian
people, whose opposition to military occupation cannot be
described as terrorism except by the occupying Power
itself.
~

113. Mr. KASEMSRI
(Thailand): I should like at the
outset to say how pleased my delegation is to see you, Sir,
presiding over our deliberations. The historic and cordial
relations of friendship and cooperation between our two,
countries further enhance my pleasure in congratulating
you most warmly and sincerely upon your assumption of
the presidency for this month. My delegation is convinced
that with your wisdom, high competence and renowned
diplomatic skill, the business of the Council .will be conducted in a very successful and effective manner during the
important month of September.

106. We remain convinced, in spite of explanations put
forward, that Israeli practices have affected the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people and constitute repeated
grave and flagrant violations of international law, in particular of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the Fourth Geneva Convention. That is why we believe
that the Council must take action to prevail upon, Israel to
comply strictly with the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions and desist immediately from
administrative detentions, internments, forcible expulsion
and imposition of curfews, which serve it only the better to
carry out its policies of repression and oppression.

114. I take this opportunity also to associate myself with
the welldeserved tributes paid by previous speakers to
your predecessor, Mr. Oleg Troyanovsky of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, for his highly competent and
dignified stewardship of the Council during the month of
August. We note in particular the fact that the Council’s
plan to convene a commemorative meeting was finalized
and agreed upon during his presidency.

107. Israel must put an end to its defiance of intemational public opinion and understand that a comprehensive, just and lasting solution that will make it possible for
the Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable rights is
the only alternative to a situation of arbitrary rule, abuses
and injustice.

115. I wish also to extend a warm welcome to Mr. Li
Luye and Mr. Carlos Alzamora Traverso, who have
recently taken up their assignments as representatives of
the People’s Republic of China and Peru, respectively.
With their wealth of diplomatic experience and extensive
knowledge of international affairs, they should prove to be
distinct assets not only in the conduct of diplomacy of
their respective countries but also for the Organization.

108. Mr. ALZAMORA (Peru) (inte~retarionfi-om Spanish): I had the pleasure yesterday of telling you, Sir, how
pleased I was to join the Council under your very able
presidency, and I repeat that sentiment today. I want also
to express my delegation’s appreciation of the excellent
work done by my good friend, Mr. Troyanovsky, as President last month. I also wish cordially to express my thanks
for the words of welcome extended to us today by fraternal
delegations.

116. The question of the plight of the Palestinian people
in the occupied territories is indeed not a new question
before the Council. The Palestinians have long been victims of arbitrary measures by the occupying Power in the
occupied territories. Moreover, the question of Palestine
constitutes the core of the Middle East problem and holds
the key to peace and security in the region as a whole. The
position of my Government has been consistent in support
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and in
the eamest hope of achieving a peaceful and just solution
to the problem. Therefore I should like once again to reiterate Thailand’s policy on this matter as follows.

109. As co-sponsors of draft resolution S/17459, we
want to express our concern over the worsening of the
situation in the occupied Arab territories by virtue of the
measures taken by the occupying military authorities
against the civilian population.110. Interested in contributing to the establishment of
conditions that can lead to a just peace for all parties in the
Middle Fast, Peru has participated in all attempts to stem
the process of deterioration, of which the recent events are
an additional serious factor.

117. First, Thailand fhmly supports all relevant United
Nations resolutions on the question of Palestine, in particular Security Council resolution 242 (1967) on the Middle
East, which constitutes the only agreed basis for solving
the problem peacefully.

111. As part of that same desire for peace and justice in
the area, we reiterate that concern and the urgent need for
an end to the measures taken against the Palestinian population and for the occupying forces strictly to observe the
provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Tie of War, of 12 August
1949: which it is our duty to ensure.

118. Secondly, Thailand supports unequivocally the legitimate aspirations and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to self-determination, the
right to national independence and sovereignty and the
right to return safely to their homes and properties.

112. Therefore the nonaligned countries are submitting
‘the aforementioned draft resolution, whose adoption

119. Thirdly, Thailand holds that any acquisition of
another State’s territory by force contravenes one of the
internationally recognized principles. In this connection,
11

we have consistently called for the withdrawal of the Israeli
presence from all krab territories occupied since 1967.
120. Having heard the statements of ,previous speakers,
in particular of the representative of Qatar in his capacity
as Chairman of the Group of Arab States and the observer
for the PLO [ibid], my delegation wishes to register again
its grave concern over the plight of the Palestinian population in the occupied territories, in particular in the West
Bank and Gaza. The situation remains unchangedindeed it has worsened-because it is apparent that the
occupying authorities have exercised their administrative
power to the detriment of the Palestinian people. The
measures-namely, reinstating the policies of administrative detention for up to six months without trial, deportation of persons who are considered security risks, increased
censorship, as well as the imposition of other measures
against the Palestinian people-are in direct conttiveniion
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949” to which
Israel is a party.
121. To name a few: administrative detention is in violation of the third paragraph of article 5 of the Convention
which stipulates that in case of trial the-protected persons
shall not be deprived of the rights of fair and regular trial
prescribed by the Convention. Article 49 of the Convention prohibits individual or mass forcible transfers, as well
as deportations of protected persons from occupied territory to the territory of the Occupying Power or to that of
any other country, regardless of their motive. Such measures and actions taken by Israeli authorities, if they should
continue, would not only exacerbate tensions and conflict
in the area but also constitute a serious obstruction to the
efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, with serious implications for international peace and
security in general.
122 My delegation also listened with attention and interest to the statement of the representative of Israel yesterday [ibid.]. However, my delegation is still of the opinion
that in the situation under consideration, namely, in the
occupied territories, particularly in the West Bank and
Gaza, the parties concerned, particularly the occupying
Power, must strictly observe the relevant provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. Moreover, the burden of proof should
not rest on the occupied population but, rather, on the
occupying authorities. In short, Israel has to prove beyond
reasonable doubt that no measure prohibited by the
Fourth Geneva Convention has been taken against the
Palestinian people. In the absence of such proof, any
benefit of the doubt should be conferred upon the people
who are living under the yoke of foreign occupation.
123. In this connection, it should also be noted that the
prolonged occupation of those territories by Israel is
responsible for the actions of the people cited by Israel as
the cause for its repressive measures. Indeed, the occupying Power has made an admission that the deportation of
Palestinians has actually taken place. That measure is

therefore, at least prima facie, a violation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention, regardless of the number of deportees
involved, and Israel must accordingly be held accountable
in this regard.
124. In the light of the aforementioned, my delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution contained in
document S/17459.
125. Mr. OUDOVENKO
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (interpretation from Russian): We congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council and wish you successin your conduct of its proceedings, particularly in such a difficult and arduous
month.
126. We wish also to oav tribute to the representative of
the Union of Soviet Social&t Republics, Mr:Troyanovsky,
for his skilful conduct of the Council’s work during
August. His vast diplomatic experience and erudition promoted solutions to many difficult problems.
127. The delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic also associates itself with the congratulations
extended to the representatives of China and Peru.
128. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic supported
the request for the emergency consideration by the Council
of the repressive measures by the Israeli authorities against
the Arab Palestinian population of the occupied territories. The dangerous nature of the situation which has
arisen as a result of those measures is demonstrated by the
statements in the Council of the observers for the PLO and
the League of Arab States [ibid J, as well as the alarming
reports which have been coming in.
129. Our attention has been drawn once again to the
explosive situation in the Palestinian territories occupied
by Israel and the need for taking of immediate and effective measures to put an end to the violence of the
occupationists.
130. As emerges from the reports we have had, the
occupy&g authorities have created a situation of terror
and opened fire on helpless Palestinians, including women
and children. They are carrying out mass arrests in accordance with the 4 August 1985 legislation on administrative
detention. The authorities are inciting hatred. towards the
Palestinians among the Israeli settlers. There can be no
doubt that these actions are a flagrant violation of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949: and of the
decisions and resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly.
131. The scale of the arbitrary implementation of that
legislation in the occupied territories is demonstrated by
many reports in the press which have repeatedly been
quoted in the United Nations. Suffice it to point out that
87 per cent of the adult population in Palestinian refugee
camps have been subject to arrest or detention. Thousands
of times the occupationists used their weapons, resulting in

and mosques, wherein the name of Allah is oft mentioned, would assuredly have been pulled down. Verily
Allah helpeth one who helpeth Him. Lo! Allah is
strong, almighty.”

the killing and wounding of about 650 Palestinians, including more than 100 women and children.
132. The most recent wave of repression and terror in the
occupied territories is aimed at creating an atmosphere of
terror among the Palestinians, forcing them to leave their
ancestral homes to create so-called living space for the
Israeli settlers. The implementation
of these criminal
acts-criminal
from the point of view of international
law-by Israel and its disregard of decisions of the Security Council and of the General Assembly have been made
possible by the direct economic, military, political and
diplomatic assistance and support from the United States.
As a result of this position, all proposals aimed at solving
the Palestinian problem have been blocked.
133. The delegation of the ‘Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic categorically condemns the aggressive expansionist policy of Israel and its most recent acts of repression’
against the Palestinians in the occupied territories. We are
in favour of the immediate cessation of those actions and
support the draft resolution contained in document
s/17459.
134, The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have just received a letter from the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

138. I am sure no one in the Council or in the audience
can deny the significance or the appropriatene&af
these
verses with regard to the issue under consideration. The
verses I just recited contain the divine mandate, the powerful and most valid, and as a matter of fact the only valid
permission for the Palestinian Moslems to tight against the
Zionist occupiers and in defense of their God-given rights,
In addition, in verse 190 of surah II of the Holy Koran, we
have: “Fight in the way of Allah against those who tight
against you . . .‘*.
139. These verses are addressed not simply to the Palestinian Moslems, who happen to be the most appropriate
example of these verses, but to all Moslems, to all the
millions of Moslems. To defend the holy land of Palestine,
to liberate the Islamic sanctuaries from Zionist occupation, to re-hoist the flag of Palestine and to revive the State
of Palestine under the banner of Islam are all Islamic
duties which apply to all Moslems. The Holy Koran commands and orders all Moslems, in verse 60 of surah VIII;
“Make ready for them all thou canst of (armed) force
and of horses tethered that thereby ye may dismay the
enemy of Allah and your enemy, and others beside
them whom ye know nor. Allah knoweth them.‘*
140. Instead of unifying all their resources and. the
present-day strings of horses against the Zionist usurpers,
some members of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference-by
that I mean some of our Islamic
countries-resort to the Security Council and remain satisfied with draft resolutions, many of which-all similar to
each other-have so often been adopted in the past, in
order to cool down the champions of support for Palestine
and also to please the Zionist enemy by that cooling-down
process.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani
(Islamic Republic of Iran) took the place reservedfor him at
the side of the Council chamber.
135. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

141. The history, and even the contemporary history, of
Lebanon and Palestine has convinced even the Council
members that what has been taken by force must be taken
back by force, the only language that the Zionist enemy
understands.

136. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Islamic Renublic of
Iran): I should like to thank you very much indeed, Sir, for
allowing me to speak during the final moments of these
meetings of the Security Council. I congratulate you on the
manner in which you have presided over these meetings. I
also congratulate and thank your predecessor for the valuable services he offered to the Council last month.

142. It is a waste of time to elaborate and to enumerate
what the Zionist usurpers have done in the past or in
recent days in the occupied territories. We have to finish
the occupation, not analyse.the terms and the modalities of
it. But regrettably it has been most difficult to bring our
Moslem brothers together under the banner of Islam on
this issue.

137. In the Holy Koran, verses 39 and 40 of surah XXII,
we read:
“Sanction is given unto those who fight because they
have been wronged; and Allah is indeed able to give
them victory;

143. Ever since we forgot our Islamic identity and emulated the circular, satanic models of secular society, we
have been forced to do things as they please and as their
norms want us to do; therefore we waste our time in the
Council waiting for it to restore justice for us-at least, in
terms of resolutions.

“Those who have been driven from their homes
unjustly only because they said: Our Lord is AllahFor had it not been for Allah’s repelling some men by
means of others, cloisters and churches and oratories
13

144. However, this body is meant to negotiate, to give a
chance to the angry and oppressed to release energy and
cool down. That is the function of the Security Council.

shame that the entire Moslem world is ignoring its religious
duties and pretends to be absolutely, innocently ignorant of
them, and, like a daydreaming child, makes its complaints
to its tedddy bear, its beloved Security Council, which
might in the end deplore what the Zionist enemy has been
doing to Palestine and to the Palestinian Moslems.

145. Mr. President, as you know very well, by entering’
into negotiation with the illegal, illegitimate enemy, one
gives recognition to oppression, to occupation and to ihe~
gitimate, lawless practices.

152. The struggle of the Lebanese people has made it
evident that this once-invincible enemy-an enemy which
in 1967 the entire Arab army could not resist for more than
six days-can be defeated, and even with a small army. But
where are the wise eyes and ears to see and listen to the best
lesson of our contemporary history?

146, .!n this body, .the aggressor and the victim, the. oppressor and the oppressed become equal and equally legitimate. The illegitimate Zionist base of imperialism becomes
a party to negotiations. This is .wrong.
147. But in an Islamic struggle the case is’different. There
the oppressed race to eradicate injustice, not to negotiate.
They race to demolish illegitimate editices and in so doing
to try to carry out a divine spiritual obligation; this leads to
justice and provides.for further spiritual enhancement. Justice is the natural equilibrium which the divine hand has
inscribed for our social order. It is the social equivalent of
the equilibrium which exists throughout nature: in the
heavens, in the stars, in the moon, in the sun, in .&thegalaxies, and in the ‘beauty of flowers-everywhere. Just as no
one.can deny that equilibrium, no one can deny the prescriptive equilibrium which must be maintained in human’
society on the basis of divine prescriptions.

153. Like many good members of the Council, we too
believe in justice, but we do not believe that justice can be
achieved simply by the Security Council.
154. Our position is quite clear. We believe that the Moslem world must conduct itself according to Islam in order
to restore its rights and to hoist once again the flag of
Palestine over the entire Islamic land of Palestine. I beg
our Moslem brothers, Arabs and non-Arabs, to join hands
on the basis of Islam and to establish a united Islamic
front.
155. Just as we are ready to join them in the Council, I
ask our brothers please to join us to defeat the enemy and
to defend our Palestine at the battle-front. I assure them
that if they do so this very Council will happily adopt any
resolution that pleases them, because they will be powerful
and victorious, and ‘worthy of respect and reverence from
those who recognize no right but power. I believe that
many in this Chamber, including members of the Council,
agree with me.

148. Those who ignore divine law and seek justice in the
trivial secular artificialities on which we have been wasting
our time for the past 38 years of the occupation of Palestine deserve the humiliation which ‘they proudly claim for
themselves.
149. “I am sure we all know what would be involved if the
Arab world really wanted to act according to Islam and
were to make ready for it all the forces and the strings of
horses of today’s Islamic countries. All the assets of the
Moslem countries in the Zionist banks in the United
States; all the resources, the oil, the manpower of Egypt,
the Sudan, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Syria, Iraq, Iran, Palestine, Morocco, Algeria and so many other military and
other .Powers; all their markets and economic resources;
and, above all, their hands and brains-all
would be
mobilized and utilized according to the way of God. Our
strings of horses and our present-day forces ,would be
mobilized against the enemy.
/,
150. If ,they could co-ordinate.only one fifth of all those
resources, I am sure that the Zionist occupiers would find
it absolutely uneconomical to stay in Palestine any longer.
They wouid just go. But when the Islamic dicta and rulings
are forgotten, the-Zionist enemy can occupy and expand
its occupation; it can deport, destroy and kill: And we sit
in the Council chamber fighting for a draft resolution.
That is the tragedy of the Moslem world.

156. The Zionist non-entity is really nothing. It must be
defeated, and it can be defeated very easily. Tbe Moslem
nation is really a great, superior and able nation. I am sure
that it is capable of eliminating the cancer of zionism from
the Middle
‘. East and, that it will do so very soon.
157. The PRESIDENT:
I hope that in his speech the
representative of the ‘Islamic Republic of Iran was not
advoc&ng courses of action contrary to the Charter of the
United Nations, the acceptance of which is a condition of.
membership of the Organization. If he wishes to do so, the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran will be able
to spe;ik in reply in due course.
158. The next speaker is the. representative, of Israel. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his ‘statement.
159. Mr. NETANYAHU”(Israe1):
It is instructive sitting
here this afternoon, receiving lectures about human rights,
democracy and democratic values from’ the: likes of the
representatives of Syria and a few other countries. We owe
a special, warm debt to the last speaker, the representative
of Iran, who grew tired of the dissimulation of some speakers and called the proceedingsand the statements of those

151. To please our brothers who have appealed to the
Council, my delegation supports draft resolution S/17459,
in which the Council only deplores the crimes of the Zionist
usurpers. It even begrudges a stronger word-quite apart
from the fact that even this petty offering might be vetoed.
We, and the members of the Council, should see that it is a
14

speakers what they are. He was clearly exhorting a holy
war, a jihad. There is no question about that. Everyone
heard it.

166. The question has, arisen during the present discussions of what constitutes civilian targets. It is very easy to
answer .that. I cited a few yesterday: the cab driver, a
young schoolteacher with his pupils or five children in the
heart of Jerusalem who were stabbed. Those are civilian
targets. The status of civilian‘targets is totally unaffected
by the cause of the conflicts that are waged around them
and claim them as victims. In fact, there would be no
meaning to international law and the whole concept of the
war Convention and the very ideas that this body-not
only the Security’Council but the United Nations-was set
up for, if we did not adhere to the central tenet of the laws
of war-that is, that the separation of combatants,from
non-combatants-and
if such a definition were not
entirely independent of the nature or cause, professed or
real, of the conflicts involved.
j

160. We are talking here about deportation. I have heard
that word come up several times during the present discussion. The representative of Iran unabashedly tore the mask
off what some representatives have been calling for-the
deportation of a State, of an entire people, a holy war.
161. I heard the representative of Syria speak on behalf
of the tortured Palestinians. I ask him: who is killing Palestinians in the Bekaa? Who is killing them in Tripoli? Who
is killing them in Beirut? Who is killing them in Sidon?
Who is killing them in Damascus? Yasser Arafat is very
specific about that, and at least he deserves to be heard on
Syria. He said, as reported in Der Spiegel in July:

167. Nothing justifies the deliberate murder of children.
Nothing, not “national 1iberation”;not fighting for “legitimate rights**-nothing.
If we allow ourselves to become
conditioned, horribly conditioned, to the idea that such
terrorism, such violence, such systematic and deliberate
killing of civilians, is permissible, ‘not merely will (those
particular victims suffer, but it will opeh up the intemational arena for a period of lawlessness and a return to the
savagery that we witnessed earlier ‘in the century.

“In Damascus, in .the Palestinian camp of Yarmuk
‘alone, 22 Palestinians have been killed and more than 80
wounded in recent fighting with government forces. . . .
The same thing is happening in the Palestinian camps in
Haleb and Darah, also in Syria. Moreover, hundreds
have been detained.**
The Voice of the PLO from Baghdad is quite specific. It
says that “the PLO holds Syrian President Hafez Al-Assad
responsible for the bloody incidents”.
,

168, I asked yesterday how many deportations we were
dealing with. The figum, that ,I gave has not been challenged. The number was one expulsion of an active terrorist in the past four years. Some representatives, including
the Syrian representative, said that “mass killings*’ j of
Palestinian Arabs were taking place right now. Mass killings, I suppose, by Hama rules would be, say, 20,000.
That is the number of. Syrian civilians killed in Hama.
Take half of that-10,000: that would be mass killings. But
I shall be lenient and say perhaps 1,000, perhaps 100: it is
still a mass killing. I shall be more lenient-lo.
How about
five? How about naming five Palestinian Arabs who have
been killed-we can argue later about whether they were
innocent or not-by Israeli forces in the past year? I shall
be more lenient. How about fewer than five? I suggest we
have the names of .those people presented here. Just like
yesterday’s figure, today’s challenge says ‘it all.

162.‘, I shall be happy to supply the numbers, because
what is important is not only who is doing the accusing,
but the numbers involved. Medical Aid for the Palestinians, a British-based charity whose sympathies are very
clear, reported this summer, after a trip to Lebanon, that
14,000 Palestinian Arabs had fled the Syrian carnage to
southern Lebanon. It is evidently much safer for Palestinians to be closer to Israel than to Syria and Damascus.
163. The representative of Syria evoked, by my count, at.
least a dozen times the word “democracy*‘. What kind of
democracy is he suggesting-the farcical parliaments of
Damascus, perhaps democracy by what is known in our,
region by everyone-and by now, surely by the members
of the Council-as democracy by Hama rules? He evoked
other calls-and I was touched to hear them-about concern for Israeli democracy and its future by various Arab
representatives: I am’encouraged by that concern, because
I hope it will translate into their own countries and into a
new age- that we can look forward to.

169. We are dealing here not .merely with the abuse of
the Council and its convening for an absolutely preposterous and irrelevant reason, but with a distortion, because
those very people who have been engaged in mass killings,
in mass attacks, in the deliberate and systematic murder of
the innocent, are usurping the purpose and meaning of this
body, and it would be a terrible continuation of the degradation they seek to inflict on ‘it if the draft resolution that
they have presented were adopted.

164. But I am most grateful to the Syrian representative
for his quotation from Lincoln. To give another ouotation
from him, Lincoln once said: “Words fitly spoken are like
apples . of gold on a silver platter*‘.

170. The PRESIDENT: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it [ibid.]. Unless I hear. an objection, I shall put
it to the vote now.

165. I do not wish to sav that the’ Svrian renresentative’s
other text was a silver plaiter, but hisrquotatibns about the
meaning of liberty and the commitment to liberty of the
American Secretary of State and his statements about
Israel’s resolve to defend liberty are indeed apples of gold.

171. I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements ,before the voting.
15
_

172. Mr. LOIJET (France) (hrerprerarioe from .French): I
wish to convey to you, Sir, the congratulations and encouragement of the French delegation on your assumption of
the presidency. We are happy that in September the Security Council will be able to benefit from your experience
and skills.

which he conducted the presidency last month. It is almost
30 years to the day since Ambassador Troyanovsky and I
met in Geneva-in a distant, distant past when we were
both a great deal younger.

173. I would ask you to be good enough to express our
thanks also to the representative of the Soviet Union for
the remarkable way in which he carried out his task during
August, a month in which he presided over the Council
with authority and courtesy.

180. I must first point out that the confrontational
debate we have witnessed yesterday and today has done
little to serve the cause of peace. In our view, the often
intemperate and unwarranted language used by many
members to criticize Israel has tended only to distract and
disrupt and to complicate the search for a just solution to
the problems of the Middle East. It has been a matter of
particular concern to us that this should be taking place
when a process of peace is under way in the Middle East.

174. My Government has observed with great concern
the new rise of tension in the West Bank and Gaza, which
has led the administration of the occupying Power to
revive special legislation dating from the time of the Mandate. One can only deplore the constraints which that legislation imposes on the civilian population of the occupied
territories. Nevertheless, we must remain aware that only a
cessation of the escalation of violence, from whatever
source, will make it possible to restore the climate of contidence that is ‘indispensable
to dialogue.
-.

179. I turn now to my statement in explanation of vote.

181. I have to note in particular a number of references
here to the Nazis and nazism. One or another contemporary situation has been repeatedly described here as a form
of nazism, as being analogous to the crimes of the Nazi
period. This is patent nonsense. I can only appeal for an
end to this sort of harmful, indeed poisonous, rhetoric.

175. You are aware of the particular interest that my
Government has always taken in the situation of the peoples of these territories, both with regard to the protection
of the persons and to the preservation of resources and
respect for the structures of local representation. It is in
that spirit that my country has always been committed to
the defence of the legitimate rights of the peoples of the
territories of the West Bank and Gaza, in accordance with
the provisions of the Geneva Conventions, in particular
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.2 Accordingly, my delegation would have liked to be able to take a
position on a text of a draft resolution clearly reflecting the
situation with regard to the measures taken by the occupying administration since 4 August last v&d-vis the stipulations of the Fourth Geneva Convention. That Convention
clearly prohibits, in its article 49, deportations of persons
outside the territories in question, and, in its article 78,
subjects internment to precise conditions. There can be no
doubt whatsoever that Israel, as the occupying Power,
must respect the provisions of that Convention. According
to information at our disposal, some of the measures
recently taken by Israel in the occupied territories are not
in fact in keeping with the provisions of that Convention.
But the draft resolution before us suggests that all those
measures are contrary to the Convention.

182 It is particularly distressing to listen to rhetoric
charging the United States Government with the “heinous
crimes” of responding to public opinion in determining its
foreign and domestic policies, helping to provide Israel
with a sense of security and attempting to find a way to
bring about a just and lasting peace between Israel and its
neighbours. I had hoped to listen to and participate in a
reasoned debate. I regret that, instead, I have heard the
preaching of hate in this Chamber.
183: Coming now to the subject of this debate, let me say
that I believe we have another problem here-namely, the
selective application of the law. This is a phenomenon
which, regrettably, is becoming ever more frequent in the
Council and could well be the death knell of any system of
law. Any system of law-and certainly that is what the
United Nations aspires to be-has as its first rule the equal
application of the law. This principle lies at the heart of the
Charter of the United Nations. Universality is the very
cornerstone of the United Nations. The unfortunate obsession of several States in the Council debate with the selective application of international conventions is destructive
to the quest for world order as envisaged by the Charter.
This cannot be allowed to continue. Either these conventions apply to all or they apply to none. Selective application of the Charter or international conventions strikes at
the very heart of the institution. My Government will continue to oppose such destructive- tendencies.

176. In those circumstances, my delegation feels it must
abstain on the draft resolution.
177. Mr. WALTERS (United States of America): First
of all, I should like to express the thanks of my delegation
for the able, indeed outstanding, manner in which you,
Mr. President, have presided over the Security Council
during the month of September, and to express our gratitude therefor.

184. I was also grieved by the repeated accusations of
hostility toward Palestinians made by those who choose to
forget that my country has done more to support the Palestinians through the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency since 1949 than any other country. As is well
known, the United States is by far the largest contributor to
UNRWA.

178. I should like also to address to Mr. Troyanovsky
our thanks for the businesslike, coherent and fair way in

185. Let me turn now to the draft resolution before the
Council [ibid.].
16

186. The United States Government cannot support a
draft resolution which singles out for condemnation the
detention and other policies of Israel on the West Bank
and Gaza without equally condemning and calling for a
halt to the acts of terror against Israeli civilians and officials in the West Bank and Gaza which have provoked
those policies.

192. Mr. WOOLCOTT (Australia): I should like to associate the Australian delegation with the high praise that
has been accorded to your diplomatic skills by previous
speakers and to welcome you, Sir John, as President of the
Council for the month of September.
193. I should like also to record my delegation’s warm
appreciation of the skilful way in which the representative
of the Soviet Union discharged his duties as President during the month of August.

187. We have made clear in the past that we consider
measures such as administrative detention and deportation
to be inconsistent with the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949.*

194. The Australian delegation abstained in the vote. In
considering the draft resolution we have taken into
account all the statements made to the Council in these
two meetings and our understanding of the situation on
the ground in the occupied territories. What is clear to us is
the increasing unrest on the West Bank with violence
breeding violence, often to the detriment of innocent civilians. Of particular regret to my delegation are the graphic
and sad accounts of attacks on innocent women and children, attacks that we find outrageous and repugnant.

188. As we have stated repeatedly, the United States
Government is very concerned about the level of violence
throughout the area, including Lebanon and Israel. If left
unchecked, this violence inevitably leads to a spiral of rep
risals. All those truly interested in a just and lasting settlement in the region must work to break this vicious circle.
One-sided draft resolutions such as this one, however,
encourage the spiral of violence and retaliation by hardening the attitudes of all parties. The party singled out for
condemnation naturally concludes it can never get a fair
hearing, and the other parties believe that the Security
Council has condoned their actions. I might add that there
are unfortunately many other peoples in that region, in
Central Asia, and in South-East Asia who live under foreign military occupation. Little consideration seems to be
given to the plight of these millions who have been driven
from their homes.

195. In approaching the issue before the Council, my
delegation has been guided by a number of considerations.
We cannot do otherwise but note that the persistence of
problems of this sort reinforces the continuing need for a
just and lasting peace settlement in the Middle East. In the
present case, we regard Israel’s continued occupation of
the occupied territories as being in breach of international
law. Equally, while the occupation continues there can be
no doubt as to the applicability of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949: to those occupied territories.
Israel has understandable security concerns, but it has an
obligation to respect the civil liberties of the Arab inhabitants of the West Bank and to refrain from excessive measures. There may be debate as to what constitutes a breach
of the Geneva Convention, but it is important that the acts
of the occupier conform to the letter and spirit of the
provisions of that Convention.

189. In conclusion, let me say that such a draft resolution
as the one before us undercuts rather than strengthens the
ability of this body to play a positive role in resolving the
problems which are the root cause of the violence by exacerbating an already volatile situation.
190. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution submitted by Burkina Faso, Egypt, India,
Madagascar, Peru and Trinidad and Tobago, and contained in document S/17459.

196. The facts of the situation in the West Bank speak
for themselves. Much has been said here about causes and
effects and blame has been directed at different parties.
What is clear is that action has bred reaction in a cycle of
violence. The result has been a series of events all too
familiar, but none the less distressing, to members of the
Council. It is the hope of the Australian delegation that we
shall see, first, an early end to violence and, secondly, a
restoration of calm and peace in the occupied territories.

A vote ivas taken by show of hands.
In favour: Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.
Against: United States of America.
Abstaining: Australia, Denmark, France; United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

197. My delegation regrets that the draft resolution
before the Council was deficient in several respects. We
would have preferred to see a recognition in it of the rzgrettable escalation of violence in the occupied territories
rather than a focus solely on the actions of one party.
Similarly, the draft resolution in our view contains unbalanced and, in some cases, less than fully accurate reflections of the situation on the ground in its relationship to
the Geneva Convention. It is for those reasons that my
delegation abstained in the vote on the draft resolution
before us.

There were 10 votes in favour, I against and 4 abstentions.
7?ze draft resolution was nof adopted. the negative vote
being that of a permanent member of the Council.

191. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those
members of the Council who wish to make statements
following the voting.
17

Security Council. We express regret that it was not
adopted because of another veto by the United States.
None the less, we feel that Qatar, on behalf of the Group
of Arab States, had every justification for requesting that
the Security Council convene immediately to consider the
question of the repressive measures of the Israeli authorities against the Arab Palestinian population of the occupied territories.

198. Mr. BIERRING
(Denmark): ‘Let me start, Sir, by
saying how pleased we are to see you presiding over the
Council for the month of September. We have worked
together closely on many occasions, both in the past and in
the course of our membership of the Council, and we
highly appreciate your professional and human qualities.
199. I should like also to pay tribute to your predecessor,
Mr. Troyanovsky,.for the way in which he carried out his
duties as President for the month of August. Once again
my delegation had the opportunity to admire his qualities
as a .diplomat and to appreciate his fairness and sense of
humour.
’

207. The dangerous situation created as a result of these
repressive measures can be seen from the statements of the
observer for the PLO, the representatives of the Arab
countries and members of the Council at yesterday’s and
today’s meetings. Moreover, we would like to stressthat
we reject any attempt to equate the occupiers with the
inhabitants of the territories who are resisting occupation.
We feel that any talk of a “cycle of violence” is quite out of
place in this situation.

200. Denmark is very concerned about the latest developments in the Arab territories ‘occupied by Israel since
1967. The increasing number of attacks on Israeli civilians
has led to a series of Israeli countermeasures, including
administrative detentions, curfews and deportation orders.

208. The Council knows that the Israeli authorities have
established conditions of terror in the occupied territories
of the West Bank and the Gaze Strip: the occupiers open
fue on defenceless Palestinians and mass arrests are being
carried out in accordance with the 4 August law on administrative detention. In a number of cities curfews have
been imposed and many Palestinians are threatened with
deportation. The fact that these actions are a flagrant.violation of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,2
and of resolutions of the Council can be doubted by no
one. Nor can anyone doubt that-Israel’s actions and its
ignoring of Security Council decisions are possible strictly
because of the direct economic, military, political and
diplomatic help and support received from its strategic
partner. Today we have seen yet another example of that
support.

201. My Government strongly deplores this escalation of
violence and tension, which has resulted in a number of
innocent civilian victims, and urges all parties to show the
utmost restraint. We should like to reaffirm that the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative-to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Tie of War, of I2 August 1949,2 as
well as other norms of international law, are applicable to
the occupied territories until such time as an, end is put,
within the framework of a comprehensive, just and lasting
settlement, to the territorial occupation which Israel has
maintained since 1967.
,
202. Denmark, together with the other members of the
European Community, has on several occasions stated its
position regarding the Israeli policies in these territories
and the principles necessary to secure peace in the Middle
East. A continuation of the cycle of violence and
countermeasures can only undermine the necessary basis
of dialogue and trust ‘which is an essential prerequisite for
any constructive negotiations aimed at achieving a comprehensive peace settlement.Denmark
therefore urges that
no steps be taken that could lead to further aggravation of
tension in the area.

209. The Soviet delegation contirms its unswerving policy on the question of the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East. We express our solidarity
with the courageous struggle of the Palestinian people for
their legitimate national rights and the establishment of an
independent State. A comprehensive Middle East settlement can be achieved only through the collective efforts of
all the parties concerned, including the PLO, within the
framework of a specially convened international conference, on the Middle East.

203. The draft resolution presented today did not adequately take these considerations into account. Furthermore, we fear that it might have hampered the moves
towards negotiations on the Arab-Israeli contlict. Consequently, my delegation abstained in the vote.

210. In vigorously condemning Israel’s recent repressive
acts against .Palestinians in the occupied territories the
delegation of the Soviet Union feels that it is high time for
the Council to take the strictest measures to put an end to
such activities.

204. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Sir, we are happy
to see you here as President and we feel that the affairs of
the Council are in good hands, We wish you all successin
this important month when, among other things, we shall
hold a commemorative session of the Security Council
with Ministers for Foreign Affairs participating.

-

21.1: The PRESIDENT: Before I speak in my capacity as
the representative of the United Kingdom, I should like to
say one or two things.

205. I also welcome the new representatives of China and
Peru and wish them success in their important work.

212. I feel somewhat at a disadvantage: Since I have
already formally congratulated and thanked my‘predecessor on behalf of the whole Council and also welcomed the
representatives of China and Peru, I am left without any

206. The-Soviet Union voted for the draft resolution submitted by the group of non-aligned States members of the
.

-,

18

nice little introduction to my .statement, But I do have
something serious to say.

should like to make the following points in my capacity as
Chairman of the Group of Arab States.

213. I hope that all extreme or abusive statements will be
avoided. They are not consistent with the standing and
dignity of the Council. In particular, they should be
avoided by representatives of non-members who are guests
of the Council.

220. I express our sincerest thanks and appreciation to
the nonaligned States members of the Council for their
efforts in preparing a draft resolution that reflected the
minimum aspirations of the civilian population in the
Palestinian territories to put an end to the inhuman practices pursued by the Zionist authorities against them.

214. I -now wish to make a statement in my national
capacity in explanation of vote.
215. My delegation listened with close attention to the
arguments put forward in the course of the debate. We
also took account of reports from the occupied territories
of violent incidents and of measures taken by the authorities. We deplore the acts of violence by whomsoever committed, especially when these cost innocent civilian lives.
We feel grave concern for the damage done to the atmos?here of calm and restraint which is essential for the success of current efforts to engage all parties in peace
negotiations, to which we attach the greatest importance.
216. We cannot ignore the fact that a number of the
measures taken by the Israeli authorities in the occupied
territories appear to have been extreme’and to have been
taken in breach ‘of their legal obligations. The Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,2 imposes clear obligations upon the occupying Power in its conduct towards the
civilian population of the territory. There can be no doubt
that deportation of even a single individual would be in
breach of the provisions of article 49 of the Convention
and, therefore, wholly unacceptable. Nor do we believe
that the Israeli authorities have acted with all the sensitivity that is clearly required in the tense and unhappy circumstances prevailing in the occupied territories.

221. I express the same thanks and appreciation to all
those States that voted in favour of the draft resolution.
Their affirmative votes reflect their commitment
to
humanitarian principles and equality among all peoples, as
well as the fact that they have expressed their concern for
,a11individuals without any discrimination.
222. I am confident that the Palestinian people will not
forget this honourable position and will consider it as sup
port in its efforts to end the occupation. The Group of
Arab States, for its part, expresses its appreciation to them
for their positive response to Arab demands and will not
forget their position.
i :
223.. We regret that some States have abstained in the
vote. We had hoped that those States, some of which have
suffered from foreign occupation and whose peoples have
struggled with all courage against the occupiers, would
understand the reality of the. situation faced by the Palestinian people and the feelings and reasons behind the
Palestinian struggle to end that occupation. We had hoped
that the history and heritage of those countries would
impel them to vote in favour of that draft resolution.
224. We especially regret that the United States has by its
veto defeated the draft resolution. We had hoped that the
United States, which takes a pioneering role against colonialism and occupation-which
supports human rights
and self-determination for. all peoples-principles
enshrined in the Fourteen Points proclaimed by President
Wilson-would
not ignore the rights of the Palestinian
people. We had hoped that it would not ignore the most
basic human aspirations of the Palestinian people, particularly since the draft resolution was very mild in form and
in content.

2 17. My delegation considered carefully the draft resolution submitted by a number of member States of the Council in document S/117459. As some members are aware,
we indicated that a number of points of difficulty arose for
us in its formulations. Despite our unhappiness about certain aspects of the conduct of the Israeli authorities, we
were not satisfied that paragraph 2 conformed with the
occupying Power’s legal obligations in this case, and we
would have welcomed a balanced reference calling for an
end to violence by all parties. Only if calm is restored to
the West Bank will it be possible to move the peace process
forward. We regret that suggestions on these lines were not
taken up and we have therefore found it necessary to
abstain in the vote on this draft resolution.

225. Legally and technically, the draft resolution has
failed because of the use of the veto. Morally, however, the
draft resolution has given support to our brothers in the
occupied Arab territories in their struggle to rid themselves
of injustice and heinous occupation.

218. I now resume my function as President of the Security Council. The representative of Qatar has asked to be
allowed to speak, and I call on him.

226. The ‘PRESIDENT:
The observer for the PLO has
asked to speak. I call on him.

219. ‘Mr. AL-KAWARI
(Qatar) (interpretation from
Arabic): On the occasion of the conclusion of the Council’s
proceedings on the repressive measures taken by the Israelis against the Palestinians in occupied Arab territories, I

227. Mr. MANSOUR
(Palestine Liberation Organization) (interpretation from Arabic): At .the outset I should
like, on behalf of the PLO, the sole, legitimate representative of the Palestinians, wherever they are, to convey our
thanks to all our friends who voted in favour of the draft
19

234. The Israeli newspaper Davar likened the Palestinian
struggle to a natural law. It said: “So long as there is
occupation there will be constant revolution.”

resolution, despite all odds. They thus affirmed their condemnation of the. repressive measures pursued by the
Israeli authorities against our struggling people in the
Arab territories. They also affiied their solidarity with
our own people in its just, legitimate struggle against this
obnoxious occupation. We take deep gratification from
the wide support of the non-aligned and socialist States
and our friends who affirmed today that they are on the
side of right, justice and the struggle of people against
colonialism, oppression, occupation and aggression.

235. When an Israeli newspaper like Davar admits that
fact and devotes to it its edit&d of 20 August, it sends an
obvious message to the supporters of “the iron fist policy,
the policy of oppression, the policy of besieging Palestinian
camps and villages”. The purport of this message is that
“that policy might bring about a certain calm, but the next
wave of resistance will inevitably come; it cannot be prevented”. The editorial called upon the Israelis to dispel the
illusions harboured by those in power who attempt to halt
the efforts of those struggling against the occupation, ,and
also said that “he who believes that the practices of the
occupation authorities can stop protest against the Israeli
authorities is deluding himself ‘.

228. Israel believes that mankind in general is in the
wrong and that people are liars. Israel believes that it and
the United States are the only countries that do not lie.
Anyway, I shall leave it to the Council to understand the
lies and inventions of the Israeli representatives.
229. The position of the United States, which killed the
draft resolution, as it previously killed the declaration by
the President of the Security Council, automatically stands
in the way of any measure taken by this Council on the
subject. It is yet another practice in a long list of practices
pursued by the United States against the aspirations of the
Palestinian people.

236. Anyone observing the prevailing situation in the
occupied territories in the light of the offtcial terrorism
against Palestinian citizens may have an opinion contrary
to that of the masterminds of Zionist policy, because that
policy cannot dissuade the Palestinians from resistance.
237.

230. This position of the United States goes against the
minimum standard of human rights because it supports
the oppression and the iron-fist policy pursued by Israel. It
ignores the most basic human right of the Palestinian
people: the right to stand up to aggression. This disastrous
veto cast by the United States is yet another challenge to
the international will and the will to halt the illegal practices pursued by Israel against the people of Palestine.

The newspaper went on to say that:

“It is high time that the Israeli Government stop
arm-twisting, flexing its muscles and offering deceptive
promises that the blood of Jews will not be split in vain.
Why do we not speak the truth and say that there can
be no secure life for the Jews”-referring, of course, to
the Jews on the West Bank and in Gaza--“if more than
a million people look upon us as occupiers. Even if we
take away their knives, razors and stones, they will still
have their fists, nails and teeth to resist with.”

231. The representative of the United States said that the
United States has helped the Palestinian people. He
ignored the fact that the United States was behind the
problem of the Palestinians and has opposed the Palestinians’ return to their homeland. The return of the Palestinian people is still being opposed by Israel and the
United States, especially the United States, which prevents
the adoption of any resolution by the Council. Moreover,
Israel and the United States are impeding the implementation of relevant United Nations resolutions.

238. I quote again from the newspaper Ha’aretz
August, which said:

of 7

“The outbreak of a fire within means success for
Arafat. We have to admit unequivocally that the inevitable result of all the oppression will be a very harmful
one, particularly since confusion and disillusionment
will be sown among the Jewish population, which will
alter the direction and shape of life even within the
green-line area and administer a shock to our society.*’

232. Everyone knows who is hindering the attainment of
peace in the Middle East. To be hypocritical and yet condemn hypocrisy is the worst form of hypocricy. The position of the United States will encourage our people to go in
only one direction: to step up its struggle and end the
occupation of our territory. We insist on regaining our
territory and establishing an independent State on our own
soil, Palestine.

239. If our people’s resistance to occupation in the occupied territories amounts to mere acts of terrorism by a
handful of people, as was alleged by the representative of
Israel, why, then, do they send paratroops to the Palestinian territories? Why do they increase their oppression
against the inhabitants of the occupied territories? Why
have they persisted in enforcing inhuman laws against
them since 4 August 1985? Why do they continue administrative arrests by the hundreds? Why do they deport trade
unionists workers, students and heads of municipalities
who spent long periods in prison and were freed under
agreements with the International Red Cross? Why were
they expelled after having spent month after month among
their people, as was determined by yesterday’s Supreme
Court decision to expel I.1 Palestinians from the

233. As for the lies on the part of the Zionist reprcsentative today and yesterday, and his attack against the Palestinian people in its struggle in the occupied territories, I
should like to tell him about some of the opinions in the
Israeli press. The Israeli representative believes that anything else is just a lie, a fabrication and invention. He may
be convinced by what is being said in the Zionist press and
written by Zionist writers.
20

.’

occuuied territories? They could be expelled at any
moment-if
they have not already been. -Why do they
open fire on children? Why do they build new prisons?
Why do they close down and muzzle the press? Why do
they impose curfews’! Why do they practice mass persecution? Why do they confiscate land and establish more settlements? Whjr do they condone some people-especially
Kahane sind Sharon-who want to eject 2 million Arabs? I
put all those questions before the Council.
240. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran has asked to speak in exercise of
his right of reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
241. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republic of
Iran): 1 thank you, Mr. President, for inviting me to speak
again, “to exercise the right of reply”. My understanding
is, Sir, that in your capacity as President of the Council,
you probably did not have the right to make that comment
about my statement; and as to your national capacity I
think that your comment, since I did not say anything
against your country, might not have been necessary. But
still I am exercising my tight of reply.
242. Regarding the substance of your comment, Sir, I say
that we are a signatory to the Charter of the United
Nations not for the fun of it, but in order to see that the
Charter is implemented. I wonder if any member of the
Council believes that the Council has been able fully and
correctly to defend the rights of the Palestinians or that the
struggles of the Council in that direction have not been
obstructed. Our problem, Mr. President, is the same as
yours: we too want the implementation of the Charter and
of the resolutions of the Council.
243. But consistent implementation
of the Charter
requires respect for the Charter both today and at the time
when the land of Palestine was first occupied and divided,
with one part of it gradually eroded and nibbled at, which
is the case to this day. We all know where we are today: it
is the revered Charter itself which has not been able to
defend the rights of the Palestinian people, or the rights of
the Moslems whose sanctuaries are now occupied by the
Zionist forces.
244. We therefore believe that the Charter has, in very
polite terms, not been implemented. We believe that this
politeness and lack of implementation will continue.
245. 1 should also say, Sir, without making any comment
regarding the substance of the Malvinas war-and I
believe you will agree with me-that your country conducted that war under the title of self-defence. Your country believed it was a legitimate war.
246. Similarly, I believe that if the Moslem world unites
in defence of Palestine and against the Zionist usurpers
that is quite legitimate under the Charter, and none of its
signatories will be in contravention of the terms of membership of the United Nations. Therefore, I am glad that
the call for the defence of Palestine, the very comprehen-

sive call, the Islamic call, still falls within the terms of the
Charter.
247. I regret that some may have been displeased by that
call. The fact is that my statement, the statement of a guest
of the Security Council, was not abusive at all. It was full
of facts, but facts are not always sweet. They are sometimes very bitter. The facts that are taking place now inside
Palestine and Lebanon and elsewhere in the Moslem world
are very bitter. The occupation of Palestine, the killing of
people, their dislocation, their being led to where they are
now, are very bitter facts; they are not sweet. We must
however see them as they are.
248. We also know that the occupation of Palestine and
the violation of the rights of the Palestinians have been
tolerated very politely in this chamber. I believe that the
bitter facts about those violations and usurpations deserve
the same treatment.
249. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked to speak in exercise of the right
of reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
250. Mr. EL-FATTAL (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): I apologize to members of the Council
for speaking at such a late hour, but I shall be very brief.
251. At the outset, I wish to express my country’s thanks
to Burkina Faso, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago, Madagascar
and India for their position of principle on such a vital
issue, the protection of the structure of international
human law by obliging countries that are occupying others
to respect international law. That position shows care not
only for international law but for the Charter of the United
Nations, which was adopted zifter the Second World War
because of the Fascist and Nazi practices to which millions
fell victim in Europe.
252. The vote on the draft resolution made one thing
clear, particularly to all the Arab countries which, represented by the representative of Qatar, came here to request
what was their right, not to beg anything of the Council. If
the United States veto of another draft resolution put forward to save those persecuted under occupation in Lebanon and elsewhere showed anything, it was its intention to
abolish or destroy international law because it applies to
the American aggression against the people of Nicaragua.
253. There are attempts to falsify the description “freedom fighters”. The United States Central Intelligence
Agency is working in Nicaragua. Officials at the highest
levels of the United States Administration are formally
calling the rebels there popular or national liberation
movements. However, our sons in Palestine, South Lebanon and other occupied Arab territories are exiled, shot,
detained and imprisoned, and we are told that we have no
right to resort to the Security Council with a resolution
that can include only one party, as if we were on the same
level as the Israelis; the usurpers and the occupied are on
the same level.

254. The majority of members of the Council have been
under foreign-occupation at some time. We can see this
from European literature and the history of the Orient and
the West. Books published after the Second World War
show that resistance is the most honourable act of a
human being. I take pride that we have people struggling
in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, South Lebanon and the
Golan Heights. I have said before that we cherish and
honour them, and the international community must support their struggle to liberate their territories.
255. The right to wage that struggle is enshrined in the
Charter. It is a tradition that has been followed since the
foundation of the United Nations and since the adoption
of the resolution to end colonization. It is just like the right
given in Article 5f of the Charter. The struggle is legitimate. All countries under occupation are obliged to use
that right to liberate their territories. Therefore, no matter
how the United States may try to equate us with the Israelis imported from various parts of .the world, we shall
never listen to the United States. We shall never heed its
threats and we shall never yield an inch. We shall come to
the Security Council dozens of times, knowing in advance
that we shall face the American veto, because we know the
United States is protecting Israel.
256.’ Israel signed the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Tie
of War, of 12
August 1949.2 So far it has not recognized the applicability
of the Convention to all Arab territories, but it selects
those provisions that benefit its occupation forces while
denying those that protect the civilian population under
occupation.

‘There were no objections to his teaching until a visiting
Iraeli professor complained, in a 1983 letter to the administration, that Professor Dube’s linking of Zionism to racism
was ‘sloganeering that is practised by the anti-Semite’.
*‘The Israeli professor, Selwyn K. Troen, said he had
never talked with Professor Dube nor attended his
classes, but based his charge on a complaint by one
student and by the course syllabus.”
And here is the syllabus:
“Fifth week: the three forms of racism and how they
have manifested themselves. 1. Nazism in Germany.
2. Apartheid in South Africa. 3. Zionism in Israel.“*
260. The fate meted out to that professor was expulsion
from the university. The claim is made that in the United
States academic freedom is guaranteed. But because that
professor dared to speak freely and honestly and to say
what we have said in the General Assembly-namely,
that
‘Zionism is racism-he was expelled. This is freedom and
democracy in the United States.
261. The representative of the enemy asked for the name
of a Palestinian who was killed last year, or during the last
two years. But all of us read the newspapers. We know
that a large number of persons have been killed; I am not
saying that thousands have been killed, but there have
been a large number. The Israeli representative used the
phrase “in the past year”. But he forgot about the destruction and killing that have taken place since 1948.

257. We have more than once said that what we are
trying to tell the Council is that there is an alliance between
the United States and Israel and a conspiracy against the
Arab nation, particularly in that region of the Middle East.

262 Through you, Mr. President, we should like to ask
the Israeli representative this: Who killed Count Folke
Bemadotte, the representative of the Secretary-General in
Palestine? Shamir, now the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Israel. Does that not constitute killing? Shamir killed
Count Folke Bemadotte and his.French colleague.

258. There has been talk about democracy. We talk
about Israeli democracy, that racist democracy. of course
the Zionists have democracy; they have the right to vote.
The white minority in South Africa has the right to vote,
but the black majority does not have that right. The two
situations are very similar. The Arabs in soxalled Israel do
not have the rights given to the Israelis. In order not to
prolong the discussion, I shall not give examples.

263. Through you, Mr. President, we ask the Israeli rep
resentative this: Who killed 300 innocent civilians in Deir
Yassin? Who was the champion of that massacre? Well,
the champion of that massacre was crowned with the
Nobel prize. He became a Nobel prize laureate. The Nobel
prize is not an Arab prize. Everyone knows the background of the prize. And who perpetrated the massacre in
Deir Yassin? Begin, who went to Cairo and who was
visited by Sadat. Begin, who was awarded the Nobel prize,
And who perpetrated the massacre at Qibya? It was
Sharon, the same person who perpetrated the massacre of
Beirut; the same person who masterminded the plan.for
the invasion of Lebanon, in which 30,000 Lebanese have
been killed and which has left tens of thousands of other
victims.

259. The freedom of speech guaranteed by the First
Amendment to the United States Constitution seems to
apply only to those who praise and applaud Israel. I shall
give a very small example in this connection. It relates to a
professor at the State University at Stony Brook in Long
Island. I quote the following excerpt from an article in i%e
New York Times on 18 August:
“mis professor] who was involved in a controversy
two years ago-because a course he taught equated Zionism with racism has been denied tenure and will have to
leave the University next year.

264. ‘And the Israeli representative asks when did they
kill people, when did they beat them, when did they expel

-_ . . .

L‘

l

22

Quoted in English by the speaker.

them? Perhaps Israel has not expelled .ot exiled anyone in
the past month or the past two or six months, but in 1948
Israel expelled and exiled about a million Palestinians.

But Israel is collaborating with the South African r6gime.
In this connection I should like to quote from an article in
the Economist-a publication from your own country, the
United Kingdom.

265. Article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which
the representative of Israel has falsely invoked, states very
clearly in its second paragraph:

“Yet Israeli-South African relations, especially military ones, are the cosiest of all. .A host of joint research
projects bind the countries together. .For instance,
South African steel has helped to give the Merkava an
extra-strong armour-plating; South Africa now makes
its own version of the Ktir. A joint submarine-building
project is under way; and-most sensitive of all-South
African’ uranium . . . is thought to have been used to
develop Israel’s capacity for making a nuclear bomb.*‘*

“Persons thus evacuated shall be transferred back to
their homes as soon as hostilities in the area in question
have ceased.*‘*
266. The number of refugees has become larger and
larger as children have been born. The number has tripled.
Each year the United Nations states that these refugees
must be allowed to return. The United States representative reminds the Council of the assistance given by his
Government to UNRWA. What they are saying to the
Palestinians is this: “If you remain outside your territqry,
we will give you some dollars, but you must never invoke
the right to return”.

269. These questions must be posed, must be thought
out and must be directed to the representative of Israel,
who is in this Chamber.
270. The PRESIDENT: The Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

267. Israel has expelled 128,000 persons from the Golan
Heights. It has displaced tens of thousands of families in
southern Lebanon. Yet the Israeli representative asks
when did they touch an Arab, when did they expel an
Arab, when did they exile an Arab? There are really limits
to this kind of falsification.

The meeting rose at Z30 p.m.

268. I am very miserable about the result of the vote on
this humanitarian draft resolution. We remind you that
the entire world is standing by the people of South Africa.
* Quoted

in English

NOTES

’ Officiaal Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session. Supplement No. 1 (A/40/1).
* United Nations,

Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
3 Ibid., vol. 1125, No. 17512.

by the speaker.

23

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT
SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS
DES NATIONS UNIES
l.es publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dcpositaircs
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous i : Nations Unies.
Section des ventes, New York ou Gentve.
KAK

KIOJIYYHTb

M3AAHMFI

OPPAHM3AlJMM
OsbEAMHEHHblX
HALJMf-4
Haurrtt MOXCHO K)‘nHTb B KHHXUILIX
MaTa3HHaX
HaBOnHTe
CllpaBKki
06 H39iSHHIIX B BaUCM KHHXCHOM
snu nm.u~Te no anpecy: Opramtsauea 06beLIWWiHblX
HauntI, CeKutia no

ki3llaHkfX
OpraHkf3iUWH
O6leeAllHWHblX
H ZIrCHTCTBaX
BO BCCX PaROHilX
MApa.

Maraxute
nponane

H3naHHR.

kfbto-fiOpK

HJ-IW ‘HCeHeBiI.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES
DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00400

90-61439-January

1995-1.925
