UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
UN LIBRARY
ttb 27 1987

ulN/sAC~LLECTDN
NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2224)

. .. ... .. .. .... .. .. .. .... .. .... .. .. ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 3 June 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Bahrain
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13977) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SiPV.2226

NOTE
S~bols_~f
United
t.~~Ofr3r~b,~e’d:~t~~~~~~~~~ention
Nations document.

Nations documents are composed of capital letters comof such a symbol indicates a reference to a United

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2226th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 5 June 1980, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Ole ALGARD (Norway).

letter dated 4 June from the representative of Tunisia [S/13982], which reads as follows:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

“I have the honour to request ,that the Security
Council invite the Permanent Observer for the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in the
consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation
in the occupied Arab territories’, in accordance with
the Council’s usual practice.**

agenda (S/Agenda/2226)

3. The proposal by the representative of Tunisia
is not made pursuant to rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, but, if approved by the
Council, the invitation would confer on the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO). the same rights of
participation as those enjoyed by a Member State
when invited to participate under tule 37.

1. Adoption of the agenda

2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 3 June 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Bahrain to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13977)
The meeting

.4. Does any member of the Council wish to speak
on this proposal?

was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Adoption

5. Mr. McHENRY (United States of America): The
United States has made clear its view that it is inappropriate for the Council to invite the Palestine
Liberation Organization to participate in the debate
on terms that some seek to interpret as conferring
the right of participation as if it were a Member State.
For this reason, we shall vote against the manner in
which this invitation is phrased when it is put to a vote.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 3 June 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Bahrain to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council

(S/13977)

6. The PRESIDENT: If no other member of the
Council wishes to speak at this stage, I shall take it
that the Council is ready to vote on the proposal by
Tunisia.

1. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received letters
from the representatives of Bahrain, Egypt, Israel
and Jordan, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

A vote was taken by shonpof hands.
In favour:
Bangladesh, China, German Democratic Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Philippines,
Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia
Against:

United States of America

Abstaining:
France, Norway, Portugal, &ited
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Blum (Israel)
took a place at the Council table; Mr. AI-Saffar
(Bahrain), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt) and Mr. AIZubi (Jordan) took the places reservedfor them at the
side of the Council chamber.

The proposal
4 abstentions.

was adopted

by JO votes to I, with

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization)
took a place at the
Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like further to inform
the members of the Council that I have received a
1

..-..
-__.- - .

7. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council is
meeting today in response to the letter dated 3 June
from the representative of Bahrain to the President of
the Council, circulated under the symbol S/13977.

15. The recent developments in the occupied West
Bank are alarming and call urgently on the conscience
of the international community for that community
to act rapidly to end the Israeli violations of the human
rights of the Palestinian people and also to put an end
to the Israeli occupation of all Arab territories.

8. Members of the Council have before them document S/13984, which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of consultations.

16. Israel has practised every possible inhuman act
against the Palestinian people, whether the latter are
living in lands under Israeli occupation or in exile.
Israel has practised collective punishment, house
arrest, imprisonment, torture and deportation and
finally has even bombed the cars of the Palestinian
Mayors. That includes the collective punishment of
families or whole towns and the blowing up of houses.

9. The first speaker is the representative of Bahrain,
who wishes to make a statement in his capacity as
Chairman for the month of June of the Group of
Arab States at the United Nations. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
10. Mr. AL-SAPPAR (Bahrain): Permit me first of
all to thank you, Mr. President, as well as the other
members of the Security Council, for having convened
‘this urgent meeting. I should Iike at the same time to
extend to you my sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and to wish you every success in your
difficult task as President of the Council. I am confident that your wisdom, diplomacy and statesmanship
will be dedicated to the successful outcome of. this
debate.

17. According to The Christian Science Monitor of
30 May, young soldiers testified to Uri Avneri, member
of the Israeli Parliament and newspaper publisher,
that, after they had served for one week on the West
Bank, they were given the following order by a senior
military government officer. “Every person you catch
outside his house [during the curfew] beat him on all
parts of his body except for the head. Have no pity;
break all their bones.”
18. Everyone knows that since 1967 Israel has
occupied vast Arab territories. The Israeli leadership
has on many occasions claimed that Israel was ready
to withdraw from the occupied Arab lands within the
framework of a comprehensive settlement that
guaranteed peace and security to all parties concerned.
However, it is evident today that the Israeli leadership has no intention at all of withdrawing from the
occupied territories or even desisting from its expansionist and aggressive policy in those territories.

11. It is an honour for my delegation, in its capacity
as Chairman of the Group of Arab States for this
month, to speak on a question of great concern to the
Arab world and to the world community as a whole.
The gravity of the situation in the West Bank has
led us to request the holding of this meeting. The
recent alarming developments in the situation and the
intolerable persecution of the Palestinian people at
the hands of Israeli fanatics and illegal armed settlers
encouraged and supported by Zionist authorities in
the West Bank are the reasons for convening this
debate.

19. The Israeli policy of establishing settlements in
the occupied Arab territories has been condemned by
the international community. Even the United States
has considered those settlements illegal and an obstacle to peace. That policy in fact not only violates
international law and the provisions of the fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949’ but also constitutes a
crime against unarmed and innocent people who have
lived under occupation for the last 13 years up to
this day.

12. Last month the Council met to consider the
illegal deportation, from the occupied West Bank of
three Palestinian Arabs, two Mayors and a ,Judge,
which was a violation of the principles of intemational law in general and of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, of 12 August 1949’ in particular.
13. The criminal and barbaric acts committed against
the Mayor of Nablus, Mr. Bassam Shaka’a, and the
Mayor of Ramallah, Mr. Karim Khalaf, which were
undoubtedly organized by Israeli racists and fanatics,
had as their aim the uprooting and annihilation of the
Palestinian people so that the occupied Arab territories
might be forever kept in Israeli hands.

20. The Palestinian people have always not only
demonstrated their firm opposition to the settlement
policy but also resisted the occupation of their homeland. Resistance to occupation is a sacred duty and a
legal right of every citizen everywhere. Nobody can
reproach a people for its resistance to military occupation. Resistance to the forces of occupation has always
been glorified and considered a form of heroism in
countries which have suffered from foreign occupation. The heroic resistance of the Norwegian people
to the Nazi occupation during the Second World War
is recorded in history and the Palestinian resistance in
no way differs from that of other national resistance
groups. We do not think that the Palestinian people

14. On every possible occasion Israeli’ officials
declare that they would live with the Arabs in peace
and harmony-on their terms, of course. Peace and
harmony cannot be founded on violence against a
people in its occupied homeland. The brutality of the
Israeli acts in the occupied Palestinian Arab territories
are clear proof of Israeli intentions.
2

would be denied the right to resist the Israeli military
occupation by all the means at their disposal.

estinian people to self-determination and its national
right to establish its- own
I sovereign State in Palestine.

21. We believe that there is no comparison between
the acts of a people resisting foreign power and the
violence committed by illegal, alien settlers, come to
usurp the lands and the property of others. The resistance of the Palestinian people to the Israeli occupation
and to the illegal Israeli settlements in Palestine will
therefore continue until the Israeli forces and settlers
withdraw from the occupied Arab territories.

27. The Israeli persecution of the Palestinian people
will not stop the Palestinians* struggle to regain their
national rights and to return to their homeland. Occupation will not last forever; it will vanish because of the
determination of the Palestinian people. This determination was spelled out by the Mayor of Nablus,
Mr. Shaka’a, while he was under treatment in the
hospital, in these words: “They can amputate my legs,
but they cannot amputate my struggle.”

22. The denial by Israel of the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination is not new, but it is a
constant source of concern to the international community, which now has serious doubts about the desire
of the Israeli officials for peace. Indeed, the recent
events in the occupied Palestinian territories have
shocked international public opinion. The promotion
of new settlements, the deportation and the attempted
assassinations of Palestinian leaders are part of a
series of systematic violations of the Charter of the
United Nations and the fourth Geneva Convention.
In fact, they are deliberate acts to destroy the identity
of the Palestinian people and to deprive it of the
most fundamental human rights.

28. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on whom I call.
29. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, at the outset,
let me present my compliments to you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of June. We all recall the exemplary skill, wisdom,
statesmanship, propriety and good humour with which
you conducted the business of the Council in April of
last year. It gives us special pleasure to see you, the
representative of a country with which mine has the
most cordial of relations, in the presidency for a second
time in the course of Norway’s membership in the
Council, and we know that you will exhibit once again
the outstanding qualities which have gained you the
esteem of us all.

23. In our opinion. the United States bears a great
responsibility-for the sufferings of the Palest&an
people. The United States not only supplies Israel
with conventional and sophisticated weapons and
allows it to continue its occupation of the Palestinian
homeland; it is also one of the signatories of the Camp
David accord and a party to the negotiations which
aim at perpetuating the occupation of Arab territories
and legaiizing the Israeli presence in the Palestinian
homeland.

30. Last Monday, 2 June, three -persons were
seriously injured in explosions which took place in
Judea and Samaria. Two were the Mayors of Nablus
and Ramallah. The third was a bomb-disposal expert
of the Israel Police Force who saved the life of the
Mayor of Al-Bireh and lost his eyesight in the process.
In addition, seven people were wounded on the same
day in Hebron by a hand-grenade.

24. We have stated our opposition to the Camp David
accord on many occasions. The Palestinian people and
its leaders have rejected it. Most European countries
have also expressed their doubts about the outcome of
the accord and the negotiations for Palestinian autonomy in the West Bank and Gaza, because that accord
and the negotiations that are taking place do not- deal
with the core of the Middle East conflict-that is,
Palestinian national rights.

31. These acts of terror have met with outrage and
revulsion on the ‘part of the Government and people
of Israel. They regard them with the utmost gravity.
The Government is determined to stamp out terror,
whatever its origin. It has ordered an intensive investigation into these acts of terror. As stated unambiguously by the Prime Minister of Israel in the
Knesset a few hours after the attacks had occurred,
the investigation will be carried through with firmness
and determination until the criminals- have been discovered, apprehended and brought to justice. The
Government of Israel has made it perfectly clear that
it will not tolerate any recurrence of this kind of
criminal activity against anyone. The investigation is
already under way. However, the identity of those
who committed the crimes on 2 June is still unknown.
So long as this is the case, we must refrain-and it is
equally incumbent on the Council to refrain-from
giving rein to suspicions and from casting blame.
When the culprits are apprehended, they will be put
on trial to answer for their crimes.

25. We are certain that the present negotiations on
Palestinian autonomy will not lead to stability and
peace in the region. Since the signing of the Camp
David accord, the situation in the occupied Arab
territories has deteriorated. Today we are faced with
the same methods and tactics as were used by the
Zionist organizations and settlers before the inception
of Israel, which led to the massacres of Palestinian
civilians and the eventual expulsion of Palestinians
from their homes and lands, and resulted in the present
tragedy of the Palestinian people.
.
!
26. We believe that any settlement of the Middle
East conflict must recognize the right of the Pal3

32. Our outrage at these acts of terror derives from
our position of principle concerning terrorism in all its
manifestations. Beyond that, it should be seen in the
light of our experience as the targets of Arab terror
for several decades, at the cost of thousands of Jewish
and Arab lives. No one is more convinced than the
Government of Israel that the use of terror not only
hinders the cause of peace and the common good of
all concerned, but also makes these objectives, which
we hold so high, all the more difficult to attain.

merely because they were not prepared to carry out
the PLO’s instructions, as in the case of the Imam of
Gaza, Sheikh Hashem Khozander, who was brutally
done to death by the PLO exactly a year ago. Could
it be that the sudden surge of concern displayed here
today derives from the fact that in the present case
PLO involvement in the outrages of 2 June has not
been established?
38. Let us recognize today’s exercise for what it is
-yet another &play of- the well-known double
standard that has characterized the Council’s dealings
in everything bearing on the Arab-Israel conflict. In the
last few months, particularly since the Soviet invasion
of Afghanistan, a new dimension has been added to
this phenomenon in the form of a war of attrition
conducted by Arab representatives against the Council and designed to condition the Council to adopt
resolutions with the minimum of scrutiny and if at
all possible without debate.

33. Political assassination and attempts on the lives
of political figures are, unfortunately, phenomena well
known in other parts of the world, including Europe,
but not least of all in the Arab world. Attempts to
liquidate political rivals and opponents or to create
provocations are commonplace in Arab countries.
Over the past decade the plague of international
terrorism has been spread to a decisive degree by the
PLO, which has become the linchpin and quarter-.
master of the “terrorist international”. The extent to
which the PLO provides aid, training, logistic support
and shelter to other terrorist organizations which
operate in diierent parts of the globe is now common
knowledge.

39. If the Council were genuinely interested in the real
causes fanning the flames of tension in the ArabIsrael conflict, it would have taken note of the shrill
battle-cry sounded in Damascus a few days ago.
I am of course referring to the so-called “political
programme’* and “resolutions” adopted at the fourth
Congress of the Al-Fatah terrorist organization,
headed by that well-known moderate, Yasser Arafat.
As pointed out in my letter of yesterday, circulated
as document S/13985, the call for the liquidation of the
State of Israel appears three times in that “political
programme.‘* The aim of Al-Fan& which is the largest
single component in the terrorist PLO, is defined as:
“the liquidation of the Zionist entity, politically,
economically, militarily, culturally and ideologically”.

34. In recent years responsible Governments have
taken measures, both individually and collectively,
to cope with this scourge threatening the very fabric
of society everywhere. They have not been successful
in eradicating this despicable phenomenon in their
own countries. Israel is one of those countries which
have acted with firmness, determination and a high
degree of effectiveness in combatting international
terrorism, at considerable expense to our human and
material resources. But, for all our efforts, it has been
impossible to provide foolproof protection against
incessant attacks by PLO terrorists.

40. This kind of criminal mentality has been likened
here today to the resistance of the European peoples
to Nazi occupation and oppression. There can be no
greater desecration of the memory of these heroic
resistance fighters who gave their lives in their struggle
against the Nazi oppressors. Incidentally, the veterans
of the European resistance movement have themselves denounced the vicious attempt to liken them to
the PLO’s terrorist criminals.

35. In any event, Israel needs no lecturing about the
need to combat terrorism. It certainly needs no
hectoring from the Security Council, or any other
organ of the United Nations. For the United Nations
has failed miserably to provide any leadership in the
struggle against this grave threat to international
security and stability.
36. When it comes to the Arab-Israel conflict, the
United Nations, rather than siding with the victims of
Arab terror, has in fact, through manipulation by an
arithmetical and tyrannical majority, providedsupport
and encouragement to the terrorists themselves. One
manifestation of this deplorable phenomenon is the
granting of irregular rights and privileges within the
United Nations to the terrorist PLO, in clear violation
of the Charter.

41. To come back to last week’s meeting of Al-Fatah
in Damascus: After the Congress, Yasser Arafat
declared:
“The Al-Fatah organization will continue its
armed struggleuntil it has achieved its basicaims . . .
the complete liberation of all the land of Palestine,
the destruction of the Zionist entity and the establishment of the democratic secular State of Palestine
over all the territories of Palestine.”

37. The professed concern of the Council for the
well-being and security of the residents of Judea,
Samaria and the Gaza district would be more credible
had it not ignored the numerous PLO murders and
attempted assassinations of Arabs in those areas

42. These pronouncements provide further proof, if
such were necessary, of the true character and aims
of the organization in question, and, inter afiu, of the
concrete purpose of its activities in the United Nations
4

_

w**-.

-

system. These words speak for themselves, but the
Council apparently has no time for such trivia.

students in Ramallah are a consequence of the
occupation and expansionist policy of Israel.
Governing circles in Israel bear responsibility for this
policy and its consequences. Here in the Council
there has already been repeated reference to the
responsibility also of those who give military, political
and economic support to Israel’s policy of expansion.
This particularly relates to those imperialist circles
which, in spite of the total failure of the separatist
policy of Camp David, even now encourage Israel to
continue its policy of flouting international law and
disregarding the decisions of the United Nations. This
increases the danger to the Arab peoples.

43. In conclusion, I wish to emphasize again that the
Government of Israel condemns outright any and all
use of terror. The acts of terror against the Arab
Mayors on 2 June have evoked widespread revulsion
in Israel. From the President of the State and the
Prime Minister downwards, there have been emphatic
condemnations of those crimes. This widespread
revulsion stands in stark contrast to the virtual absence
of any similar condemnations by Arab Governments
and public opinion whenever the PLO perpetrates acts
of terror, whether against Jews or Arabs.

51. It is time now for the Council to take urgent
measures to put an end to Israel’s continued expansionist policy. If this is not done, then acts of violence
against the Palestinian people-acts such as those
which today are being condemned by the Councilwill become ever more frequent. The most recent
events in the Arab territories illegally occupied by
Israel give one an idea of what awaits the Arab people
of Palestine in circumstances of the so-called autonomy
of the population. There is no other recourse for that
people but to wage a struggle for its own independent
State until final victory.

44. This debate may give some satisfaction to those
who wish to exacerbate tension and friction in our
area, with a view to obstructing the ongoing peace
efforts, and to those who for one reason or another
find it expedient to support them. Israel, for its part,
remains firm in its quest for a comprehensive peace
in our region. Israel is entitled to expect that the
Council will refrain from adopting any positions which
may be interpreted by the enemies of peace as
encouragement to further violence.
45. The PRESIDENT: It is my understanding that
the Council is ready to proceed to the vote now
on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.

52. The delegation of the German Democratic
Republic with the utmost vigour stresses the need for
a comprehensive and lasting solution to the Middle
East conflict. The fundamental elements for such a
solution are well known. They have been indicated in
numerous documents of the United Nations. The draft
resolution contained in document S/13911, which was
recently discussed in the Security Council in connexion
with the implementation of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, contains these basic elements.
They are the withdrawal of Israeli troops from all the
Arab territories occupied in 1967, the implementation
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including the right to the creation of their own
independent State, and a guarantee of the security
of all States of the region. Such a radical solution to
the Middle East conflict was supported by two thirds
of the members of the Council. Only one permanent
member impeded the adoption of that draft resolution, and this once again demonstrates the lack of real
interest in a comprehensive peaceful settlement of the
problem of the Middle East.

46. I shall first call on the representative of the
German Democratic Republic, who wishes to make a
statement before the voting.
47. Mr. FLORIN

(German Democratic Republic)
Russian): Mr. President, permit
me to express to you our esteem for your performance
of the important functions of the presidency of the
Council. Your great diplomatic skill and your rich
experience guarantee that there will be thorough discussion of the international questions on the agenda
of the Council under your presidency.

(interpretation

from

48. The delegation of the German Democratic
Republic at the same time would like to express its
gratitude to the President of the Security Council for
May, the representative of the Niger, Ambassador
IdC Oumarou, for the exemplary way in which he
performed his functions.
49. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic will vote for the draft resolution in document
S/13984, which, in our view, contains the very
minimum of what the Council should do in this
situation.

53. A few days ago the People’s Republic of Bulgaria,
the Hungarian People’s Republic, the German Democratic Republic, the Polish People’s Republic, the
Socialist Republic of Romania, the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic once again expressed their. view on this
question in a joint declaration, contained in document
S/13948. Everyone can see the constructive nature of
this viewpoint of the socialist States, which is in
keeping with the fundamental provisions of so many
resolutions of the United Nations.

50. The indignation of the whole world has been
aroused by these fresh crimes against the Palestinian
people in the Arab territories illegally occupied by
Israel. The new bloody crimes against the Mayors
of Nablus, Ramallah and Al-Bireh and also against
5

54. The German Democratic Republic will support
any step towards a comprehensive and lasting political
settlement of the Middle East conflict.

part of a broader tragedy-the continuing Arab-Israeli
conflict. The Council has the res~ponsibility to. keep
in mind in its actions the full range of these events
and other factors bearing on the dispute., which
regrettably has not been done in the present resolution. I might add that the resolution contains a number
of provisions that we cannot support or which are at
best incomplete.

55. I should like once again to give earnest assurance
of the fact that the German Democratic Republic will
in all solidarity support the Arab people of Palestine
in the difficult struggle it is waging under the leadership of its only legitimate representative, the Palestine
Liberation Organization, for the implementation of its
right to selfdetermination and, in particular, the
creation of its own independent State.

60. For our own part we continue to believe that
resolution 242 (1967) provides the basis for a just
settlement of the conflict, and we would oppose any
change. It is on the basis of resolution 242 (1967),
which is not modified in any way by the resolution
which is before us, that the United States has pursued
a peaceful settlement throughthe Camp David accords.

56. The PRESIDENT: I shall now -put the draft
resolution in document S/13984 to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

61. An accelerating cycle of violence, of actions and
counter-actions born of fear and insecurity, erodes
the shared vision of an equitable peace from which
any negotiation must draw its sustenance. Instead of a
steady advance towards the mutually beneficial resoiution of problems, more grievances are created which
require redress, and historic suspicions are reinforced.
Solutions become more complicated as belief in the
very possibility of a prosperous and secure coexistence
is perceived to recede.

In favour:

Bangladesh, China, France, German
Democratic Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger,
Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Zambia
Against:
Abstaining:

None
United States of America

The draft resolution
none, with 1 abstention

62. Further, as violence proliferates, many may
conclude that violence is inevitable, and brave men
dedicated to bridging gaps of -mutual suspicion in
the delicate early stage of a search for peace will
find their reasoned appeals are no longer heard. Fear
radicalizes by undermining the sense of the possible
and the willingness to compromise and show compassion. As a minimum, the law. must be upheld.
There must be absolute certainty in every mind that
criminals will be brought to justice and the law
scrupulously observed. If, instead, the law-which on
the West Bank includes the provisions of the fourth
Geneva Convention-is flouted, or conceived to be
flouted, the voices of moderation, of reflection and
of good will may be stifled. The fear of ever-increasing
violence will come to dominate life of all. Many will
conclude that active self-defence must be their first
priority, with a concomitant loss of interest in understanding the fears of the other side;

was adopted by 14 votes to
(resolution 471 (1980)).

57. Mr. McHENRY (United States of America):
Mr. President, I wish at the outset to extend the good
wishes of the United States Government to you as you
assume the challenging duties of the presidency of
the Council and to thank your predecessor for the
diligence and skill with which he presided over the
Council’s meetings during the past month.
58. A brutal crime has been perpetrated on the West
Bank. On 2 June, the official spokesman of the
Department of State expressed the distress of the
people of the United States and their Government
when he said:
“We are deeply saddened by these terrible acts.
Our profound sympathy goes out to Mayor Shaka’a,
Mayor Khalaf, those who have been injured in
Hebron, and their families. I would note there has
been at least one Israeli injury as well. Nothing can
justify such senseless violence. We condemn those
responsible and hope that they will be brought
swiftly to justice. In the interest of the. welfare of
the peoples of the area, we urge everyone to exercise
maximum restraint.*’

63. Let no one doubt the result. The historic result
of this kind of radicalization is tragically clear. The
emotion and, ultimately, intolerance of immoderate
minorities wins not only adherents but a controlling
hand in a deteriorating atmosphere where one violent
act is assumed to guarantee another. A distorted
senseof self-preservation in individuals and groups will
cause them to give undue credence to those who
preach force, and will insidiously discredit those who
argue for a conscious effort first to understand and
then to work to allay the concerns of the other side.

59. We have convened today to adopt a resolution
which focuses on these cowardly acts, the latest in a
spiral of acts which has brought more distress to the
West Bank than it has suffered at any time since the
occupation began. This sad situation and the equally
sad murder of Israeli citizens at Hebron are of course

64. On behalf of my Government and the peopIe of
the United States, I appeal most earnestly to those
6

with influence and authority to exercise leadership
and restraint. No provocation can justify. terror,
intolerance or disrespect for the law. There must be
an end to the fear engendered by the horrors of recent
events so that the people of the area can turn constructively and creatively to the urgent task of building
a peaceful and equitable framework within which to
live their daily lives, Where wrongs can be righted,
those in authority should act to that end. Where a
wrong cannot be reversed, we hope the perpetrators
can be promptly discovered and delivered to the
appropriate courts of justice.
65. Mr. WHYTE (United Kingdom): Before Iexplain
the vote of my delegation on the resolution that we
have just adopted, allow me on behalf of the United
Kingdom to express to the representative of the Niger
felicitations and gratitude for the admirable way in
which he conducted the affairs of the Council during
the month of May and to extend to you, Mr. President, felicitations and good wishes on the assumption
of your high office.
66. My delegation voted for the resolution just
adopted. We condemn unreservedly the assassination
attempts on the Mayors. But, shocking as they are,
they are but the latest link in the chain of violence.
My Government therefore wishes to make it clear that
we deplore and wish to see an end to all violence
in the area. We call for restraint by all concerned. We
believe that recent events only underline the need for
ajust and lasting peace in the Middle East, which must
involve, among other things, Israeli withdrawal from
occupied territories.
67. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) ‘(interpreration from
French): Mr. President, you are exercising your
function on the occasion of a very difficult and important debate. I should like to associate myself with
the tributes already paid to you by preceding speakers.
We are all aware of your experience in the United
Nations, your skill as a diplomat and your qualities as
an individual, and we are therefore convinced that you
will guide our discussion in a masterly way and will
do so successfully.
68. Before turning to the subject before us, we should
also like to address to your predecessor in the presidency, Mr. Ide Oumarou, our sincere congratulations
on the way that he directed our work during the month
of May. We recall not only his smiling authority but
also the wisdom of his judgement and his very effective
work.
69. Mv delerration voted in favour of the draft resolution which &e Council has just adopted. We wish
to express, on this occasion as we have so often in
the past, our deep concern at all the acts of violence
that have taken place in the region in recent months.
70. As regards the issue onwhich the Council hasjust
reached a decision, I should like to quote here the

declaration of the French Government
connexion:

in this

“The French Government expresses its deep
concern at the assassination attempts against two
West Bank Mayors. It condemns the acts of
violence now taking place, which make more necessary than ever the quest for and implementation of
a just and lasting peace settlement. The Goverment
wishes to express its profound sympathy to the
victims and their families.” I
71. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics (interprefution from Russian): Mr. President, first of all I should like to welcome you, the
representative of Norway,. to the presidency of the
Council. I should like to state that the peoples of
our two countries are bound traditionally by ties of
good-neighbourliness and aspirations to mutually
advantageous co-operation. I should also like to
express the hope that in the near future the links and
contacts between our two countries will be further
developed for the benefit of detente, peace and stability
in Europe. We are sure that your diplomatic skills
will be of assistance in solving the problems which the
Council has to consider in the course of June.
72. I wish also to express my sincere gratitude to
the representative of the Niger, Mr. IdC Oumarou,
who so skilfully and efficiently conducted the Council’s
proceedings last month and to wish him further success
in his work for the attainment of the noble ideals and
aims of the United Nations.
73. The Soviet delegation voted in favour of the
draft resolution submitted for the consideration of the
Council as a resolution that reflected in some degree
the profound indignation and anger with .which the
international community learned of the criminal
attempts on the lives of the Mayors of the Palestinian
towns on the West Bank of the Jordan and of the
grievous it#rries that were caused as a result of those
attempts to the Mayors of Nablus and Raniallah. I take
this opportunity, on behalf of the Soviet delegation, to
request the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization to convey to the victims our sincere
sympathy. and condolences.
74. In this regard, we should like to confirm once
again the unswerving solidarity of the Soviet Union
with the Palestinian people in their just struggle for
the implementation of their inalienable rights,
including the right to establish their own independent
State. We would also recall that the States parties to
the Warsaw Treaty, in a declaration they. adopted on
15 May this year in Warsaw, once again called for an
all-embracing peace settlement in the Middle East and
.stressed that
“Such a settlement requires the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from all Arab territories occupied
in 1967, the restoration of the right of the Arab

people of Palestine to self-determination, including
the establishment of its own independent State,
and the safeguarding of the sovereignty and security
of all States of the region.** [S/13948, annex ZZ,
section III.]

but by the United States Administration, which provides Israel with broad political and financial support.
We support the appeal in the resolution to all States
not to provide Israel with any assistance to be used
specifically in connexion with settlements in the
occupied territories. Can one view the repeated
statements by leaders in the United States in support
of the Israeli Government as anything but indulgence
of Israel regarding its continued occupation of the
Arab territories and repression of the indigenous
Palestinian population?

75. The barbarous acts committed with the clear-cut
connivance of the Israeli authorities and directed
against the distinguished elected Palestinian officials
are the direct extension of the campaign of terror,
violence and intimidation that has been conducted
by the Israeli authorities for 13 years in order to force
the indigenous Arab population to resign themselves
to the military occupation regime. Israel has striven
by every possible means to suppress the resistance of
the Palestinian people and to impose, in the guise of
“autonomy”, the final annexation of their ancestral
lands. As a result of the terroristic actions of the
Israeli authorities, the situation in the West Bank’of the
Jordan has recently deteriorated sharply. The constant
imposition of a curfew, the destruction of the dwellings
and properties of the Palestinians, the illegal expulsion
of the Palestinians from their homes, the acts of
violence directed against peaceful inhabitants and
the bloody brutalities inflicted upon them have led to
the brink of an explosion, and the situation is’fraught
with the most serious consequences for the cause of
peace.

79. At the same time the delegation of the Soviet
Union considers that the Council should be even more
vigorous in its condemnation of Israel’s terrorist acts
against the Palestinian population of the occupied
West Bank and Gaza,and demand the immediate cessation of those acts and unswerving compliance with
the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention of
1949.
80. The Soviet delegation believes that there is an
ever more urgent need for the Council not to confine
itself to condemnation of individual criminal acts by
the Israeli authorities but in the most serious way to
consider the question of what Israel’s aggressive policy
will ultimately lead to and where the Israeli leadership
and its supporters are pushing developments in the
Middle East situation, and to take all necessary measures to call a halt to this dangerous turn of events.

76. However, in spite of all the repression and terror,
the Palestinians have unanimously and determinedly
rebuffed all attempts on the part of the United States,
Israel, and Egypt to entrench the occupation regime
in the occupied Arab territories and are demanding
that they be accorded unconditionally their right to
self-determination and to the creation of an independent national State. Without the satisfaction of
these just demands of the Palestinians there can be no
lasting peace or stability in the Middle East.

81. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
82. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): At the outset,
I should like to express our thanks and appreciation
for the contribution of our colleague and friend Ambassador Oumarou of the Niger, who presided over the
Council during the month of May.

77. However, the efforts to stifle this manifest truth
are still continuing. We quite often hear allegations
that events in the Middle East constitute a kind of
“vicious circle of violence**. These assertions are
entirely devoid of foundation. There is no such
“vicious circle*‘. Violence in the Middle East is the
occupation by Israel of ancestral Arab lands and the
expulsion from those lands of the indigenous Arab
population; it is the terrorism that is constantly being
practised by the occupiers. We must put an end
precisely to these manifestations of violence, which
are actually the true source of tension in the Middle
East. And there is only one way of eliminating that
violence-that is, by the withdrawal of Israeli troops
from all the Arab territories occupied in June 1967.
Only in this way will it be possible to bring about a
just and lasting peace in that region.

83. I should like also to express my delegation’s
sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of June. You represent a country which is
firmly committed- to world peace and has throughout
the years maintained a distinguished record of de-fending liberty, freedom, justice and human rights.
Egypt is fortunate to enjoy close and friendly ties
with Norway. With your outstanding diplomatic
skills, vast knowledge and experience, the Council’s
deliberations have reached a fruitful conclusion with
the adoption of the draft resolution before it. We
sincerely hope that provisions of the resolution will
be respected and fully implemented.
84. Today the Council has been asked to deal with
an issue of the utmost gravity. The dastardly assassination attempts on the lives of the lawfully elected
Palestinian Mayors will certainly have far-reaching
repercussions inside and outside the region. The international community cannot afford to stand idle and

78. The Soviet delegation agre.es entirely with the
statements of the Arab representatives to the effect
that responsibility for the attempts on the lives of the
Palestinian Mayors must be borne not only by Israel
8

allow this dangerous situation to continue unchecked.
The situation stems from one cardinal fact: continued
Israeli occupation that is 13 years old today, 5 June.

89. The Government and people of the Arab Republic
of Egypt, in condemning these brutal criminal acts,
call upon the Government of Israel, as the occupying
Power, to shoulder its responsibilities by taking all
necessary measures to punish the terrorist groups that
have committed this atrocity and to ensure the protection of the people of the occupied territories in accordance with the fourth Geneva Convention, which
governs the status of the legitimate Arab owners of
the lands under Israeli occupation.

85. As a general rule, all forms of military occupation
are ruthless, cruel and indiscriminate and reflect an
utter disregard for the peace and security of mankind.
Military occupations have the same effects, whether
in the Middle East, Asia, Africa, Europe or elsewhere.
The assassination attempts prove once more and
without a shadow of doubt that military occupation
entails repression and oppression. Oppression breeds
resistance, which is the only natural response to
occupation; therefore, it should be realized that
violence and bloodshed are but direct consequences
of the Israeli occupation.

90. I should like to emphasize that it is the considered opinion of the Government of Egypt that the
assassination attempts and all the other repressive
measures in the occupied territories have destroyed
all the Israeli arguments that the maintenance of
security in the occupied territories should remain the
exclusive responsibility of Israel. Under the Israeli
military administration, Palestinians have been denied
their rights, their security has been endangered, their
homes have been destroyed and their lives have been
threatened. It is therefore imperative that the Palestinians themselves should now be responsible for
security affairs in the occupied West Bank and Gaza,
within the framework of transitional full self-Government, so that the lives of Palestinians can be protected,
their safety ensured and their security safeguarded.
The Palestinian people should be enabled to exercise
their inalienable rights, including their right to selfdetermination. Those, in our view, are the steps
essential for the creation of the necessary conditions
conducive to the achievement of a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement. Egypt, meanwhile,
will spare no effort to safeguard the legitimate rights
of the brotherly people of Palestine on the path to a
just and comprehensive peace.

86. As the occupying Power, Israel is bound by the
relevant provisions of The Hague Regulations and the
Geneva Conventions. Its authority in the occupied
territories is restricted to the functions permitted
under the aforementioned binding international legal
instruments. To ensure that Israel scrupulously
respects those provisions is an intemationalresponsibility which the international community cannot
escape. The General Assembly and the Security
Council have repeatedly reaffirmed the applicability
of the fourth Geneva Convention to the occupied
Arab territories. Suffice it to mention General Assembly resolution 34/90 B and the unanimously
adopted Security Council resolution 446 (1979), which
strongly deplored Israel’s failure to abide by the Council resolutions and called once more upon Israel, as
the occupying Power, to abide scrupulously by the
provisions of the aforementioned convention.
t 87. Egypt strongly condemns the recent criminal
acts against prominent Palestinian leaders. On 2 June,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Cairo issued a
statement in this connexion, circulated under the
symbol S/13979. Furthermore, the Egyptian people’s
Assembly has expressed the indignation of the people
of Egypt at these barbaric acts.
88. These criminal and barbaric acts are a resounding
and incriminating testimony to the evils of the Israeli
military occupation to which the Palestinian people
in the West Bank and Gaza are subjected. These
acts provide further evidence of the necessity and
urgency of terminating the Israeli occupation and of
bringing to an end the terrorist practices pursued by
the military administration. Moreover, they unequivocally attest to the falseness of the Israeli settlements
policy with regard to Palestinian lands, a policy that
not only undermines the basis for coexistence between
the Palestinian people and the people of Israel but also
fuels the vicious cycle of violence, bitterness and
hatred at a time when there is an urgent need for. a
propitious climate to effect a historic reconciliation
based on strict respect of law, justice and gosdneighbourliness.

91. Genuine peace can never prevail as long as
military occupation exists. In 1967, the Council called
solemnly and unanimously for the termination of the
Israeli occupation, yet, regrettably, the Council’s
injunction has not yet been obeyed in the West Bank
and Gaza. The termination of the Israeli occupation
is long overdue and should be the paramount responsibility of all peace-loving nations. In Egypt we consider
it our sacred duty, and we are determined to make
every posstble effort, to effectuate Israel’s withdrawal
from all the occupied territories and to facilitate the
establishment of a just, comprehensive and durable
peace. All responsible Governments should join in a
meaningful, constructive and genuine attempt to
achieve peace in our region.
92. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Jordan. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
‘93. Mr. AL-ZUBI (Jordan): May I, on behalf of my
Government and on my own behalf, extend our
warmest congratulations to you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of June. We are confident that under your
9’

wise leadership the Council will be able to discharge
its responsibilities effectively and with dispatch.
94. I wish also to take this opportunity to express
our grateful thanks to your predecessor, Ambassador
IdC Oumarou of the Niger, who so efficiently and ably
presided over the Council’s affairs in the month of
May.
95. We are meeting at a very critical time. We are
meeting to resume our deliberations on one of the
greatest tragedies and injustices facing any people in
the’ contemporary world-that is, the tragedy of the
Palestinian people, who for more than 30 years have
been deprived of their birthright and dispossessed of
their land, and are now facing physical uprooting and
extermination.
96. This sad reality has been a matter of great
concern to my country for more than 30 years, as
stated in the Council and in other international forums.
We believe that the Israeli authorities are eager not
only flagrantly to intensify their expropriation of
land and property but also to eliminate the national
leadership of the people in the occupied Arab territories, especially now, after having been frustrated by
the failure of the autonomy talks.
97. The attempt to assassinate Mr. Bassam Shaka’a,
Mayor of the city of Nablus, Mr. Karim Khalaf,
Mayor of the city of Ramallah, and Mr. Ibrahim AlTawil, Mayor of the city of Al-Bireh, and the deportation of Mr. Mohamed Milhcm, Mayor of the city of
Halhoul, Mr? Fahd Qawasma, Mayor of the city of
Al-Khalil and the Sharia Judge, Rajab Attamimi, three
weeks ago, are grave and serious events. They reveal
the brutal and ugly face of the Zionist entity in Palestine as a colonialist, Fascist and racist entity. They
also reveal that these criminal acts will not end but
will form part of a series of malicious acts aimed at
destroying the spiritual and national aspirations of and
demoralizing the Palestinian people, who stand
heroically against suppression, terror and inhuman
treatment. They also reveal that peace and security,
which represent an international commitment, have
neither pertinence nor relevance to the Israeli intentions of territorial acquisition and expansion.
98. The Government of Jordari would like to state
clearly its condemnation of those extremely ruthless
acts. The Government of Jordan would like to reiterate
the conviction shared by all decent and peace-loving
people that the security and safety of the civilian
people in the occupied Arab territories are the responsibility of Israel as the belligerent occupy&
Power. What has been planned and executed by the
Israeli authorities is in flagrant violation of the fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, and in particular of articles 5, 9, 10, 27 and 47, which completely prohibit
acts of terrorism, inhuman treatment, arbitrary arrest
and exile.

99. Unless and until the Council shoulders its responsibility by taking the necessary measures provided for
in the Charter--especially since the resolution. just
adopted does not contain the necessary provisions
against the criminal acts committed by Israel-peace
and security in the Middle East will be in jeopardy
and the situation will deteriorate seriously.
100. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization, on whom I now call.
10;. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
,It is with great pleasure that we express our conviction, Mr. President, that your wise presidency will
lead the work of the Council to constructive and
positive results. You have manifested your wisdom
in a very concrete manner in the past. You represent
‘a country that has mobilized its resources in the defence
of peace by contributing effectively to peace-keeping
forces and-to other humanitarian endeavours. The role
of the Scandinavian countries in the defence of those
whostruggle for their human rights is very well known.
It is not without significance that you are presiding
over deliberations dealing with racist and racial discrimination by racist regimes -in southern Africa and in
occupied Palestine. It might be accidental, but it is very
significant to us, The fights against apartheid and
zionism are linked. The elimination of all forms of
racism- and racial discrimination is the task, the
accepted task, of the United Nations. Consequently,
the elimination of apartheid and Zionism is the task of
the United Nations.
102. We wish to express our thanks and gratitude to
Ambassador Oumarou of the Niger for his excellent
leadership of the Council during the month of May.
103. I wish also to thank the representative of the
Soviet Union for the condolences he expressed. I shall
convey them to the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
104. The Secretary-General immediately expressed
his concern and indignation when he condemned the
assassination attempts on the Mayors of the occupied
.Palestinian towns, Mayors who had been elected by
their Owenpeople to perform specific duties. Those
crimes against the Mayors and other civilians give
cause for indignation and condemnation. The crime
committed against two students of the Bir Zeit University, Walid Qashmar and Riad Enaya, and the crime
committed against- the people of Hebron when they
went shopping on that fateful day, are not just crimes
of murder: they are criminal acts of genocide.
105. It is an established fact that the occupying
Power has responsibilities under the Geneva Convention, and one of-those responsibilities is to protect
the public, especially against all acts of violence or
threatszthereof. In our opinion, th,at protection is ever
more necessary when the perpetrator of violence and
crimes is the Government itself.

10

106. There has been an emergence of organized
Israeli terrorism in the occupied Palestinian territories. This is quite obvious. Armed vigilantes have
acted as though they had a licence to kill and maim
and-to destroy property whenever and wherever they
choose, be it in Jerusalem, Gaza, Hebron, Nablus,
Ramallah, Al-Bireh or elsewhere. If the population
of a vrUage stands in their way, they go in the still of
the night and tear down its vineyards-its means of
livelihood; they break windows, they destroy cars, and
we have another Kristallnacht . If the youth of a village
are particularly proud to be Palestinians and refuse to
bow down to the occupying forces, these vigilantes,
these marauders, these Israeli terrorists, carrying
arms which the Palestinians are pre,vented from
carrying, give themselves the licence to kill and maim
at random.

that the Chief of Staff was vindicated by the Defence
Minister, the. Prime Minister, the Cabinet and Parliament-those criminals, those Israeli t&rorists, become
emboldened and encouraged to persist in their deeds.
110. There are many stories of this leniency on the
part of the authorities, which show their complicity
in these acts of terror. I quote the following from a
story that appeared in The Jerusalem Post intemational edition for the week of 19 to 25 August 1979:
“The police last week released two ‘Elan Moreh
girls arrested at Television House in Jerusalem the
previous day when they arrived armed with an
unlicensed assault rifle demanding to speak to TV
reporter R&k Halavy. Halavy was recently reprimanded by the Minister of Agriculture, Ariel
Sharon, for his coverage of the establishment of the
controversial Gush Emunim settlement, where the
girls lived. A police spokesman told The Jerusalem
Post the police were convinced that neither a
IO-year-old, Mazal Kohan, who carried the rifle,
j nor 16-year-old Michal Mishor, who carried the
loaded magazine, intended to threaten or to harm
” Halavy, but only to speak to him.”

107. The stories of the events that have taken place
in the past year of this expanding pattern of terrorism
against fhe defenceless, unarmed, unprotected civilian
population of the Palestinian territories under Israeli
occupation, are ominous indeed. These are not mere
acts of irresponsible individuals: they are acts that
have beem encouraged, that have been aided and
abetted, by a climate of licentiousness created by the
authorities through their leniency to convicted criminals in the occupied territories. These acts have been
encouraged by arbitrary legislation for the requisitioning of property; these acts have been permitted
and encouraged by financing from the State; these
acts have been encouraged by the deployment of the
Israeli army to defend the illegal settlements.

Ill. I wonder what would happen to a Palestinian
who went to the television director with a gun. Or
why should I go that far? I wonder what would happen
to a Palestinian student who hurled a stone at the car
of the Military Commander. We all are aware of the
fate that befell a 17-year-old boy recently: he was
trampled on by soldiers and collective punishment
was meted out to his parents; his 60-year-old father
was banished to Jericho. That is colonial, racist
discriiuintition.

108. The Chief of Staff of the Israeli occupation
army has earned himself the dubious distinction of
exercising such leniency whenever the death of Arabs
at the hands of criminals under his command has
been involved. Lieutenant Pinto, Lieutenant-Colonel
Sabeh and Private- Lederman-murderers convicted
by the courts-had their sentences reduced to ridiculous iengths by the Chief of Staff. A murderer of four
prisoners by strangulation following torture had his
sentence reduced to two years and, after time off for
good behaviour, he was released after 17 monthsfour months and one week for each human life he took
by torture and strangulation. As The Jerusalem Post
reported last summer:

112. We know that the racist doctrine of iionism is
<basedon the concept of He&-that
the indigenous
population should be “spirited across”. That concept
appears in Herzl’s diaries. Spiriting a population
across its homeland is a form of gendcide. Only a
few years ago, the Governor of Galilee, a certain
Mr. Koenig, developed this theory of “spiriting the
population across” into the theory of “thinning away”
the Arab population. And thinning away a population
is another form of genocide. Mr. Koenig, a racist,
merely took the expression from another racist,
Eichmann, who proposed that the Jewish population
in Vienna should be thinned away. We hear about a
new system, suggested by a certain Mr. Sharon, an
expert advising Begin on his dealings with .the Arab
population. This system provides for the positive
segregation of the population. So what we are facing
is a racist doctrine aimed at the elimination of a
race-the Arab race of Palestine.

“This period of two years to which one after the
other of these criminals had their sentences reduced
is the same judgement imposed on a Bat Tam
civilian for selling bogus car insurance certificates.”
That is the value of human life, the human life of a
Palestinian. That is the value of human life, as long as
it is the lives of Palestinians that are concerned, in the
eyes of the Chief of Staff.

113. Well, they tried to spirit us across. They
failed. They will fail again, because we insist on
remaining at home. They tried these things in the past.
They were supported by Great Britain during those
infamous days of the Mandate. They tried every means

l-09. When the terrorists of the Gush Emunim- or
thos_ewho are ied by the American Kahane see that
this is the attitude of the authorities, when they see
11

to root out the Palestinians in Palestine. They did not
succeed. Then came Begin and the other Zionists.
Begin thought that there was a very effective way to
achieve success-that is, physical annihilation. He
tried it in Deir Yassin. Let us see what he said about
the effectiveness of such methods. After Deir Yassin,
where 254 men, women and children-all innocent
civilians-were butchered, there was a mass flight.
This is what Begin had to say: “This mass flight soon
developed into a maddened, uncontrollable stampede.
Of the about 800,000 Arabs who lived on the present
territory of the State of Israel, only some 165,000 are
still there. The political and economic significance of
this development can hardly be overestimated.” So we
can see that physical annihilation is a process in the
racist Zionist mentality and modus operandi.

provided this formula: “Israel shall act to secure the
future of Israeli settlements and shall be concerned
with solving the problem of land shortage in the
occupied territories which weighs heavily on those
settlements”. On the same day, Sharon, the Minister
of Agriculture, proposed to “allow requisitioning of
private land in”-as he called it-“Judea and Samaria
in case of need only”. Does that not ring a bell?
Does it not make us think of the Lebensruum’? Are we
going back to the late 193Os?Are we preparing for
another holocaust-this time against the Palestinian
Arabs?
117. Another method was adopted recently-again,
in April-after the signature of what is known as the
Washington pact. It has been reported that the military
government authorities have arbitrarily decided to
confiscate the funds of the municipalities of the West
Bank. Why? Because of non-payment of taxes. What
a poor excuse that is. These are territories under
illegal occupation. Yet, arbitrarily, the authorities
confiscate the taxes. We know that most of the
municipalities are receiving subsidies and not paying
taxes. But, of course, the Palestinian municipalities
have to pay taxes.

114. We know very well that since the Zionist
occupation of Palestinian territory that followed 1967,
the Zionists have wanted a Judenreich . They want the
Palestinians to get out of the area. But the Palestinians
do not want to get out. So the method that has been
adopted has been expulsion of leaders. More than
1,600 Palestinians have been expelled since 1967.
There is also the method of administrative detention.
Thousands and thousands of Palestinians are arbitrarily detained. But that has not led the Palestinians
to abandon their cause and their struggle. So physical
elimination is now the order of the day. That is
exactly what the blowing up of the cars of the elected
Mayors boils down to.

118. Those are some of the actions taken by the
Israeli occupation forces. But let us now turn to what
happened on 2 June.
119. We watched television and we heard the news.
We saw someone who claimed that he was proud to
be involved. According to The Christian Science
Monitor, a certain Yossi Dayan said: “It is 30 days
since the bombing of Hebron, so somebody.has to pay
for this. This was done with co-ordination in the
three main cities of the West Bank”. So here we have
someone presenting himself and claiming responsibility for the crime. Another fellow appeared on
American television and said: “There is room for only
one people-the Jewish people”. Yet another said:
“The Arabs must learn how to respect their masters”.
And yet we are told here that the investigation- is
already under way, that the identity of those who
committed the crimes is still unknown and that, so
long as that is the case, we must refrain from giving
rein to suspicions and from casting blame.

115. The policy of the Zionists is very clear. Begin
has announced it on several occasions. The Labour
alignment has also announced it on several occasions.
Indeed, Begin made it clear on the eve of his assumption of power, when he said-and I quote this from a
report in L’Express of Paris, the issue of 23 May 1977:
“The term ‘the West Bank’ means nothing. It is
Judea and Samaria. It is Israeli land belonging to
the Jewish people. It is no longer necessary to
establish colonies, since the future Government of
Israel will ask the Jewish people to establish themselves on their own land. It is a paradox that the
Jews can settle in Tel Aviv, London or Paris and
are forbidden to settle in Judea or Samaria.”
When Begin was asked about the annexation, he said:

120. In May the Council met twice because the
Mayors had been expelled and they did not claim
responsrbility for whatever had happened in Hebron
and Halhoul. What is more, the military administrator
absolved them of any responsibility. ‘Yet action was
taken against those Mayors; they were arbitrarily
expelled. They appeared before the Council and. the
Council decided that they should be enabled to return
to their homes. The Israeli authorities simply ignored
the Council’s resolution on the subject, Article 25 of
the Charter notwithstanding. And yet we are told that
no action shouldlbe taken because we do not know
who the perpetrators of the,crime are.

“One can only annex foreign land. This is liberated land. I do not see any reason preventing
the coexistence of a Jewish community with an
Arab community on this land. I repeat: this is
Judea and Samaria.”
116. Knowing that to be the aim, we know exactly
what the policy of the Zionists will be. The Security
Council Commission established under resolution 446
(1979) gave us full evidence concerning the Zionist
plan in the occupied Palestinian territories. It referred
to the Drobles plan. Very recently, on 13 April, Begin
12

121. We know very well why this suppression and
oppression have been escalated. It is because the
struggle of our people has also escalated. It is because
our people has denounced, opposed and rejected the,
Camp David conspiracy and the autonomy talks. And
what do these autonomy talks envisage? Abba Eban,
who might perhaps be the next Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Israel, wrote the following:

to President Carter in which he said that “Israeli
settlers shall not be subject to the autonomy but to
Israeli jurisdiction only”. Are they really aiming at
establishing ghettos or reservations? I do not know
which, but those settlements scattered in the occupied
Palestinian territories will just be patches in the area
that will either be ghettos for the settlers or reservations for the indigenous population.

“Mr. Begin envisages an Israeli monopoly of
sovereignty and power in the whole of Eretz Yisrael.
After a few years of autonomy, interpreted by the
Likud as the delegation of a few paramunicipal
powers under the overriding authority of the
military administration, the Liiud is committed to
seek the application of Israeli sovereignty to the
whole of Eretz Yisrael. An Israeli Government
that aspires to Israeli sovereignty five years from
now is not likely to make any substantial transfer of
power to a countrywide Arab-authority today.”

126. In his letter to President Carter, Begin says that
“Elections for the autonomy institutions shall be held
on a functional basis”. I really do not know what that
means. But there is another stipulation that only
13 portfolios will constitute the Administrative
Council. Worst of all, and the most dangerous of all,
is that Israel shall be free to decide on taking all
measures to guarantee its security. So the territories
under occupation will only be another colony or a
military base for the Zionist forces.
127. The world is shocked by these crimes. The
criminals are known; they are not arrested. Who
knows, perhaps when they are arrested, they will get
four months and one week each?

122. That statement by Abba Eban and one by a
certain Mrs. Weitz, who lives in the occupied territories, to the effect that “You must come and conquer
it by settlement, not by war” make one believe that
it is only the members of the Herut and Likud parties
or Begin’s friends who adopt this policy. But we cannot
forget that the policy of illegally establishing settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories was
started by the Labour alignment, that more than
1,600 Palestinians were expelled not by Begin but by
the Labour alignment, by Abba Eban and his friends,
Peres and so on. So this is the Drobles plan, also for
the settlements, which was adopted by the World
Zionist Organization and the Jewish Agency-the
two powers controlling the State of Israel. It is the
Labour alignment which confiscated thousands of
acres.

128. Chairman Yasser Arafat addressed a letter
immediately to the Secretary-General, which was
circulated under the symbol S/13983, in which he
wrote:
“The ongoing escalation of the crimes being
committed by the Zionist occupation authorities
against our unarmed Palestinian people and their
national leadership is proof of the failure of those
authorities to overcome our people’s heroic
resistance to the Zionist occupation, the Camp
David conspiracy and the autonomy talks.”
129. We take exception to and we protest against
statements made in the Council by parties to those
Camp David accords and the Washington pact,
because what is happening now is to confront the
opposition of our people to that pact and to those
accords. Our people know their friends and will not
be fooled by certain statements made in the Council.

123. Furthermore, last November, the General
Assembly was seized of,the question of the expulsion
or deportation of the Mayor of Nablus, Bassam
Shaka’a. The General Assembly voted almost
unanimously to ask Israel to rescind the order of
deportation, and Bassam Shaka’a returned to assume
his responsibilities. His car was blown up and he lost
both legs. He could not be treated in Nablus and’
this morning he was carried by helicopter to a hospital
in Amman. Last November, that same BassamShaka’a
was warned by Weizman, the then Defence Minister,
who told him: “Listen, Bassam, if you continue with
your political agitation, I shall personally see to your
physical liquidation* *. So those things are not accidents
but premeditated and planned actions.

130. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Israel
has asked to speak, and I now call on him.
131. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The Council has just
adopted another one-sided, unbalanced, hostile resolution against Israel. It is cluttered with pieces of old
lumber. But it also contains a series of new aberrations.

124. The people under occupation were supposed to
go to the polls and elect their municipal representatives. Israel delayed that; Israel was scared that it
could not really face the results of such elections.

132. The resolution reaffirms the applicability of
the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 to “the Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including
Jerusalem’*. Israel’s consistent position on the nonapplicability of that Convention to the territories in
question is well known. I mentioned it in my statements to the Council on 8 and 20 May [2221st and

125. Now, what is Begin’s aim in his latest move?
According to Ha’areetz, Begin sent a letter on 23 April
13

2222nd meerines], and I need not spell it out again.
The references to Jerusalem in the resolution are
totally unacceptable to Israel. Also in this case we
have stated our position repeatedly and unequivocally,
and there is no need for me to repeat it now.

137. Let me give a few more recent examples. In
1976, Joe Nasser,, the editor of the Jerusalem Arabic
newspaper&F@ was abducted and neitherhe.nor his
body has ever been found. On 26 December 1977,
Hamdi AI-Qadi, the Director of Education in RamalIah,
was assassinated, and the man who masquerades here
in the Organization as the observer for the terrorist
PLO was not inhibited from justifying that political
murder on NBC News later the same day. On 8 February 1978, Abd Al-Nur Janho, a member of the
Ramallah Municipality and a prominent businessman,
was assassinated. Exactly a year ago to the day, Na’if
Hawatmeh, of the PLO’s so-called Democratic Front,
announced that the Mayor of Gaza was at the top
of a list of 15 leading figures who had been marked
for elimination. And only three weeks ago, on 15 May,
Al-Huduf, a bulletin put out by the PLG’s so-called
Popular Front, referred to an explosion which- had
occurred in the car of Muhammad Abu-Zallaf, the
editor of the Jerusalem Arab newspaper Al-Quds; AlHuduf said that the bomb had been planted because
Abu-Zallaf had co-operated with-United States representatives with regard to the autonomy talks and that
the action was a warning to all other Arabs who did
not toe the PLO line.

133. The resolution. recalls resolution 469 (1980).
That resolution was a conscious attempt to interfere
in the judicial process of Israel. The Israel Supreme
Court, sitting as the High Court of -Justice, is at
present seized of a petition made on behalf of the
Mayors of Hebron and Halhoul and the Qadi of
Hebron, and thus the matter is sub judice. The
Supreme Court will not be swayed or affected by
undisguised attempts by this or any other political
organ to interfere in the due process of law as exercised
in Israel in a manner which many Members of the
Organization, and several members of the Council,
would do well to emulate.
134. The resolution expresses shock at the attempts
on the lives of the Mayors of Nablus, Ramallah and
Al-Bireh on 2 June. That is all very well. The Govemment and the people of Israel have also expressed
shock, indignation and revulsion at those acts of
terror.

138. Where was the voice of the Sec;rritv Council
on all those occasions? Where was its shock?-Where
was its indignation? And where is its integrity?

135. But ,when, let me ask, has the Council ever
expressed shock, revulsion and indignation at ‘any of
the hundreds upon hundreds of Arab acts .of terror
against Israel over the last three decades, and in
particular at PLO outrages, which since 1967 alone
have cost the lives of over 640 Jews and some
360 Arabs, not to mention the maiming,, wounding
and disfiguring, in many cases for life, of well over
5,000 Arabs and Jews alike?
1
I
.. .
.,
136. Perhaps the Council is less aware of Arab terror
against Arabs in Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district.
This violent phenomenon goes back decades, at least
to the inter-war period under the British Mandate and
to the days of Haj Amin Al-Husseini, the notorious
Mufti of Jerusalem, a war criminal wanted after 1945
by the Allies to stand trial in Nuremberg. Since 1967
the PLO, the direct disciples of the infamous Husseini,
have assassinated and threatened, terrorized and
intimidated Arab mayors, heads of local councils,
mukhtars-that is, heads of villages-and local leaders in other walks of life, like commerce and joumalism, throughout Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district.
As early as in the years 1968 and 1969, several members of the Milhem family of Halhoul-the family of
the same Mr. Milhem who appeared before the Council last month-were murdered. Mr. Qawasma’s
predecessor as Mayor of Hebron, Sheikh Mohamed
AIi Al-Ja’abari, was frequently subjected to PLO pressure, and repeated assassination threats were made
against his life. In 1973, an attack was made on-the life
of Rashad AI-Shawwa, the Mayor of Gaxa,and once
again he has become a.declared target of PLO agents
operating in the area.

139. Never mind Jews and Arabs. Where was the
Security Council when the PLO perpetrated acts of
international terror? Where. was the Council when
Yasser-Arafat gave the order to murder United States
and Belgian diplomats in Khartoum? Where was the
Council when5the PLO killed a United States diplomat
in ‘Beirut? Where was the Council when PLO terrorists and those working in conjunction with them
struck at Israel targets abroad and killed innocent
bystanders in Athens, in Brussels and in London, to
mention but a few? Where was the Council when the
PLO blew up commercial airliners in mid-flight, such
as the, Swissair disaster on 21 February 1970, which
resulted in the deaths of all 38 of the passengers.and
crew? But never mind international terror perpetrated
by the PLO and its supporters.
140. When has~theSecurit Council expressed shock
and indignation at any of tlT‘e politicaI assassinations,
guerrilla outra ges and urban terror which horrifitally have become part and parcel of life today on
every continent? Let us just take today’s newspaper.
Perhaps some members of the Council will have the
curiosity to glance in the privacy of their own offices
at page A5 of today’s The New York Times and here
are the headlines: “Protestant politician is slain in
Northern Ireland ambush”; “Bombs damage union
halls in, eastern Bolivian city”; “Opposition p-arty
protests executions in Bangladesh”; “Two are killed
in Turkey in new political violence”; “T&o hurt as
:Philippine leftists attack provinci-al building”.
14

141. Is there no limit to the Council’s hypocrisy?
When has the Council ever expressed its shock at the
Libyan hatchet-men ploughing their way through
France, Italy, the United Kingdom and the United
States?

act to prevent the impending all-out Arab aggression.
But in vain.
146. As regards Jordan, the then Prime Minister of
Israel sent on the morning of 5 June 1967, through
the Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), a message to King
Hussein asking that Jordan refrain from joining the
hostilities that had just begun. King Hussein received
that message. He spumed it. He opened fire on
Jerusalem and all along the 1949 Armistice Lines
with Israel, bringing every major town and city in Israel
under direct fire from his army’s long guns; and let it
not be forgotten that Jordan’s occupation of Judea and
Samaria was illegal in the firstplace. It was the outcome
of Jordan’s joining other Arab armies in marching
against the State of Israel on the very day it was
established in May 1948. As in 1948, Israel again in
1%7 acted legally in repelling the Jordanian aggression, in exercise of its right of self-defence and in
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations.

142. Let us take that thought a little further. The
resolution expresses “deep concern” that Israel “has
failed to provide adequate security*’ to the civilian
population for which it is responsible. When has the
Cotmcil ever dreamed of expressing “deep concern”
about the failure of certain countries in Europe and
elsewhere to provide “adequate protection*’ for the
civilian populations for which they are responsible?
I am sure that all members of,the Council can think
of numerous instances, without the need for me to
mention them, of countries where political assassinations are running rampant and where attempts are
made on the lives of national readers of all colours
and persuasions. Where, might I ask, has the Council’s
voice been in these cases? And what gives the Council
a special prerogative to apply such a blatant double
standard to Israel?

147. That was exactly 13 years ago to the day,
scarcely a long time by the yardstick- of international
affairs. But the ‘Council, with its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, which did nothing at the time to prevent
the war of 1%7, chooses todayto turn a blind eye to
the facts it finds unpleasant to recall.

143. In the resolution the Council calls on Israel to
provide the victims of the attacks of 2 June with
“adequate compensation”. This, too, is all very
well. But when did this Council ever call for “adequate compensation’* to be paid to the victims of PLO
outrages at the Munich Olympics, at Avivim, at Kiryat
Shmona, at Ma’alot, at Nahariya, at Netanya or, less
than two months ago, at Kibbutz Misgav Am? And
what about “adequate compensation’* for all the
innocent victims of the PLO’s international terror,
the families not only of dead diplomats but of ordinary
folk, brutally and tragically cut down by PLO terror
in third countries? The Council has never called for
compensation to the victims of any one of these PLO
atrocities. Instead, it has preferred to pass a series
of resolutions in which it consciously and deliberately
refused even to refer to the perpetrators of those
abominable crimes and to the pain of the victims.

148. Thirteen years ago the Security Council adopted
resolution 242 (1%7), which remains to date the only
agreed basis for a negotiated peace settlement in the
Middle East. Any attempt to tamper with that resolution, either directly or indirectly, can only harm the
cause of peace in the Middle East and the delicate
balance of the current peace efforts which are based on
that resolution. This caveat applies with equal force to
any attempts to twist and misrepresent the-provisions
of that resolution, such as we have witnessed here
today.

144. The resolution talks about .“the Arab tenitories occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem”. How frail and tickle political memories are.
Every member of the Council knows full well how the
Council failed to act in May and June 1967, so that
Israel was left with no alternative but to repel the
Arab aggressors and at the end of six days found itself,
inter al&z, in Judea and Samaria and the Gaxa District.
The Council can pretend, if it wishes, that it has forgotten the horrifying events of those days when the
whole of the Arab world-the whole of the Arab
world-was roused into a vicious and violent mood to
the battle charge of “driving the Jews into the sea’*.

149. Today, with the adoption of this sanctimonious
resolution, the Council has stooped to new depths of
cynicism. And the cynicism displayed here by the
Council cannot but breed distrust in the hearts and
minds of hundreds of millions of young people around
the world who have watched the steady deterioration
of the United Nations with utter disgust and disbelief. Performances of this kind make people question
not merely the usefulness of an Organization that has
been perverted to such a degree; what is worse,
people around the world have increasingly started to
ask themselves, as a result of this kind of behaviour,
questions regarding the very validity of the noble
.principles on which the Organization is founded. Of
the many sins committed here and in other organs of
the United Nations against the Charter, this is perhaps
the most grave. And it is one that will not and cannot
be lightly forgiven.

145. In the face of growing Arab bellicosity, in the
face of an escalating series of threats, blockades and
military movements, Israel appealed to the United
Nations and Governments throughout the world to

is

150. The Council’s resolution reeks with hypocrisy.
It does not advance the cause of peace; it impedes it.
It does not enhance the stature of the Council; it can
only further diminish it. The resolution does not add
to the resonance of the world Organization; it stifles it.
151. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization wishes to make a
statement in reply. I call on him.
152. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
The representative of Tel Aviv was carried away by
his emotions, to the extent that he almost gave himself
away and told the Council that he knew exactly who
the terrorists and murderers were.
153. It still seems that Tel Aviv maintains that the
provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention are not
applicable, despite the unanimous consensus of the
international community. Naturally, the Palestinian
people being under foreign occupation, sometimes
quislings show up and the people execute them. That
is a fact of life, and we Palestinians are not at all
different from other peoples under foreign domination
which have executed quislings.
154. But in a series of crimes, the Zionist movement
started planting bombs in the souks all the way back
in the 1930s;the Zionist movement blew up the civilian
administration of the British Mandate at the King
David Hotel, not a military but a civilian administration; the Zionist movement, in the form of the State

of Israel, forced down civilian aircraft and dropped
cluster bombs on c.hildren; and the Zionist movement
still denies the right and prevents and prohibits the
retum.of Palestinians to their homes, which is the
only way to peace, not the Camp David accords, the
Washington pact, or even resolution 242 (1967).
155. The United Nations has a Charter, proclaimed
by the peoples of the world, in which are set forth

the methods and means of securing peace for the
world. The Zionist movement and the United States
of America, which finances that movement, are the
obstacles to peace.
156. With reference to our people under illegal occupation, I have only one thing to say. Why have they
been denied the right to elect even their municipal
councils? I think that in the reply to that can be found
the answer to all the allegations.
157. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council has
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting

ruse at 5.55 pm.

NOTE
I United Nations, Treafy Series, vol. 75, p. 287.

;&I
b.

J.b

ci’l

&I

j

l,z

+I

. ,&II

.Ll

c2)

j

@I
. citjr

?Yl al,‘+

,,A, d&II
j )I hr.+

j

;dl
u’ $

&

,+Yl &,a
,+
til

J,,mJI i&
& J&l
;k-.
fY1 : J” -;rl
,I

trlmw~a~~~cB

B%~~~MB~~A~~~Rw~~~~~~~~~
HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

U~~~~r~lBT~fl~~~BsAB~~~~~~~

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente darts les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
ICAIC

JfOJIYISiTh

H3lItAHHR

OPl’AHH3AI~HH

OE%EfiIIHEHHMX

HAIWH

Hzvm~m
Opranwsauuw
06’bennxentr~rx
HaqHR
MOH(HO
rynwrb
B KXWXH~IX
Mara3miaX H areuTcTaax
no acex pafiorrax
rdupa. Haao~rire
cnpanrcn
06 H3naHWRX B
naurex
Ktiuxoio~
sraraanne
xnu ~HIUHT~ no anpecy:
Oprami3aann
06’benntrentrbtx
HassiR. Cexuna
no npoaaxe
mnamiil.
Hbm-Mopx
HUH )f(eHeBa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerlas y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o ditijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00400

83-61462-September

1986-2,050
