22

General A11embly-Seventeenth SeHion

drawn up in the execution of the plan, adopted by
the Conference of African States on the Development
of Education in Africa, held at Addis Ababa in 1961,w
Noting further the efforts African Governments are
making to achieve the realization of their national
educational programmes within the framework of the
Addis Ababa plan, as evidenced by their decision to
establish a conference of ministers of education to review
the implementation of the Addis Ababa plan and its
costs, and to assist in harmonizing all external assistance
available to African countries, at the request of their
Governments, for their effective and accelerated educational development,
Noting with appreciation the action of States Members
of the United Nations and members of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which are giving increasing assistance to the
African Governments in the realization of their programmes of educational development,
Expressing its appreciation of the assistance being
given to African Governments by the United Nations,
in particular the Economic Commission for Africa, and
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and other agencies and institutions, and the readiness to expand such assistance, as
evidenced by the intention of the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development and the International Development Association to give all consideration to requests by Governments for loans for educational
projects designed to accelerate the rhythm of economic
development,
1. N ates that the latest estimates by the African
Governments of their additional financial needs, for
1962-1963, for the implementation of their educational
programmes amount to $435 million, which is $25
million greater than the deficits set forth in resolution
1717 (XVI);
2. Invites States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies to consider
favourably requests by African Governments for
technical and financial assistance, including loans, for
the implementation of their national programmes of
educational development, within the framework of the
Addis Ababa plan;
3. Reiterates the need for African Governments to
continue to devote increasing resources to the development of education along the lines of the five-year programme referred to in resolution 1717 (XVI), with due
regard to the relation of educational programmes to each
country's over-all development programme;
4. Recommends to the appropriate organs of the
United Nations and related agencies and financial
institutions, in particular the United :::-Jations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the
Economic Commission for Africa, further to increase
technical and other kinds of assistance in the field of
education, including the provision of grants and loans
by competent institutions within the limits of their
resources;
5. Addresses a similar appeal to appropriate intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
engaged in educational programmes at the request of
interested African Governments ;
6. Requests the Economic Commission for Africa
to co-operate with the United Nations Educational,
lh Transmitted to the members of the General Assembly by
a note of the Secretary-General (A/4903).

Scientific and Cultural Organization in supplying secretariat and technical services to the permanent conference
of ministers of education of Africa.
1197th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.

1833 (XVII), Progress and operations of the
Special Fund; United Nations programmes
of technical co-operation
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the objectives of the United Nations
Development Decade as expressed in its resolution
1710 (XVI) of 19 December 1961 and in Economic
and Social Council resolution 916 (XXXIV) of 3
August 1962,
Recalling the importance given in its resolution 1715
(XVI) of 19 December 1961 and in Economic and
Social Council resolution 916 (XXXIV) to the prompt
attainment of the target of $150 million for the contributions of States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies to the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance and the Special
Fund,
Noting with appreciation that at the United Nations
Pledging Conference on the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance and the Special Fund, held on
16 October 1962, a number of Governments announced
increased contributions to these programmes, with the
result that total contributions are now estimated at
$120 million,
Considering however that this total is still substantially
short of the established target, the attainment of which
must be deemed vital in the interest of accelerating the
development of human resources, natural resources and
national and regional institutions,
1. Renews the appeal to States Members of the
United Nations and members of the specialized agencies
to review their contributions to the work of the
Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and the
Special Fund so that the combined budgets for these
two programmes may reach the target of $150 million
in the immediate future;
2. Invites all States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies which have
not yet contributed, and may wish to do so, to make
voluntary contributions to the Expanded Programme
of Technical Assistance and the Special Fund;
3. Calls particular attention to the view expressed
by the Governing Council of the Special Fund at the
eighth session that it was essential that contributions
should be increased as soon as possible to at least $100
million so as to permit a necessary further increase of
the Fund's activities;
4. Agrees to consider new targets for the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance and the Special
Fund at its nineteenth session.
1197th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.

1834 (XVII). Question of assistance to Libya
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 398 (V) of 17 November
1950 in which it recognized the special responsibility
assumed by the United Nations for the future of Libya,
and its resolutions 924 (X) of 9 December 1955,

23

Reaolution1 adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1303 (XIII) of 10 December 1958 and 1528 (XV) of
15 December 1960 implementing this policy,
Having noted the communication of September 1962
from the Prime Minister of Libya to the SecretaryGeneral, 16 in which he stated that the General Assembly
might consider that the question of assistance to Libya
no longer required a special agenda item and
might be dealt with in the same way as the problems
of many other newly independent States in Africa, that
is, under broader items dealing with problems of economic and social development,
Having also noted the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the question of assistance to Libya, 17 in which
he expressed appreciation to the Libyan Government for
its clear demonstration of faith in the United Nations,
as set forth in the Prime Minister's letter, and for its
willingness to forgo the preferential treatment it had
hitherto been accorded by the General Assembly,
1. Registers its satisfaction at the efforts of the
United Kingdom of Libya to improve its economic
prospects;
2. Considers that the question of assistance to Libya
no longer requires a special agenda item;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, the Technical
Assistance Board, the Special Fund, the specialized
agencies concerned and the International Atomic
Energy Agency to deal with the needs of Libya in the
general framework of assistance to the newly independent countries, particularly in Africa.
1197th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.
1835 (XVII). Confirmation of the allocation of
funds for the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance in 1963

The General Assembly,
Noting that the Technical Assistance Committee has
reviewed and approved the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance for the years 1963 and 1964, and
long-term projects for the period 1963-1966,
1. Confirms, subject to the provisions in paragraph 3 below, the allocation of funds authorized by
the Technical Assistance Committee to each of the
organizations participating in the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance from contributions,
general resources and local cost assessments as follows :
Participating
o,rganization

United Nations
International Labour Organisation
Food and Agricultural Organization of
the United Nations
United Nations Educational, Scientific,
and Cultural Organization
International Civil Aviation Organization
World Health Organization

Allocation
( equivalent of
US dollars)

9,732,488
4,879,276
11,896,562
7,773,733
2,084,225
8,196,040

16 Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventeenth
Session, Annexes, agenda items 12, 40, 41 and 78, document
A/5282.
17 Ibid., document A/5281.

Allocation
( equivalent of
US dollars)

ParticiPaling
organization

International Telecommunication Union
World Meteorological Organization .. .
Universal Postal Union
......... .
International Atomic Energy Agency ..

948,752
1,019,470
67,359
970,123

TOTAL

47,568,028

2. Con firms the authorization. given by the Technical Assistance Committee to the Executive Chairman
of the Technical .Assistance Board to allocate to the
participating organizations for the implementation of
the programme for Algeria an amount of not more
than $408,000 for 1963, subject to subsequent approval
of the 1963-1964 programme by the Committee at its
next session ;
3. Concurs in the Committee's authorization to the
Executive Chairman to make changes in these allocations, as may be necessary, to provide as far as possible for the full utilization of contributions to the
Expanded Programme, and to permit modifications to
country programmes requested by the recipient countries and approved by him;
4. Requests the Executive Chairman to report any
such changes to the Committee at the session following
their adoption ;
5. Concurs in the Committee's authorization to the
participating organizations to retain for operations in
1964 the balance of funds allocated to them in 1963
which have not been obligated by the end of that year.
1197th plenary meeting,
18 December 1962.
1836 (XVII). Technical assistance to Burundi
and Rwanda

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1746 (XVI) of 27 June 1962
on the future of Ruanda-Urundi,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral submitted in accordance with resolution 1746
(XVI) 18 requesting him to report on the need for
technical and economic assistance to Burundi and
Rwanda and on the implementation of the resolution,
Taking into account the economic and social problems confronting Burundi and Rwanda on their accession to independence,
Taking also into account the assistance at present
being provided under the Expanded Programme and
the regular programme of technical assistance of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies, and also
the assistance emanating from other sources,
Noting the progress made in implementing the
Agreement on Economic Union concluded by the Governments of Burundi and Rwanda at the Conference
held at Addis Ababa under the auspices of the United
Nations Commission for Ruanda-Urundi, established
under General Assembly resolution 1743 (XVI) of
23 February 1962,
18 Ibid.,

document A/5283.
