S/PV.8414

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8414th meeting

Thursday, 6 December 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Amon-Tanoh/Mr. Adom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
The role of States, regional arrangements and the United Nations in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts
Letter dated 28 November 2018 from the Permanent Representative of Côte
d’Ivoire to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/1064)
.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-41579 (E)
*1841579*

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
The role of States, regional arrangements
and the United Nations in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts
Letter dated 28 November 2018 from the
Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2018/1064)
The President (spoke in French): I wish to warmly
welcome the Secretary-General, who is honouring
us again today with his presence, the Ministers and
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, Colombia, Cuba, the Dominican Republic,
Egypt, Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Guatemala,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Kenya, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Mali, Morocco,
Namibia, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Portugal, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal,
Singapore, Slovakia, South Africa, the Sudan, Turkey,
Ukraine, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, and His Excellency Mr. JeanClaude Kassi Brou, President of the Commission of the
Economic Community of West African States.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Serge
Christiane, Acting Deputy Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
2/74

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

06/12/2018

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/1064, which contains the text of
a letter dated 28 November 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of Côte d’Ivoire to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French):
Following the debate yesterday (see S/PV.8413), I
again thank the delegation of Côte d’Ivoire for having
proposed this open debate on the role of States, regional
arrangements and the United Nations in the prevention
of conflicts.
(spoke in English)
Our world is faced with complex threats that are
multidimensional, interconnected and unpredictable.
The number of countries experiencing violent conflict
is higher than it has been in 30 years. The number of
low-intensity conflicts has increased by 60 per cent in
the past 10 years. We have a responsibility to act, not in
isolation but collectively.
Since assuming office, I have prioritized prevention
of all kinds, from conflicts to natural disasters to
pandemics and the foreseeable dangers posed by new
technologies. There are complex links among those
threats, which can reinforce and amplify each other and
should not be seen in isolation. I have therefore called
on all parts of the United Nations system to focus on
prevention, including, obviously as a priority for us,
the prevention of conflict. We are overwhelmingly
managing crisis and conflict, when we should put far
more effort into preventing them from happening in
the first place. Rather than launching humanitarian aid
operations to save lives, we should invest in reducing
the need for aid.
For us, prevention is an end in itself. It should never
be seen as the instrument of any other political agenda.
First and foremost, it saves lives and protects people
from harm. But prevention also makes economic sense.
The recent United Nations-World Bank study entitled
Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing
Violent Conflict concluded that prevention would save
approximately $34 billion in damage in countries that
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

avoid war. Those benefits are compounded over time,
to reach over $140 billion after 15 years. From greater
use of my good offices, including through my Special
Representatives and Envoys, to investing in mediation,
to strengthening the contribution of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding to prevention, we are working to
improve our capacity. The endorsement of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative by 151 Member States
is a strong sign of support for the central role of our
peacekeepers in preventing conflicts from worsening,
and in proactively supporting peace.
Beyond the peace and security pillar, the entire
United Nations system is tackling the root causes that
can make communities and societies vulnerable to
violence and conflict, which often lie in competition
over control of power and resources, inequality and
exclusion, unmet aspirations, the marginalization
of women, young people and minority groups, poor
governance and the instrumentalization of ethnic
and religious divisions. They are also interlinked and
exacerbated by climate change, migration, transnational
crimes and global terrorism.
All our work to achieve the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, from human rights and
humanitarian affairs to gender equality, environmental
protection and combating climate change, has a role
in preventing conflict. Sustainable development is an
end in itself, and must be considered as such. But it
is also one of the most effective tools for prevention.
Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals will
make a significant contribution to tackling root causes
and building lasting peace.
While conflict between States has declined, internal
conflicts are increasing and account for the majority of
humanitarian needs and displacement around the world.
Strong, resilient societies are enriched, not threatened,
by diversity. But such societies do not come about by
chance. As societies become more multi-ethnic and
multireligious, cultural and economic investments in
cohesion are vital. Every member, every group, must
feel valued.
We must also invest in education and training for
young people so that they have hope and prospects for
the future. Young women and men must be empowered
to participate in making the decisions that affect their
lives. That is a vital goal in itself, but it is also essential
to counter the risk of alienation and susceptibility to
extremist narratives, and even recruitment. By the

S/PV. 8414

same token, we must invest in helping countries and
communities that are emerging from conflict. Justice,
truth and reconciliation are essential for societies to
heal and move beyond war. The United Nations works
to support such efforts in many countries and regions
of the world. States and subregional and regional
organizations are our vital partners in all those efforts,
and we are working together with respect and trust.
Our relationship with the African Union is
showing the way forward, through our frameworks for
enhanced partnership for peace and security and the
implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. I am delighted that the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission is here
to discuss this important issue with us today.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
shows the visionary genius of those who drafted
our foundational document. At that time, regional
organizations barely existed. Seventy years on, regional
and subregional organizations are an indispensable
part of the rules-based global order. Chapter VIII
even envisages our cooperation on joint peacekeeping
operations. Regional and subregional organizations
have the proximity, experience, knowledge of local
dynamics, flexibility and relationships to engage more
rapidly and effectively when situations deteriorate.
In the Gambia two years ago, the coordinated joint
action of the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the United Nations and
neighbouring countries helped to prevent a political
crisis and supported a peaceful, democratic political
transition. In Madagascar, the United Nations worked in
close coordination with the African Union, the Southern
African Development Community and the International
Organization of la Francophonie to facilitate dialogue,
which contributed to peaceful presidential elections last
month. We hope that cooperation will be maintained in
the near future. When crises broke out in Mali and the
Central African Republic, the Economic Community of
West African States and the Economic Community of
Central African States were the first to deploy troops
and engage in mediation efforts. The African Union
took over the operations, which later became United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In Central Asia,
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia supports regional dialogue
on transboundary water management and promotes
water diplomacy, in close cooperation with national
Governments and the International Fund for Saving the

18-415793/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Aral Sea. And in the aftermath of contested elections
in Honduras in November 2017, the United Nations
maintained close contacts with the Organization of
American States to ease tensions and facilitate dialogue.
Those efforts should — and must — be replicated
elsewhere.
(spoke in French)
That was the subject of the high-level interactive
dialogue that I organized in June with the leaders
of various organizations, including regional ones,
to consider ways and means of strengthening our
cooperation by placing special focus on prevention.
I intend to continue that dialogue and intensify our
collaboration with a view to contributing our expertise
and support to anchor stable and resilient societies. I
also intend to take inspiration from the success of
frameworks adopted by the United Nations and the
African Union, but also coordination mechanisms
in other regions of the world. The reforms I have
undertaken will help us to improve the coherence of
our efforts. In particular, we need to help regional and
subregional organizations to better anticipate crises and
take preventive measures early. The Alert and Response
System of the Economic Community of States of West
Africa is a rather edifying example in that regard.
No State or organization can alone overcome the
current challenges, whether they involve climate change
or inequality. I fear therefore that the current political
trends, prevailing pessimism and lack of confidence
could undermine multilateralism and the international
rules-based system. I urge world leaders to renew their
commitment to inclusive multilateralism based on the
Charter of the United Nations, and on the principles of
complementarity and subsidiarity. I also urge them to
use the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Sustainable Development Goals as a global plan of
action. The willingness to collaborate and act quickly
must be translated into genuine and tangible results.
Promoting prevention and resilience must be at the
heart of our collective efforts.
I believe that we have the knowledge and resources
required to achieve that objective. We lack only the
courage and political will. We must involve everyone
in building stable and resilient societies, work together
with management teams, ensure the full participation of
women and harness the energy and creativity of young
people. Conflict prevention is a responsibility we all
share. Regional and subregional organizations play a
4/74

06/12/2018

key role in implementing a global multidimensional
strategy that can meet the challenges ahead.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing. I would like to
reiterate that the President of Côte d’Ivoire thanks him
for contributing to yesterday’s debate.
I now give the floor to Mr. Faki Mahamat.
Mr. Faki Mahamat (spoke in French): Today’s
debate on conflict prevention takes place at a time
when the international order is faced with a series of
diverse and grave threats. Whether related to climate
change, migration, the rise in racism and xenophobia,
transnational crime or terrorism, such threats exacerbate
current situations and could transform latent tension
into open conflicts.
Today’s debate addresses an issue that is extremely
sensitive for Africa, as well as for the rest of the
world, because it is true that the challenges in question
transcend borders and continents. Today’s debate is
also crucial for the Security Council, whose credibility
and legitimacy can be heightened only if it is able to
effectively address international crises. I commend
Côte d’Ivoire for convening a debate on this issue. The
commitment to silencing the guns by 2020, which is one
of the flagship projects of Agenda 2063 of the African
Union, not only entails settling current conflicts; but
also building peace where it has already been achieved
and preventing new crises, in particular in Africa.
The need for sustained action in the area of conflict
prevention is indeed one of the issues that enjoy the
broadest consensus within the international community.
Very often, however, such consensus exists more in
theory than in practice. There are many challenges to
effective preventive action. In my opinion, two arise
most frequently. The first is linked to the reticence
of States that view any early intervention as a threat
to their sovereignty. The second lies in the culture of
urgency, which ends up tainting international action in
several areas.
An awareness of that situation led to the development
of the Protocol Relating to the Establishment of the
African Union Peace and Security Council, which made
prevention one of the African Union’s top priorities.
Since the adoption of the Protocol, the African
Union has significantly strengthened its capacity
to prevent, manage and settle conflicts. There is no
better illustration of that encouraging development
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

than the progress made on the deployment of African
peacekeeping operations. In recent years, experience
has clearly shown that such operations are useful tools
for curbing violence and preventing its escalation. They
are part of the range of instruments at the disposal of
the African Union in the area of preventive diplomacy.
The issue of funding such operations has been
on the agenda of the Security Council for more than
a decade. We are pleased to note that, throughout
this time, the international community has become
increasingly aware. Everyone acknowledges the fact that
international crisis-response mechanisms are not suited
to today’s challenges. The reasons for that situation
are well known and linked to the nature of conflicts,
which are often intra-State rather than inter-State, the
high number of actors involved, extreme violence, the
scourge of terrorism and organized crime. Those are
the many factors that have shaken the very foundations
of peacekeeping operations, including the conditions
of their deployment. The situation on the ground has
become so complex that waiting to fully restore, build
and keep the peace often means being unable to help
people in danger.
That is the context in which the division of labour
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
in particular the African Union, has evolved. The
African Union has demonstrated that it can intervene
rapidly in complex environments to curb violence,
facilitate peace and create the conditions for keeping
it. The partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations has evolved to allow for creative
negotiations on current security challenges. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the
transitions in Mali and the Central African Republic
from African missions to United Nations missions,
and the considerable support that the United Nations
provides to our mission in Somalia are illuminating
examples in that regard. We should ask ourselves if
the situation in the countries concerned would have
arisen had the international community opted only for
orthodoxy and conservatism instead of the innovation
required by the circumstances.
It is up to us to go even further. Those extra steps
are not a leap into the unknown. They represent the
extension of what we have already experienced, the
lessons learned from the multifaceted support provided
by the United Nations and the resolutions already
adopted on the issue. The approach of adopting a
resolution on sustainable and predictable funding

S/PV. 8414

for African peace operations, which was solemnly
reiterated by the African Union Peace and Security
Council at its meeting three days ago, is important. I
must underscore that such operations are possible only
with the consent of the Security Council. The Security
Council must be allowed to more effectively assume
its primary responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security by using all the resources offered
by the Charter of the United Nations. Furthermore,
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union must be further cemented by ensuring
a better distribution of the financial burden that comes
with promoting peace.
Over the years, we have taken several initiatives
precisely to shoulder our share of the responsibility in
that area. African leaders have agreed to fund up to
25 per cent of the continent’s peace and security agenda.
We have revitalized the African Union Peace Fund.
More than $80 million has already been raised and its
Board of Trustees has just been established. We have
taken concrete steps to ensure greater accountability
and respect for human rights in the conduct of our
operations. Admittedly, additional efforts are required,
but the foundations for a Security Council decision
have already been laid.
The renewed determination of Africa to play a
greater role in the promotion of international peace and
security must find support in this Council Chamber.
Now is not the time to hesitate with respect to our
continent, still less so at a later time. The draft resolution
for Africa proposed by the three African members of
the Security Council sets out a framework that in no
way prejudges subsequent decisions by the Council on
a case-by-case basis and does not have any financial
impact at this stage. It preserves the authority of the
Security Council. I would even say that it reinforces
it, because it gives it more effective control over the
conduct of African operations partially supported by
the United Nations. We call for consensus on texts, on
the understanding that this one should not empty them
of their substance. I would like to acknowledge the
outstanding work done by the three African members
in this regard. It was a truly consultative approach that
guided their efforts.
Today we are at a turning point. We must seize
the opportunity to better address the challenges
of peace and security. That is what our continent
expects, as do many other members of the international
community — of that I am sure. In an unpredictable

18-415795/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

international environment where threats that are
becoming more serious and complex every day, we
cannot adopt a wait-and-see attitude. Sooner or later we
will pay dearly for such an attitude.
I have come to the Security Council to express
Africa’s renewed faith in the United Nations and its
hope in its ability to meet the challenges of the day. I
have come to say that the African Union is determined
to play its rightful role in the collective endeavour to
strengthen our shared Organization and make it more
effective in promoting peace and security. I have come
to acknowledge the need to work with a strong sense of
urgency towards the advent of an international peace
and security architecture that is in line with the threats
of today and tomorrow. May this faith and hope come
out of this debate stronger than before.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Faki
Mahamat for his briefing and for honouring the Côte
d’Ivoire with his presence again at this second debate.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brou.
Mr. Brou (spoke in French): On behalf of the
institutions of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), I would like at the
beginning of my briefing to express my condolences to
the Government and the people of the United States on
the occasion of the passing of Mr. George H. W. Bush,
forty-first President of the United States of America.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to participate in this important meeting,
which is in line with the high-level meeting presided
over yesterday by His Excellency Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, President of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire,
whose theme was post-conflict reconstruction and
peace, security and stability (see S/PV.8413). All of
yesterday’s statements provided ample evidence of
the reciprocal causality between sustainable economic
development and peace and security. Today’s theme
gives us the opportunity to deepen our reflections on
the international community’s efforts to promote peace
and security. I would like to make three observations
that summarize the action of ECOWAS on this key
issue.
The first concerns the ECOWAS internal mechanism
for peace and stability in the region. The civil wars in the
region, particularly those in Liberia and Sierra Leone,
and their consequences — destabilizing for security and
devastating for the economic and social development
6/74

06/12/2018

of these countries — led in particular to the adoption
of the ECOWAS Revised Treaty in 1993. Through this
revision, the regional peace and security agenda was
added to the Community’s original agenda, namely,
regional economic integration and development, with
the overall objective of creating a peaceful and secure
environment conducive to regional integration and
economic development in the region. ECOWAS has
adopted two major instruments enabling it to intervene
at any time in crisis prevention, management and
resolution, as well as to undertake peacekeeping and
post-conflict reconstruction: the Protocol relating to
the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management,
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security, adopted in
1999, and the Supplementary Protocol on Democracy
and Good Governance, adopted in 2001. These two
instruments provide the legal framework for and give
legitimacy to ECOWAS interventions.
These actions are carried out, on the one hand,
at the level of crisis prevention, to prevent tensions
and perceptible disputes from escalating and turning
into conflicts. In this way, we avoid the dramatic
consequences of conflicts while avoiding the cost of
a hypothetical intervention. Preventive actions and
preventive diplomacy have been conducted in almost
all States at the precise moment when a crisis emerges.
They are less visible but have helped to reduce tensions
and avoid the emergence of difficult situations.
Preventive diplomacy actions are more frequent
during electoral processes, especially during
elections. They have been successfully deployed in the
presidential elections in Guinea, Nigeria and Ghana,
and more recently in Sierra Leone and Mali. In addition,
recently, preventive diplomacy actions were carried out
in Nigeria in anticipation of the upcoming elections.
Furthermore, to enhance the effectiveness of the
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, ECOWAS is
establishing an early-warning and response system,
based on the collection and analysis of a variety of
indicators in the political, social, economic, climate and
environmental fields. Based on a regional architecture,
this arrangement is being extended with the creation of
early-warning and response mechanisms at the national
level; these are already in place in five Member States.
The programme envisages a gradual extension to the
other countries of the region.
With respect to crisis management and resolution,
interventions are deployed when preventive diplomacy
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

actions have not achieved the expected results or have led
to open crises or when crises occur in an unpredictable
manner. These actions focus on facilitation or mediation
efforts between national political actors, and, in
extreme cases, involve the deployment of peacekeeping
missions. The recent history of ECOWAS is rich with
these missions. They include, for example, mediation
in the political crises in Togo and the Niger, in 2005
and 2009, respectively; multiple mediations in Guinea
Bissau, resulting in the deployment of the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea Bissau since 2012; the case of Côte
d’Ivoire, presented yesterday by His Excellency the
President of the Republic; mediation efforts in the postelectoral crisis in the Gambia following the presidential
election of December 2016, which led to the deployment
of the ECOWAS Mission in the Gambia (ECOMIG); and
the ongoing mediation in the political crisis in Togo.
The second observation that underlies our action
is the partnership in all the aforementioned areas
of intervention. Collaboration with all partners, in
particular the African Union and the United Nations,
is a constant feature of our action. We coordinate our
actions to ensure better visibility and efficiency. The
partnership is characterized by the following.
First, our partners, in particular the representative
of the African Union and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, participate in
all meetings of the ECOWAS Mediation and Security
Council at the ministerial level and the Meeting of Heads
of State and Government, the main decision-making
bodies on issues of regional peace and security.
The second element is the political support of
the African Union and the United Nations for the
deployment of peace missions. Such support was
instrumental in defining the mandate of ECOMIG and
in its deployment, which required the authorization of
the Security Council;
Third is the conduct of joint missions with the
United Nations, particularly in Burkina Faso in 2014
during the political crisis and in Mali in 2012 following
the military coup d’état, and preventive diplomacy, as
I have already mentioned, in Guinea, Nigeria, Ghana
and, more recently, Sierra Leone.
Lastly, as part of strengthening that cooperation,
on 23 April, ECOWAS signed a memorandum of
understanding with the United Nations, which
covers areas related to political dialogue, national

S/PV. 8414

reconciliation, democratic governance and conflict
prevention and management, as well as human rights
and the rule of law.
The third observation relates to the implementation
of post-conflict reconstruction activities. The aim
of such work is to build peace through support so
as to prevent the resurgence of conflict, including
through institution-building, reconciliation and the
implementation of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) and security sector reform
programmes. In Guinea-Bissau, the security sector
reform programme was launched in 2013. In The
Gambia, for example, it involved supporting the
Government in drawing up and implementing a security
sector reform programme and capacity-building of
the National Assembly in its role of political control
over the defence and security forces. ECOWAS also
supports the Government in its efforts to improve the
management and security of weapons and ammunition
stockpiles.
Currently, there is close cooperation with the
United Nations and the African Union through the joint
missions deployed in various countries. More recently,
ECOWAS has embarked on programmes in other
areas, namely, providing basic goods and services to
disadvantaged groups, particularly women; supporting
resilience in the agricultural sector; and facilitating
reintegration through training and job-creation
programmes. Such activities are necessary to create the
conditions for sustainable peace.
In conclusion, ECOWAS remains strongly
committed to working with all its partners, in particular
the United Nations and the African Union, in order to
maintain and build peace and to ensure sustainable
development. I would like to end my remarks by
reiterating our sincere thanks for the opportunity of
this meeting.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Brou
for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire.
It is a great honour and privilege for me to preside
over today’s Security Council meeting following that
of yesterday, which was presided over by Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, President of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire (see
S/PV.8413). I would like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres, who honours Côte d’Ivoire with his

18-415797/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

presence on two successive days — at yesterday’s highlevel debate and again today. I congratulate him on the
quality of his briefing. I would also like to thank my two
brothers Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, and Mr. Jean-Claude Kassi
Brou, President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States, who, after being
present yesterday, honour us with their presence today.
I congratulate them on their valuable contributions to
today’s debate. I would like to extend a warm welcome
to all the eminent persons who have kindly accepted
our invitation, honouring us with their presence at this
meeting on a topic that we hold dear, namely, the role of
States, regional arrangements and the United Nations
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
The increasing number and continuance of conflicts
in the world, which are testing the United Nations peace
architecture, as well as the various crisis prevention and
resolution mechanisms, continue to represent significant
challenges and sources for collective reflection for the
Council and the international community.
Given the complexity of the situation, it is
increasingly necessary to adopt innovative and
inclusive approaches that go off the beaten path and
to call for common action and the greater involvement
of all national, subregional, regional and international
stakeholders in the prevention and management of
conflicts.
In this globalized world, where no organization
alone can shoulder the responsibility for managing the
threats to collective security, strengthening cooperation
and coordination among national actors, subregional
and regional organizations and the United Nations is
imperative.
In our view, the pursuit of a more inclusive approach
of all actors, taking into account a clear definition of
responsibilities, remains the most effective way to
ensure the prevention and management of the conflicts
that are at the heart of the agenda of the Security
Council and underpin its existence.
Conflict prevention and management, which
are increasingly multifaceted, necessarily require
a common strategy, accepted by all, with national
ownership and clear priorities, to which the United
Nations, the international community and national
partners should devote sufficient resources. The case
of my country is a perfect illustration of that.
8/74

06/12/2018

States of course have the primary responsibility for
detecting and eliminating the structural and cyclical
factors conducive to the outbreak of crises, in particular
by reducing inequalities, promoting the rule of law and
good governance, facilitating access to employment
for young people and ensuring political support for
resource mobilization, both human and material.
After more than a decade of crisis, Côte d’Ivoire,
which very early on realized the stakes of restoring
stability, has resolutely embarked on the path of
peace-building thanks to the excellent cooperation
between the Ivorian Government and the United
Nations through the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI).
The combined national and international
efforts resulted in establishing, in the context of
the Peacebuilding Fund, a joint plan, called the
Peacebuilding Priority Plans for 2011-2014 and 20152017. It has $30 million and has supported local efforts
in the areas of governance, preserving the social
climate, normalizing political life and ensuring the
security of people and property.
Consequently, the Ivorian Government, with the
assistance of its partners, has managed to restore State
authority and security throughout the national territory,
accelerate and make national reconciliation and social
cohesion irreversible, successfully implement the DDR
and security sector reform programmes, and promote
the rule of law and human rights.
Since the departure of UNOCI in June 2017, the
Government has capitalized on all those achievements
and continues that worthy course with the support of
the United Nations country team.
The support of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) to the national development plan
2016-2020 is eloquent testimony to that. Those actions
have allowed us to preserve the State and its institutions
and to organize national and local elections in peace,
security and stability, which has greatly contributed
to the current economic growth in Côte d’Ivoire. The
Ivorian experience in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, must therefore be pursued and shared.
In recent years, there have been major
developments in conflict prevention, management and
resolution in Africa. They are particularly marked by
shared responsibilities and the primacy of regional
and subregional actors in the conduct of the earliest
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

peace initiatives after the outbreak of conflict, in
accordance with the principle of subsidiarity. It is in
the name of that principle that ECOWAS is playing an
increasingly decisive and leading role in the settlement
of conflicts in our region. Thus, in my country, for
example, negotiations conducted by Senegal, in its
former capacity as Chairperson of ECOWAS, led to
the first ceasefire agreement with the Ivorian rebels in
October 2002 in Bouaké. In addition, in the framework
of ECOWAS mechanisms, Togo hosted the first
inter-Ivorian negotiations from October to December
2002, which had the merit of establishing the bases of a
political solution to the conflict.
I also welcome the mediation of other friendly
countries, such as Ghana and South Africa, under
whose auspices several agreements were signed
between the Ivorian warring parties. The African Union
and then the United Nations subsequently took over
from ECOWAS in the conduct of political and military
processes. Finally, Burkina Faso played a decisive role
in organizing the October 2010 presidential elections in
my country.
In Mali in 2012, the resolve of President Alassane
Ouattara, who was Chairperson of ECOWAS at the time,
and the mobilization of his peers enabled the return to
constitutional order in the country after the putsch led by
Captain Sanogo. That regional commitment also helped
to mobilize the international community, particularly
France, whose military intervention prevented terrorist
groups from the north of the country from seizing
Bamako. I thank the French authorities for the action
being taken by the French army in the Sahel against
the terrorist groups that threaten our common security
in West Africa. In all these situations, the African
Union, followed by the United Nations, took over from
ECOWAS on the political and security levels. It is clear
from all this that the State’s close cooperation with
subregional and regional organizations and the United
Nations is an undeniable asset for crisis prevention and
management.
In that sense, the strategic partnership between
regional organizations and the United Nations, pursuant
to Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
must be more closely oriented towards action and
results, shared responsibility, the spirit of cooperation
and enhanced coordination. In that regard, the African
Union, through its regional conflict prevention and
management mechanisms, has established itself today
as an essential and credible partner of the United

S/PV. 8414

Nations. To that end, the signing on 19 April 2017 by the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission of the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security, is the expression of the strategic
commitment of these two organizations to address
threats to peace and security on the continent.
Today, the political and military mechanisms
deployed by subregional and regional organizations
in the context of conflict prevention and resolution,
which have already proved their effectiveness,
deserve to be strengthened so as to be more effective.
Peacekeeping, an essential tool of the United Nations
for promoting and ensuring international peace and
security, faces many challenges that significantly affect
its effectiveness. The extent of the challenges facing
our world calls for diligent action on our part, which
highlights the important of the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which my country
fully endorses.
It is important to recall that some of the major
obstacles to the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
include the way host countries and populations perceive
those missions, vague mandates and the inadequacy
of the human and logistical resources available.
It should be noted that peacekeeping operations
with clear, precise and objective mandates support
national political processes. Côte d’Ivoire supports the
Secretary-General’s vision of peacekeeping, which is
first and foremost one of collective responsibility. There
is therefore a need to act together to address, through
peacekeeping operations, contemporary challenges to
peace and security. Moreover, strengthening the troop
capacities and taking account of the gender dimension
in peacekeeping operations could play a decisive role in
the effective implementation of their mandates.
International security remains inextricably linked
to peace and security in Africa — a continent where
complex and multifaceted security challenges, as
well as the perpetuation of conflicts, undermine the
foundations of stability and development.
In regard to funding at the African level,
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the fact that, in 2017, the
African Union Peace Fund received the highest
level of contributions from member States since its
establishment in 1993. In that regard, it is important to
note once again that only solidarity between the United
Nations and the African Union will make it possible

18-415799/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

to consider appropriate and lasting solutions in the
framework of a common vision for the maintenance of
peace and security in Africa. That highlights the need
for close cooperation between those two organizations,
which deserves to be encouraged and strengthened,
particularly with respect to the crucial issue of
financing African peace operations. In that regard, my
country welcomes the gradual evolution of approaches
with a view to improving the financing of peace support
operations in Africa, and that this step is an essential
link in the process of stabilizing the continent.
Indeed, resolution 2320 (2016) marked a major
step in the United Nation’s commitment to African
Union peacekeeping operations by demonstrating the
Council’s readiness to consider funding proposals, in
accordance, inter alia, with international obligations
applicable to the principles of accountability and
transparency, to which African Union peace support
operations are subject. In that regard, resolution 2378
(2017) is also an important step in the right direction,
expressing the Security Council’s intention to consider
the practical arrangements and conditions necessary for
the establishment of a mechanism whereby authorized
African operations, pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
could be financed on a case-by-case basis.
My country is of the view that measures should
therefore be taken on the basis of bolder commitments,
particularly aimed at the establishment of flexible,
predictable and sustainable financing based on
assessed contributions. Côte d’Ivoire therefore invites
all stakeholders to take a further step towards finding
lasting and solutions that are essential to the effective
functioning of African Union peace support operations.
In any case, it is in the context of a united effort
and the genuine involvement of all its actors that the
international community will succeed in strengthening
conflict resolution and prevention mechanisms, which
can make an effective contribution to international
peace and security. Côte d’Ivoire intends to play its
full part in that regard and hopes that its experience in
emerging from crisis, which it is eager to share, will
contribute to achieving these objectives for the wellbeing of the peoples and development of Africa.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council who wish to make statements.
10/74

06/12/2018

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to warmly thank Côte d’Ivoire for
organizing this important debate, presided over by the
Ivorian Minister for Foreign Affairs, whose presence
and statement I welcome. The successful experience
of Côte d’Ivoire — which is in many ways exemplary,
as you have just recalled, Sir — certainly imbues your
message with particular weight as regards our work.
Allow me also to thank you for the warm words you
have just pronounced regarding my country. Better
coordination between the United Nations, regional
organizations and States is essential to meeting our
common goal of improved conflict prevention and
resolution.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Chairperson of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) for their
presence, their important briefings and their exemplary
commitment.
Today, I will deliver three principal messages on
behalf of France. The first is a call to further strengthen
the necessary synergy between the United Nations
and regional organizations. The second emphasizes
the absolutely strategic nature and importance of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. The third is a message of support for
African peace operations.
My first message is a call to pool our efforts to
better prevent and resolve conflicts. France fully
supports the vision of the Secretary-General. We must
do more upstream by investing in conflict prevention,
and downstream by supporting peace and reconciliation
processes. France once again commends the efforts
of the Secretary-General and his team to strengthen
the prevention and mediation capacities of the United
Nations.
To better prevent conflicts, it is imperative to go
beyond the silo approach and to decompartmentalize
our interventions. In that sense, the humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus must be given practical
expression on the ground in order to provide
comprehensive and consistent responses to crises. That
is not a conceptual issue; it is a question of the necessity
of efficiency and, I would say, common sense. It is a
response to the challenges on the ground that must
be given with respect to institutional or bureaucratic
considerations, and not the other way around. That
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

is why we need to strengthen the exchange between
United Nations agencies and among bilateral and
multilateral actors in order to make the best use of
resources and skills. For the same reason, we must as
a matter of necessity promote synergies between the
United Nations and regional organizations.
This is not about a political game or trying to please
any particular person. It is a question of being more
effective together in the service of our shared goals.
Regional and subregional organizations have assets that
the United Nations does not have. They are closer to the
action, more often have a more in-depth knowledge of
what is happening on the ground, and have invaluable
human networks. We must therefore work together
and in a spirit of trust, share information and analysis,
and carry out joint initiatives. It is together, hand in
hand, that we can advance peace. We are convinced
that the partnership between the United Nations and
regional organizations is one of the keys to the success
of multilateralism, in which we believe now more than
ever. In that regard, I wish to commend the efforts of the
Peacebuilding Commission, which is cooperating ever
more closely with regional organizations in the context
of the so-called country-specific configurations. That
is a step in the right direction that should be continued
and expanded.
The State is also indispensable of course. National
authorities, but also civil societies, especially women’s
organizations, must be fully involved in international
efforts to prevent or resolve conflicts. We all know that
ownership by the actors concerned is the prerequisite
for lasting peace.
My second message concerns the special
importance of the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union. France is of the view
that the partnership between the United Nations, the
African Union and African subregional organizations
is of absolutely strategic importance today. That
is why we are resolutely committed to supporting
its development, which in our view has immense
potential. We welcome the important progress made
under the joint leadership of the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
especially since the signing of the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security in April 2017.
That partnership is manifest today in a very
concrete and operational way on the ground to prevent

S/PV. 8414

crisis and conflict situations. To name just a few of
many examples, the case of The Gambia is an example
worth following. The combined efforts of the United
Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS have helped
to prevent the post-electoral crisis from turning into a
conflict of which the people would have been, as always,
the main victims. More recently, Madagascar has also
seen the success of joint prevention efforts led by the
African Union, the Southern African Development
Community, the United Nations and the European
Union, also making it possible to avoid a major crisis
surrounding the organization of presidential elections.
We further welcome the efforts undertaken by
the African Union and its member States, as well as
by African subregional organizations, to prevent and
respond to crisis situations on the continent, thanks
in particular to the Silencing the Guns by 2020
initiative, which we fully support. The African Peer
Review Mechanism is also a valuable tool for conflict
prevention in Africa.
My third message is a call to support African peace
operations. As Council members know, France fully
supports the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel, and we will continue to plead resolutely for the
widest possible support from the United Nations to the
Force, which embodies the commitment of the States of
the Sahel to their own safety.
As I recalled yesterday in the presence of President
Alassane Ouattara (see S/PV.8413), France fully
supports the initiative, led by the African Union and the
three African members of the Security Council, aimed
at adopting an ambitious draft resolution on African
peace operations by the end of the year. Such operations
will enable intervention as early as possible before
crises degenerate and destabilize one or more States
in the long term. They testify to the African Union’s
desire to become more deeply involved in the security
of the African continent, as Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire so
resolutely and eloquently recalled today.
Let us all stand alongside our African partners
in support of their efforts. It is in our interest and
corresponds to the flow of history.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea should
like to thank His Excellency Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cote

18-4157911/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

d’Ivoire, and his country for organizing this open
debate on cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations. We also
welcome the presence of Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission. We
are pleased to see His Excellency Secretary-General
António Guterres among us once again, and we
welcome also the presence of His Excellency Mr. JeanClaude Kassi Brou, President of the Commission of
the Economic Community of West African States. We
convey to all of them our thanks for their informative
briefings.
Bringing peace to Africa and the comprehensive
development of the continent is one of the main of
objectives of my country’s foreign policy under the
leadership of His Excellency President Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo. My delegation therefore welcomes this open
debate given the importance of strengthening the
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union, which contributes to improving and sustaining
peace and security, not only on the African continent,
but also at the global level.
By holding this debate, we are reinforcing the
message underlying the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union, which is important
if we are to meet the goals set by both organizations
with regard to conflict management and prevention.
The latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/678)
indicates, that, despite the security challenges and
obstacles present in regions affected by active conflict,
such as in Libya, the Sahel region, the Horn of Africa,
the Lake Chad basin and the Great Lakes region, there
has been significant progress thanks to the continued
economic and logistical support that has been received
and to the cooperation among the United Nations,
international partners and the African Union with
the host Governments of peace missions, regional
economic bodies and regional mechanisms, as they
enjoy the advantage of superior knowledge of their own
region, which makes it easier for them not only to act
quickly and prevent conflicts, but also to prevent them
from spilling over into neighbouring regions.
That is all attributable to certain key elements,
including their proximity to conflicts, experience and
cultural similarity. As they are familiar with local
cultures, regional organizations could work more
effectively in the area of early-warning and conflictprevention systems. In the area of operations, the
United Nations should provide support in the form of
12/74

06/12/2018

the technical, financial and institutional assistance
necessary to carry out large-scale peacekeeping
activities.
The African Union has proved to be a key partner for
the United Nations in steadfastly proposing innovative
responses, based on the comparative advantage of
the rapid deployment of peace missions with strong
mandates within the framework of continental
and regional agreements, thereby demonstrating
the flexibility of the African Peace and Security
Architecture and its ability to adapt to constantly
evolving security challenges.
Africa is an important part of ongoing peacekeeping
operations, not only in terms of hosting United
Nations missions, but also, and especially, in terms
of the military contingents and police units that its
countries provide. We therefore believe that funding
should be stepped up, that mechanisms for voluntary
contributions from Member States and other external
as well as African sources should be improved, and
that the United Nations should provide continuous
training to the armies of countries that traditionally
contribute military personnel to peacekeeping missions
and other countries in need of such training, as well as
work closely with missions with regard to promoting
sustainable peacekeeping.
Ultimately, conflict resolution in Africa requires
greater political harmony between and a well-developed
joint vision for the African Union and the United
Nations, including improved coordination between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council, the development and identification of
cooperation modalities, the promotion of mutual respect
and the establishment of an operational decision-making
mechanism shared by the two organizations. The
African Union and other regional and subregional
organizations in Africa enjoy unique advantages and a
great deal of experience in resolving critical problems
on the continent. The United Nations and other partners
are a necessary factor to ensure greater effectiveness in
the quest for lasting and beneficial solutions.
That very same idea was taken up yesterday by His
Excellency Mr. Simeon Oyono Esono Angue, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Equatorial
Guinea (see S/PV.8413), when he spoke of the simple
and clear equation of cooperation. In that regard, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes the signing
of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which
outlines closer collaboration, more regular exchanges
of information and consultations and coordinated
action to promote lasting peace and security in Africa.
With regard to transparency and respect for human
rights and humanitarian law during peace operations,
we believe that it is important to establish mechanisms
and measures within missions and organizations that
would focus on strengthening policies to prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse and step up disciplinary responses
and corrective action in cases of violation of the relevant
norms. Equatorial Guinea therefore welcomes the
African Union Peace and Security Council’s adoption
of the draft policy on conduct and discipline for peace
support operations and the draft policy for prevention
and response to sexual exploitation and abuse for peace
support operations. On the other hand, although new
mechanisms and strategies for the implementation of
human rights policies are being adopted, it is necessary
to strengthen existing mechanisms so as to ensure
that they are respected in the deployment of personnel
from troop-contributing countries, as well as to ensure
compliance with training standards for African Union
peace support operations.
In order to address the issue of conflict prevention,
especially with regard to those conflicts affecting
the African continent, Equatorial Guinea deems it of
utmost importance to promote economic and social
development in Africa, as the lack of sustainable
economic management, the disparity among various
social classes, gender inequality and extreme poverty are
the main factors exacerbating existing conflicts, such as
terrorism, transnational crime and drug trafficking. We
also deem important the professionalization of women
in the areas of diplomacy and preventive mediation at
all levels, as well as their consequent integration into all
stages of the peace process, as we see such inclusivity
as critical to achieving sustainable and permanent
peace on the continent.
In conclusion, we would like to highlight resolutions
2320 (2016), of 18 November 2016, and 2378 (2017),
of 20 September 2017, which emphasize the need to
improve the predictability, sustainability and flexibility
of financing for African Union-led peace operations
previously authorized by the Security Council, to be
financed by United Nations contributions, based on
strict case-by-case analyses. In that regard, we see
the need for the members of the Council to approve
the draft resolution on financing for African Union

S/PV. 8414

peace support operations, which is expected to be
introduced during the presidency of Côte d’Ivoire.
While we note that that would constructively support
the African initiative mentioned in the latest report of
the Secretary-General, which indicates that the African
Union has moved towards the operationalization of
the African Peace Fund, African States have in fact
contributed $74 million to the Fund so far, an amount
that, it is hoped, will reach $100 million by early
2019. In that regard, we hope that the dynamic of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations will find a platform enabling them to step
up cooperative efforts with a view to achieving stable
and lasting peace in all conflicts throughout the world,
in which regional organizations could play a decisive
role given their knowledge of local circumstances and
their proximity to specific situations on the ground.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the President of the Commission of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) for their valuable remarks this morning.
During our very first month as a Security Council
member, in January 2017, we organized a debate on
conflict prevention and sustaining peace, at which the
Secretary-General had the opportunity to set out his
vision for a surge in diplomacy for peace and effective
conflict prevention (see S/PV.7857). We did so because
we saw a need for a new political consensus in support
of prevention and a commitment to policies and actions
that prevent conflicts before they begin. Now, nearly
24 months later, how have we done? As our term on
the Council is ending, it is only natural to look back at
what has been achieved and what conclusions can be
drawn. Even though we have seen a new momentum
for prevention overall, when it comes to the actual
prevention of conflict, the Council is still falling short.
We should all be held to account for that.
The Charter of the United Nations provides us with
a clear mandate to investigate any situation that might
lead to international friction or give rise to a dispute.
Yet we still spend the majority of our time and resources
trying to manage the conflicts on our agenda. A culture
of complacency surrounding conflict prevention has
very real costs and, in the long term, risks undermining
the credibility of this institution.
Today’s meeting therefore provides us with a useful
opportunity to focus on the earlier phases of preventing

18-4157913/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and resolving conflicts and on how to overcome the
current status quo. That includes an important discussion
on how to strengthen cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
as they play a key role in complementing the United
Nations in the fields of conflict prevention and conflict
resolution. Regional organizations are crucial partners
in that work, as they are often the first to identify the
initial signs and risks of potential conflicts and have
a good understanding of the issues at stake and carry
credibility at the local levels. We have seen numerous
examples in which their early engagement has changed
potentially negative outcomes for the better, and we
have also seen the effectiveness of regional approaches
in resolving conflicts.
ECOWAS played a key role in achieving a successful
outcome in the Ivorian peace process and in its resolute
actions in the Gambia, which, with the active support of
the Council, ushered in a peaceful transition of power in
January 2017. In the Horn of Africa, we have seen how
the courageous decisions of leaders have generated hope
and prospects for peace and development in the whole
region, and how the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) has been instrumental in reaching
a revitalized peace agreement for South Sudan. It is
crucial that organizations such as the African Union
(AU), ECOWAS, the Southern African Development
Community and IGAD have the necessary capacity to
engage in the early stages of conflict.
The United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations have important, complementary roles in
conflict prevention. Sweden has therefore been a longstanding supporter of an enhanced strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the AU, and we
welcome the renewed momentum and concrete steps
taken to advance that, not least thanks to the dedicated
leadership of the United Nations Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission.
We have already benefited from that closer
cooperation, including during the recent joint visit by
United Nations and AU officials to Lake Chad, South
Sudan and the Sahel. The collaboration between our
two Councils has also increased, as demonstrated by
the fruitful meeting between the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council in July,
in which we saw constructive discussions, concrete
outcomes and unified messages. That spirit now
needs to be further built upon, including through our
two Councils conducting joint field visits in order to
14/74

06/12/2018

further facilitate a shared analysis of the situations on
our agendas.
The United Nations regional offices represent some
of the most effective mechanisms at our disposal for
conflict prevention and resolution, and we see scope
for establishing further such offices in other parts of
the world. The United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel and its preventive functions must be
built upon, and we should learn from its successes. We
welcome the enlarged mandate for a Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa, as we
see potential for an enhanced role for IGAD in leading
integration in the region. The proactive and successful
cooperation between the United Nations regional
offices and regional organizations should be harnessed
to enhance subregional capacities and create synergies.
We commend the work carried out by the AU to
strengthen its capacity in preventing, mediating and
settling conflicts on the African continent, consistent
with Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. We
also commend the ongoing effort of the AU to enhance
self-reliance and the financing of its activities, and
especially welcome its commitment to funding 25 per
cent of its peace support operations by 2020, as well as
the progress made in fulfilling that commitment.
To realize the full potential of the AU-United
Nations partnership, additional financial and political
support is now needed. We welcome the ongoing
collaborative work on strengthening the oversight and
accountability of AU-led peace operations, including
by further reinforcing the women and peace and
security agenda. We also welcome the ongoing work
to strengthen respect for human rights, international
humanitarian law and the conduct and discipline
framework for AU-led peace operations, in order to
enable access to assessed United Nations contributions.
The ongoing work on a draft resolution to that effect is
important and has our full support.
Our efforts to enhance African capabilities must
go beyond strengthening military responses and should
rather be based on the presumption of prevention and
a focus on early investments, given that prevention
not only saves lives, but, as the Secretary-General
pointed out this morning, is also economically sensible.
There is a need to shift from a silo mentality between
mediation, political dialogue, security and development
towards taking a holistic and integrated approach. That
includes structural prevention at the national level and
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

building strong and inclusive institutions. Based on the
recent discussions and conclusions of the Council and
the African Union, we should also cooperate to ensure
adequate risk assessments and forecasting analysis
pertaining to the root causes of conflict, not least with
respect to climate-related security risks. Regional
integration is also a powerful vehicle for conflict
prevention in the long haul and should therefore be
encouraged.
In addition, triangular partnerships between the
AU, the United Nations and the European Union should
be further explored. The European Union has been a
long-standing supporter of the AU’s peace operations,
not least in Somalia and the Sahel, where we have seen
fruitful collaboration between the three organizations.
We welcome further opportunities for such trilateral
cooperation. We also see the potential for increased
European participation in United Nations peacekeeping.
In conclusion, upon entering the Council, incoming
elected members are often told that conflict prevention
is a difficult topic and that it is too sensitive to try
to push this agenda. But really it should be more
politically sensitive to continue to fail in that regard.
We all have a joint responsibility to do everything we
can to ensure that conflict prevention now becomes the
new normal and at the very core of our efforts. The
permanent members of the Council have a particular
responsibility in that regard. Moving forward on
enhancing the partnership between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations is one
critical part in making the Secretary-General’s vision
for a surge in diplomacy for peace a reality. That will
require our substantial and sustained political and
financial investments, and Sweden intends to continue
to actively contribute to that end.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to express my gratitude to Côte d’Ivoire
for having convened this debate on regional cooperation
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts. We are
also deeply honoured by your presence here today,
Mr. Minister.
(spoke in Spanish)
We are also grateful for the enlightening briefings
delivered by the Secretary-General, the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the President of
the Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS).

S/PV. 8414

We wish to underscore the importance of promoting
the greater involvement of States and regional and
subregional organizations and their close cooperation
with the United Nations system, with a view to
preventing and resolving contemporary conflicts
more effectively. We emphasize the need to develop a
comprehensive legal basis comprising administrative
structures and coordination mechanisms with the
United Nations and the Security Council, based on
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
That would promote synergies and complementarities
between the United Nations system and various
regional and subregional organizations, with a view to
institutionalizing and increasing the effectiveness of
the peace and security architecture.
The Council maintains active cooperation with
the African Union and subregional organizations such
as ECOWAS, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the Southern African Development
Community. The same is true of the European Union in
its involvement in various conflict-affected countries.
In that regard, we would also like to highlight
the meeting held last September on the situation in
Nicaragua (see S/PV.8340), at which the members of
the Council were able to provide support to the efforts
of the Organization of American States to contribute to
the achievement of a political solution that would make
it possible to prevent a major conflict in that country.
The nature and extent of contemporary conflicts
reflect the growing vulnerability of many countries to
global challenges such as violent extremism leading
to terrorism, transnational organized crime and the
negative effects of climate change. In that connection,
we stress the importance of having the capacity to
analyse risks and conflicts, as well as to mediate
and, in general, to develop and strengthen inclusive,
transparent and accountable institutions.
That is consistent with the concept of sustainable
peace and with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its Sustainable Development Goals.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out, in addition
to being an end in itself, development is an effective
and efficient means of tackling the contemporary
proliferation of conflicts by addressing their root causes.
Yesterday, as we considered the importance of
supporting national reconstruction and reconciliation
processes (see S/PV.8413), we highlighted the
Peacebuilding Commission’s role in preventing the

18-4157915/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

recurrence of conflicts by gathering various actors
capable of forging the alliances necessary to sustain
peace and development.
Within the framework of the reforms that are being
promoted, the United Nations system must pay special
attention to the development and strengthening of
regional capacities to support national efforts. In that
regard, we stress the importance of promoting greater
participation by women and young people. We also
stress the need for fluid coordination mechanisms to
enhance the complementarity of the various actors in
their distinct operational and geographical scopes, as
well as the synergies generated as a result of regional
actors’ better understanding of the circumstances and
requirements on the ground.
That requires predictable, sustainable and flexible
financing for peace support operations, which, in turn,
requires renewed support from traditional contributors,
the development of innovative financial mechanisms
and greater involvement of the private sector. In
that regard, we believe that, as recommended by the
Secretary-General in his Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, the Organization must be able to prioritize
the financing of support missions deployed by the
African Union where the needs are greatest.
We would like to conclude by emphasizing that
investment in the development and strengthening
of regional capacities for prevention presupposes a
more efficient and effective exercise of our shared
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
I also thank the delegation of your friendly country for
holding this important meeting. I would like to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, as well
as the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, and Mr. Jean-Claude Kassi
Brou, President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
for their comprehensive and valuable briefings on
enhancing cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, with a focus on
the relationship between the African Union (AU) and
the United Nations.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is more important than ever.
16/74

06/12/2018

The Secretary-General has stressed on more than one
occasion that such cooperation is a need, not a choice.
Our world today faces numerous extremely complex
challenges that require us to make concerted efforts
and achieve a united stance.
The challenges posed by the protracted conflicts
and disputes on the African continent have highlighted
the role of the United Nations as a key player. In 1960,
the first peacekeeping operation in Africa was deployed
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to assist
the Government in maintaining law and order. Since
then, thousands of peacekeepers have been deployed
in approximately 31 peacekeeping operations in many
African States. Today, the African continent hosts
seven of 14 United Nations peacekeeping operations, in
addition to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
The African continent is vast, with diverse
geographic, ethnic, cultural, social and historical
limitations. Those limitations give rise to subregional
realities with political and economic dimensions
under the umbrella of the AU, realities that have
created a new form of cooperation between the
United Nations and the AU communities because
each conflict is of a different nature and has different
characteristics. Security Council resolution 2033
(2012), which calls for continued consultation with
the AU and economic regional communities on peace
and security challenges, encourages the enhancement
and promotion of cooperation between the United
Nations and its specialized agencies, on the one hand,
and, on the other, the AU subregional organizations,
including ECOWAS, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the East African Community, the
Southern African Development Community and the
Economic Community of Central African States.
With respect to developing and improving
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations,
particularly with regard to peacekeeping operations, we
must stress that predictable and sustainable financing is
the greatest challenge facing all United Nations funds.
We would underline the remarks made by the SecretaryGeneral’s during the Security Council meeting held
yesterday on funding African peacekeeping operations
and the importance of supporting them, if possible,
through assessed contributions (see S/PV.8413).
Hence, Kuwait looks forward to a consensus in the
Council on a draft resolution to guarantee financing for
peacekeeping operations. The draft is being submitted
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

by Ethiopia, Côte d’Ivoire and Equatorial Guinea, and
is currently subject to consultations.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
the AU is an explicit example of the application of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
That cooperation in the fields of peace and security is
manifested in two Arab-African countries — Somalia
and the Sudan — through the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and UNAMID, respectively.
Those missions are two different successful models
of regional partnerships. The Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, in addressing the issue of partnerships,
renews host Governments’ commitment regarding
peacekeeping operations to do their utmost in the area
of peacebuilding and maintaining peace.
All States that sponsored the Declaration are
committed to supporting peacekeeping operations,
which would provide the United Nations, the AU
and subregional organizations in Africa a clear path
for cooperation. In that regard, we underscore the
importance of launching effective initiatives to reform
and develop cooperation in peacekeeping operations
and enhance United Nations efforts to support the
capacities of the AU and subregional organizations
in preventive diplomacy, including mediation, early
warning, reconstruction and post-conflict development.
That was reflected in the 2010 initiative of the forum
of mediators and peace envoys in Africa. The forum
is considered to have been the first gathering of the
Heads of peacekeeping operations and special political
missions of the United Nations with their peers in the
AU to coordinate peacemaking, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping policies at the United Nations and at the
continental level. We look forward to the AU achieving
its desired goals through the Silencing the Guns on the
African continent by 2020 initiative.
In conclusion, given the conflicts in the Arab region,
the State of Kuwait looks forward to consolidating
cooperation between the Security Council and the
League of Arab States in the areas of early warning,
conflict prevention and conflict resolution through
peaceful means, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations and the Charter of the League of
Arab States.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, and

S/PV. 8414

welcome his participation in this debate as President
of the Security Council. We would also like to thank
him for choosing the theme for today’s open debate,
namely, “Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security”, which concerns the
prevention and settlement of conflicts. It is important
to start this debate by mentioning States, as they take
prime responsibility in those processes. We would like
to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres;
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat; and the President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), Mr. Jean-Claude Kassi
Brou, for their opinions.
We share the goal of wanting to strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations to prevent conflict.
That is the goal that is enshrined as a priority in the
Charter of the United Nations. Why has it to date not
been given due attention? That is a good question. One
reason could be a lack of political will and sincerity
of intention. The Charter provides Member States with
all the instruments necessary to prevent conflict. I am
referring, first and foremost, to Chapters I and VI and
also other decisions, particularly resolution 2171 (2014),
which enshrined the basic principles of international
cooperation in that area. All of the decisions adopted
confirm that international assistance, including that
of the United Nations and regional organizations,
must be based on the consent of the host country and
complement the efforts of national Governments.
At the same time, each situation is, of course,
unique and arises owing to various factors. That means
that there can be no universal indicators of conflict.
History has shown time and again that conflicts
can arise both in contexts where there have been no
human rights violations as well as where there is a
rather developed State. At the same time, crises are
increasingly becoming the cause of external interference
or intended provocations. That is why it is important in
every situation to make sure that we take an impartial
approach and endeavour to seek unique solutions. The
work of the United Nations must be based on proven
diplomatic instruments, mediation and good offices.
Dubious concepts that are not unanimously supported
by States can only aggravate those situations and are
ultimately in the interests of a fairly small group of
countries.

18-4157917/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

In current conditions, when most crises are
domestic and intra-State in nature, the line is becoming
fine between mediation, preventive diplomacy and the
exertion of pressure on domestic political processes. It
should be sufficient to point out the number of crises
that have arisen from instances of blatant external
interference that were intended to topple Governments
that someone did not like — look at the situations in
Iraq, Libya, Syria, Ukraine, Venezuela and Nicaragua.
That is a far-from-exhaustive list of situations that have
recently been discussed in the Security Council. And
it is the international community, which is purportedly
facing some sort of new challenges to international
peace and security, that ends up having to pay for the
actions of the foreign puppeteers. In fact, the only thing
that is needed to prevent conflict is to stop interfering
in internal affairs and stop lecturing about how to build
democracy and how to respect human rights. Each State
arrives at those values in its own way, and one should
not try to impose one’s own recipes or punish anyone
for non-compliance with them. It is high time for all of
us to understand that.
With regard to the settlement of existing conflicts,
one of the key instruments for the United Nations
remains peacekeeping operations. Given the complex,
ever-changing nature of peacekeeping missions, they
must be adapted regularly. That is something that
needs to be done in full compliance with the decisions
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
It would seem that everyone would be aware of that,
but in practice we have been encountering paradoxical
situations. On the one hand, we constantly hear
reasonable appeals to strengthen cooperation among
key stakeholders of United Nations peacekeeping: host
countries, troop- and police-contributing countries,
the Security Council and the Secretariat. On the other
hand, we see increasing attempts to circumvent the
agreement of documents in specialized platforms, for
example, through decisions of the Security Council
and all kinds of forums and conferences outside of the
United Nations.
In that context, we cannot overlook the International
Forum on Challenges of Peace Operations, held in
Sweden on 28 and 29 November. There, a high-level
member of the Secretariat stated that the Special
Committee is not supposed to rectify the implementation
process of the Declaration of Shared Commitments,
which was developed by the Secretariat. We do not
even know how to react to those words. As we know
18/74

06/12/2018

very well, in the most recent annual report (A/72/19)
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
which was approved by the General Assembly, it clearly
states in paragraph 19 of chapter V that the Special
Committee is
“the only United Nations forum mandated to
comprehensively review the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects,
including measures aimed at enhancing the
capacity of the Organization to conduct United
Nations peacekeeping operations.”
And there are many such paradoxical situations
in the efforts to reform the peace and security pillar.
For example, we all agree that the mandates of the
United Nations missions must be clear, focused and
implementable; yet some of those Security Council
members who agree that peace, security, development
and human rights are closely linked are calling for
the broadening of mission mandates and requesting
unusual peacekeeping objectives.
Another example is provided by the attempts we
have seen to equate the protection of civilians with
human rights in United Nations documentation. Those
who advocate for that approach fail to acknowledge that
the protection of civilians falls under Chapter VII of the
Charter, and implies the use of force. Needless to say,
their actual intention is to obtain another way to exert
political leverage by using the authority of the United
Nations and Chapter VII, which is unacceptable. We
have already seen attempts to use Chapter VII with
regard to human rights at the United Nations Mission
in Haiti. The result of that was division within the
Council, where we always used to h consensus.
Lastly, Member States agree that strengthening the
safety of peacekeepers is a top priority. However, some
delegations have started advocating for robust mission
mandates. We do not understand how robust mission
mandates can improve the safety of the Blue Helmets,
or how they can be reconciled with the primacy of the
political settlement of conflicts. In that context, we
also cannot overlook the mention in this meeting’s
concept note (S/2018/1064, annex) of so-called peace
enforcement operations. The United Nations cannot
afford to get dragged into such scenarios. The greatest
contradiction here is that everyone agrees with the
priority to pursue the political settlement of conflicts
and that the United Nations missions must help the
host country to create the conditions for that goal.
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

However, what we are hearing in fact are proposals
to replace the responsibility of States with United
Nations mandates. That is the reason why the Russian
Federation did not believe that it was in a position to
fully endorse the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations and why
we insist that it be discussed in the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations.
The dialogue among Member States with regard to
the reforms needed in peacekeeping operations is not
over, but it is already clear that the current challenges
to peace and security require a collective approach. It
is important to strengthen United Nations cooperation
with regional organizations based onChapter VIII of the
Charter and to use their comparative advantages. It is
also important for the priority of regional organizations
to be to strive for the peaceful, political and diplomatic
resolution of conflicts. We note with satisfaction that
African countries are actively taking upon themselves
initiatives to address problems on their continent. The
leadership of the African Union can rightly be proud
of that, although it still has a lot of work to carry out.
We understand the desire of our African partners
to independently and effectively confront the new
challenges and, first and foremost, terrorism. A very
good example of that is the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), which is very active in combating
the Al-Shabaab terrorist group.
The situation remains worrisome in the Sahel,
where terrorists and radical groups are attempting
to extend their influence, and organized crime is
flourishing owing to the power vacuum in vast swathes
of the territory. The threat to security and stability
in that part of Africa has reached an unprecedented
level. We welcome the initiative of the Group of Five
for the Sahel to create a joint force to combat terrorism
and organized crime. That is an important factor in
ensuring stability.
Russia has extended assistance of various kinds to
our African partners. African peacekeepers can receive
training at the Russian centres in Domodedovo and
Naro-Fominsk and at the International Mine-action
Centre of the Russian Ministry of Defence in Nakhabino.
In 2017 Russian instructors in the Sudan and in the
Central African Republic trained 200 local military
personnel at each location. By the end of the year in the
Central African Republic, we will have trained 2,000
people. We provide $2 million in financial assistance
to the African Union Peace Fund, which is used for the

S/PV. 8414

civilian component of AMISOM and for the mediation
activities of the Committee of Elders and the High
Representatives for Somalia and Mali.
Furthermore, Russia provides financing for
humanitarian assistance and development strategies and
for the fight against terrorism in the Sahel countries. At
the same time, we understand the level of need with
respect to funding African peacekeeping. We therefore
believe that it is justified to have a discussion about
increasing the predictability, reliability and flexibility
of funding, and we stand ready to engage in further
dialogue with our African friends. At the same time,
we count on the fact that the text will not include
any non-consensual elements on peacekeeping, in
particular the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which would
prevent us from supporting that important initiative.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
I wish to welcome you back to New York. I join
other speakers in saying how welcome it is to have
representatives of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union (AU)
also with us today.
Yesterday, the Council discussed the complex
challenges of post-conflict reconstruction, and
President Ouattara reminded us of the immense human
and economic costs that civil war has imposed on his
country and the steps that Côte d’Ivoire has taken to
sustain peace and promote economic development
(see S/PV.8413). With the cost of conflict so clear, if
we are to prevent the worst atrocities and injustices, in
accordance with the aspirations of the Charter of the
United Nations, it is crucial that we learn the lessons
on what it takes to resolve conflict and sustain peace in
the long term.
Today, I should like to focus on the complementary
roles that States, subregional and regional organizations
and the United Nations can and should play in the
prevention and resolution of conflict. In that connection
I should like to make three specific points.
First, as other speakers have noted, the role of
States is paramount. Member States bear the primary
responsibility for protecting their inhabitants and
for refraining from acts of aggression. But that also
means refraining from persecuting their own people.
The best and most durable solutions are home-grown
and inclusive. But building resilient societies is not
an easy task. By addressing the structural drivers of

18-4157919/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

fragility and ensuring that people’s legitimate demands
are met, including for justice, security and economic
opportunities, we can significantly reduce the risk of
conflict. That is why democracy and human rights have
a very important role to play in stability but also in
prosperity, and there is some very good evidence freely
available that explains the link between democracy and
human rights and prosperity and thriving societies.
Strong national capacities for conflict prevention
are also essential, and it is important that multilateral
organizations be willing and equipped to support
such national efforts. For that reason, the United
Kingdom supports the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP)-Department of Political Affairs
Joint Programme on Building National Capacities for
Conflict Prevention.
The deployment of United Nations peace and
development advisers has assisted Member States
in generating the analyses that allow for early
identification of conflict risks and the ability to devise
de-escalation strategies. One such risk-identification
system is now operational in Cameroon, where it
tracks emerging conflict trends and risks in a situation
that is of increasing concern for international peace
and security.
Secondly, regional organizations often have a
considerable comparative advantage over more distant
international institutions, including at times the United
Nations. Few regional organizations have been as
active on conflict prevention and resolution as the
African Union, a welcome development of the past two
decades. In the Lake Chad basin, the Central African
Republic, the Comoros and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the AU has often been in the driving seat.
In countries such as those in the Sahel region,
where a range of cross-border issues form fertile
ground for conflict, the work of ECOWAS has been
crucial. When it comes to sustainable and inclusive
economic development, regional cooperation can
ensure that limited resources are deployed effectively
and that economic isolation does not persist and
become another cause of conflict. In the Horn of Africa,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
supports countries in their efforts to achieve better
economic integration.
With regard to support for conflict prevention and
mediation, regional actors have a unique advantage
owing to their understanding of the local context and
20/74

06/12/2018

conflict dynamics. In Guinea-Bissau, for example,
successful ECOWAS mediation delegations include
senior officials from Equatorial Guinea and Senegal.
With regard to peace-support operations, regional
groups play a crucial role, as we saw in the Gambia
in 2017. Quick mobilization by ECOWAS succeeded in
restoring stability to that country.
The United Kingdom is committed to ensuring
that regional entities are sufficiently resourced, so that
they can fulfil critical functions alongside the United
Nations, specifically on the financing of African Union
peace-support operations. That is why the United
Kingdom supports the principle of providing United
Nations assessed contributions up to a ceiling of 75 per
cent to AU-led peace-support operations authorized by
the Council. We continue to work constructively with
our partners to ensure that the necessary conditions
are fulfilled, particularly with regard to human rights
compliance, so that that can become a reality.
Thirdly, I would like to emphasize that coordinated
efforts between the United Nations, regional
organizations and Member States, based on comparative
advantages, increase the effectiveness of all our efforts
to prevent conflict and sustain long-term peace.
The Charter of the United Nations underscores the
important role played by regional organizations in the
pacific settlement of disputes, and the Secretary-General
was absolutely right to point to the farsightedness of
the Charter’s framers in that respect. It is a positive
sign to see today the broad commitment of the Council
to strengthening its work with the AU and others. It
occurs to me that broader support in this forum for
the important roles of NATO and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe might have
provided for more effective responses to the challenges
faced in Armenia, Georgia and Ukraine.
Where national and regional efforts fail, the
Council has a responsibility, as the only legally
competent body, to surpass the State monopoly on
military intervention and to act to restore international
peace and security. That is a last-resort step that we can
better avoid by mobilizing all the tools at our collective
disposal for early peacebuilding and prevention so as to
avoid escalation.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Let me begin by once
again thanking Côte d’Ivoire for having organized
this important open debate on cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

organizations in maintaining international peace
and security. We are glad to see you, Mr. Minister,
presiding over this important debate. We thank
Secretary-General António Guterres and also thank
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, and the President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States, Mr. Kassi Brou, for their briefings on
the theme of our debate. We take this opportunity to
express our profound appreciation to both of them for
their leadership and their commitment to elevating the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union to new heights.
The timing of this debate could not be more
opportune, as discussions are ongoing on a draft
resolution proposed by the African members of the
Council on the financing of an African Union (AU)
peace-support operation, which has been an important
issue in the United Nations-African Union partnership.
We hope our debate today will build the necessary
momentum for the adoption of the proposed draft
resolution, which is vital in helping the partnership
move from commitments to concrete action. The need to
ensure the predictability, flexibility and sustainability
of financing for AU peace support operations has long
been recognized, and we believe that it is the perfect
time for the Council to take decisive step forward.
The AU has demonstrated real commitment to
sharing the burden by mobilizing resources from
within the continent. With the revitalization of the AU
Peace Fund, the AU has been able to mobilize around
$80 million, as stated earlier by the Chairperson of the
AU, with the objective of endowing the Peace Fund
with $400 million by the year 2021. That is remarkable
progress that needs to be acknowledged and supported
by the Council. Yesterday we were very pleased to
have an opportunity to informally interact with the AU
High Representative for the Peace Fund, Mr. Donald
Kaberuka, who clarified some of the issues with regard
to how the Peace Fund works.
We also understand that there are questions with
regard to the AU’s ability and commitment when it
comes to meeting United Nations standards in terms
of accountability and compliance issues. AU peace
support operations are fledgling, and they cannot be
expected to be perfect in a short span of time. United
Nations peacekeeping has 70 years of experience and
we are still discussing reforms to make it fit for purpose.
Nevertheless, the AU has shown clear determination

S/PV. 8414

to fulfil the conditions set out by the Council in the
relevant resolutions, including through the adoption of
the landmark policy documents on the prevention and
response to sexual exploitation and abuse and conduct
and discipline for AU peace support operations.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
in those areas is incredibly important, and we hope the
joint declaration to be signed by the Secretary-General
and the Chairperson today will help facilitate that
continuous cooperation.
The financing issue is but one aspect of the United
Nations-AU strategic partnership. The fact that we
have not been able to make progress in discussions
on that issue means that we could not explore the
full range of possibilities for cooperation between
the two organizations on possible responses to the
conflict cycle — from prevention and mediation and to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding — in line with their
Joint Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security. Therefore, with the possible adoption of
the proposed draft resolution on the financing issue, we
hope we will be able to move forward.
There is a need to continue enhancing strategic
dialogue, partnerships, a more regular exchange of
views, analyses and information at the working level
to build capacities in relation to preventive diplomacy
tools. There is also a need to invigorate and engage
potential and existing capacities and capabilities,
particularly through United Nations regional political
offices. Furthermore, more needs to be done to ensure
the coherence and integration of their early-warning,
conflict prevention and preventive diplomacy efforts,
inter alia through mediation and the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices as appropriate.
In that context, we are encouraged by the progress
made in terms of closer collaboration, joint field
visits by senior officials, more regular exchanges
of information, deeper consultations, increasingly
coordinated action and greater collaboration between
the Secretariat and the Commission. We appreciate
the joint briefings of the Special Representatives and
Envoys of the two organizations to the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council. It
is vital that the two Councils also take concrete steps
in line with the understanding reached at their twelfth
annual consultation to consider joint visits to conflict
situations in Africa. A discussion on the modalities
should be initiated without delay to facilitate its
implementation.

18-4157921/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Finally, during the past two years of our membership
of the Council, we have exerted every possible effort to
promote enhanced cooperation and partnership between
the United Nations and the AU in general, as well as
between the United Nations Security Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council in particular, including
in our capacity as Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa. As
we hand over the baton to South Africa next month,
we have every confidence that they will do everything
possible — together with Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial
Guinea and all other members of the Council — to
continue advocating for enhanced partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union, which is
essential for the promotion and maintenance of peace
and security in Africa.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to join others in
welcoming you and your delegation, Mr. President, and
I thank you for convening this very important debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres; the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat; and
the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
Mr. Jean-Claude Kassi Brou, for their briefings.
Bolivia recognizes the centrality and leadership of
regional and subregional organizations in addressing
the problems and conflicts faced by their respective
regions. We acknowledge the fundamental role they
play to encourage and strengthen political stability,
economic growth and social and cultural development
within the framework of respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of all the States
that form their respective regions.
Therefore, the development of synergies between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations — as well as the promotion of consultations
for coordination and cooperation, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations — are
useful and beneficial, as they can make a substantial
contribution to the maintenance of international
peace and security. Similarly, exhaustive analysis
of, and debate on, conflicts and their unique features
are indispensable for the effective implementation of
mediation, prevention and reconciliation efforts for
the peaceful settlement of disputes, in line with the
application of the provisions enshrined in Chapters
VI and VIII of the Charter. The role of regional and
22/74

06/12/2018

subregional organizations is therefore essential to
bolster those endeavours.
It is also necessary to underscore the responsibility
of the international community in general to ensure
that this relationship is effective. That would facilitate a
common understanding of the root causes of conflicts,
which can be resolved only through multilateralism and
its mechanisms. It is for that reason that we reiterate
the need to deepen the integration of peacebuilding
and peacekeeping activities, as well as strengthen and
improve dialogue and mechanisms for cooperation and
coordination.
With regard to Africa, we believe such objectives
can be achieved within the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, through joint strategies linked to
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration, as well
as by prioritizing the leadership and active participation
of women and youth in order to promote the nexus
between peace, security and development. Furthermore,
we welcome the signing of the African Union-United
Nations joint framework for the implementation of the
African Union’s Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. That
will promote a systematic and predictable strategic
partnership based on the principles of mutual respect
and comparative advantages.
In terms of cooperation and coordination
mechanisms, a notable example is the deployment
of joint operations. Such efforts constitute a key
instrument in the constant search for the consolidation
of peace and security, in addition to being a useful tool
in the face of obstacles and threats such as terrorism and
humanitarian crises. Bolivia supports those initiatives,
including the deployment and full operationalization
of the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force, which,
together with the African Union Mission in Somalia and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, are the most fruitful examples of the United
Nations and the African Union’s commitment to their
partnership.
We also commend the initiatives spearheaded
by subregional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States, which, within the
framework of preventive diplomacy, made it possible to
prevent conflict in the Republic of the Gambia, as well
as the processes under way as part of the Nouakchott
process. Bolivia once again expresses its full support
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

for the regional and subregional architecture for conflict
resolution in Africa. It is vital that we take on board the
African vision and its recommendations.
We also underscore the growing strategic
partnership between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union and
their commitment to developing a structured and equal
relationship by strengthening their partnership through
mutual support and ongoing technical support, both in
terms of political issues and peacekeeping operations,
as continues to be demonstrated by the joint visits. That
is why we must continue to seek various modalities of
assistance and support for African Union peace-support
operations, in accordance with resolution 2320 (2016).
In that regard, Bolivia supports the requests made by the
African Union for a predictable and flexible budget and
economic support for peace and security operations.
To conclude, we underscore the importance for
strategic entities and partners to uphold all their
commitments, with a view to continuing to forge ahead
along the path of stabilization, peace, security and
development, leaving no one behind.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Your Excellency, the
Foreign Minister of Côte d’Ivoire, to this Chamber to
preside over this open debate. Our thanks also go to
Secretary-General Guterres, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
Mr. Jean-Claude Kassi Brou, President of the Economic
Community of West African States Commission, for
their briefings.
As we look around the world today, we see
complexities that are in a state of flux. We are confronted
with a range of challenges that are intertwined, many
of which have spilled beyond the borders of a given
country, or for that matter, a given region. Regional
countries and the international community must work
together to address them. In recent years, the United
Nations has steadily strengthened its cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, which
has significantly contributed to the prevention
and resolution of conflicts, peacebuilding and the
maintenance of regional and global stability.
Meanwhile, non-traditional security threats and
risks, such as terrorism and transnational organized
crime, are on the rise. Some countries and regional and
subregional organizations are faced with inadequate
security and governance capabilities, as well as an

S/PV. 8414

acute lack of funding. Much remains to be done on their
long journey towards lasting peace and development.
In the context of those new circumstances, threats
and challenges, how are we to further strengthen
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, within the framework
of the Charter of the United Nations, for better conflict
prevention and resolution and more effective postconflict reconstruction? The answer lies in a range of
imperatives. Please allow me to elaborate.
First, we must continue to strengthen multilateralism
and hold fast to the notions of mutually beneficial
cooperation and common development. The United
Nations is an emblem of multilateralism. Strengthened
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations is an important part
of supporting multilateralism. All parties should
actively encourage regional countries to subscribe to
the philosophy that cooperation should yield win-win
results, both bilaterally and multilaterally — that is, one
party must consider another’s interests when pursuing
one’s own interests and promote common development
while seeking one’s own development. They should
uphold the vision of common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security; encourage all
efforts to find solutions through dialogue, good offices,
mediation and other peaceful means; and enhance
mutual understanding and trust.
Secondly, we must fully leverage the unique
role of regional and subregional organizations, as
well as regional countries, in tackling topical issues
concerning a given region. Regional and subregional
organizations and regional countries have the benefit
of more intimate knowledge of the history, culture
and realities of their own region. They are uniquely
positioned to address regional topical issues, and their
role is irreplaceable. The international community
would be well advised to fully respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the countries
concerned and support the role of regional and
subregional organizations and regional countries in
leading mediation efforts. There is ample proof of the
effectiveness of that approach. Just recently, thanks
to collaboration among the African Union (AU), the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
regional countries, the South Sudanese parties signed
a new revitalized peace agreement and significant
progress was achieved in the relations of the countries
of the Horn of Africa. That is a case in point.

18-4157923/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Thirdly, we must fully leverage the United
Nations advantages to lend more support to regional
and subregional organizations. The United Nations
should make better use of the mechanisms, resources
and capabilities at its disposal to give regional and
subregional organizations more assistance for training,
institutional development, logistical support and
funding. Coordination should be strengthened to enable
complementarity of comparative advantages, while
avoiding overlap, and to bring the best out of each
other, rather than inhibit each other. A true synergy
will emerge from such an approach.
Recent years have seen remarkable progress in
the cooperation between the United Nations, on the
one hand, and the African Union and subregional
organizations in Africa, on the other, which has
culminated in the successful resolution of issues
concerning Côte d’Ivoire, Sierra Leone and Liberia.
The peacekeeping mechanisms of the United Nations
in the African region have played an important and
irreplaceable role in some hotspots, including Somalia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic.
In 2017, the United Nations and the African Union
signed the Joint Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, under which there has been an
expansion of the areas of cooperation between the two
organizations as well as improved levels of cooperation.
That sets an example for cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations. It
is also the best exercise in implementing the provisions
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and
harnessing the advantages of regional organizations.
China supports the strengthened cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
and subregional organizations in Africa and has made
active efforts to that end. During China’s presidency
of the Council in November, China convened two open
debates — one on strengthening multilateralism (see
S/PV.8395) and the other on strengthening peacekeeping
operations in Africa (see S/PV.8407) — to promote
greater support from the United Nations and the
international community at large for the African Union
and other regional and subregional organizations.
As the second-largest contributor to the United
Nations peacekeeping budget, I would like to
underscore once again, in no uncertain terms, that
China unequivocally supports the use of United
24/74

06/12/2018

Nations peacekeeping contributions to provide
stable, predictable and sustainable funding for AU
peace operations and supports the adoption of a draft
resolution by the Council to that end. We are keen
for the Council to reach consensus promptly. China
will continue to actively support the United Nations
cooperation with the AU and other regional and
subregional organizations through a combination of
channels, including direct donations and the ChinaUnited Nations Peace and Development Trust Fund.
Last but not least, I would like to reiterate
that as a staunch and consistent supporter of
multilateralism. China stands ready to work with the
rest of the international community to help foster
closer cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, with a view to
reinforcing and enhancing the international collective
security mechanism and to maintaining international
peace and stability. Together we shall build a community
of a shared future for humankind by charting the way
towards a more secure and better future.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Let me start by
welcoming you, Mr. President, in the Chamber and
commend the Ivorian delegation for holding another
very active debate on cooperation in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. My delegation expresses
its appreciation to Secretary-General Guterres,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission Moussa
Faki Mahamat and the President of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Commission, Mr. Jean-Claude Kassi Brou, for their
substantive statements.
The theme of today’s open debate is very timely.
The Charter of the United Nations states that the
responsibility for peace and security in the world rests
with the United Nations. We observe, unfortunately,
that contradictions are increasing day by day, thereby
threatening the stability and security of States and their
people. Unresolved disputes usually become the cause
of armed conflicts and undermine international peace
and security. Given that conflicts of whatever nature
threaten domestic, regional and global security, the
role of States, regional organizations and the United
Nations in conflict resolution is essential. As one of
the most representative and authoritative international
organizations in the world, the United Nations has to
play a central role in this sphere.
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

But we should not be limited to resolution, we
need to elaborate more on conflict prevention. That
will require strengthening the United Nations system
as a whole. Investments in sustaining peace should
begin early to avoid conflict and ensure early action
rather than early warnings. Without that, stability can
be uncertain, fragile and vulnerable to new shocks.
We could not agree more with the Secretary-General’s
observation that,
“Instead of responding to crises, we need to invest
far more in prevention. Prevention works, saves
lives and is cost-effective.”
In that regard, we commend the determined efforts of
the Secretary-General to reform the United Nations
and adapt it to the new realities, but the United Nations
cannot succeed in that endeavour alone. It will require
commitments by Member States and strong partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations.
The prevention of conflict remains a primary
responsibility of States. It includes the protection of
civilians and respecting and ensuring the human rights
of all individuals within their territory. Since gaining
its independence, 27 years ago, Kazakhstan has been
at the forefront of preventive diplomacy, conflict
prevention and confidence-building measures, which
are the core principles of our foreign policy. This
is not a political declaration, but rather the working
methods of my country. We have a mechanism in
place that demonstrates how we have realized those
principles in reality. An outstanding example is the
initiative of President Nazarbayev to create the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia, which has been successfully functioning
in the Central Asia region for the past 10 years. The
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel — both regional organizations — have been
productively operating in Africa on a preventive agenda
for a number of years, a model that could be replicated
in conflict areas globally.
Regional organizations are particularly important
actors in the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
as indicated in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. Kazakhstan founded the Conference
on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in
Asia (CICA) as an intergovernmental forum to promote
peace, security and stability in Asia. In that context, I
would like to recall the recent initiative of my President

S/PV. 8414

to establish a collective security organization in Asia.
CICA could be the foundation for the future organization
for security and cooperation in Asia. In cooperation
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), such an organization could contribute
to the creation of a security zone throughout the
Eurasian subcontinent. Regional and subregional
organizations such as OSCE, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization have accumulated
significant experience in conflict prevention and
resolution. Peace, security and development are
essential components of conflict prevention. Security
is complemented by sustainable development, and vice
versa. We must therefore increase cooperation and
coordination between the security and development
pillars of the United Nations at Headquarters and in the
field to achieve effective results on the ground.
We are grateful to the Ivorian delegation for inviting
the Chairperson of the AU and President of ECOWAS as
briefers today. My delegation is in full agreement with
both of them that security and development synergy is
key to alleviating and resolving conflicts.
It is in that vein that during our presidency, in
January, the Security Council adopted presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/1, which was submitted by
Kazakhstan and which, for the first time, highlighted
the importance of conflict prevention and sustaining
peace in a regional perspective and underscored the
need to utilize measures to rebuild trust and achieve
a world free of violent conflicts by the United Nations
centenary, in 2045. It includes in particular preventive
diplomacy tools and the strengthening of strategic
cooperation and coordination among the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations, an
innovative three-pronged strategy. That document also
puts emphasis on sharing best practices and formulating
forward-looking recommendations and strategies in
the light of the increasingly transnational nature of
the causes, consequences and contributing factors of
conflict, including terrorism, armed group activities,
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
organized crime and illicit trafficking in conventional
weapons.
We therefore need to continue to support the
peaceful settlement of local disputes through regional
arrangements, or by regional agencies, and continue

18-4157925/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

strengthening strategic dialogue, partnerships, a more
regular exchange of views, analyses and information
at the working level to build national and regional
capacities in relation to the preventive diplomacy tools.
We should ensure stronger and closer cooperation
by the United Nations with regional and subregional
organizations, because it is regional and subregional
organizations that have the knowledge and will to deal
with the conflicts in the areas concerned. In that regard,
we firmly support the growing United Nations-African
Union partnership and look forward to enhancing that
relationship in peacekeeping and peacebuilding spheres
as well.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan believes that a more
holistic approach should be taken to further improve our
action in the prevention and resolution of conflicts. With
that in view, Kazakhstan will continue to promote the
comprehensive threefold strategy I mentioned earlier,
which includes strengthening the security-development
nexus, a regional approach and coordinated efforts by
United Nations agencies and structures.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland) (spoke in French): We
are honoured by your presence among us today,
Mr. President, and we commend Côte d’Ivoire for
this initiative. We welcome this important debate on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission Moussa Faki Mahamat and President
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Commission Jean-Claude Brou for their
very informative briefings.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations is based on
complementary advantages. Such cooperation ensures
local ownership and a sense of responsibility. It also
provides all stakeholders with inclusive participation.
All those elements remain crucial for the success of
efforts aimed at conflict prevention and resolution.
Let me focus on three points that Poland finds
particularly vital in that regard: closer cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nation;
the strategic partnership between the European Union
and African Union; and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) as an example of
26/74

06/12/2018

a positive role played by a regional organization in
conflict prevention.
First, with regard to closer cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations, the enhanced
partnership in the area of peace and security between the
United Nations and the African Union is a prerequisite
for long-term effective solutions to the security
challenges in Africa. There is no doubt that, since the
United Nations and the African Union signed the Joint
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security in 2017, tremendous progress has been made
in that regard. I would like to commend all stakeholders
that have been engaging in strengthening the cooperation
between the two organizations. A tangible example of
subregional ownership and responsibility is ECOWAS.
Its involvement in preventive diplomacy, and in peace
and security in general, needs to be highlighted.
Furthermore, when discussing future arrangements,
we should approach the challenges in a holistic way. The
key areas we should be focusing on when drafting the
framework for the next phase of the United Nations and
African Union cooperation are, inter alia, compliance,
reporting, accountability and sustainability. The
roles and responsibilities should be assigned based
on the complementarities of both organizations in the
peace process.
Poland believes that continued United Nations
support to the African Union in its efforts to equip
itself with capabilities, tools and the means necessary
for effective action is critical. It is also of the utmost
importance in enabling both organizations to face new
threats and address complex sources of instability in
Africa. We consider regular interaction between this
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council as an essential instrument in deepening
the partnership.
Secondly, with regard to the strategic partnership
between the European Union and African Union, the
framework of that cooperation was defined in the
Joint Africa-European Union Strategy. One of the key
areas of the cooperation highlighted in the Strategy
is European Union support to the African Union in
conflict prevention and political solutions, including
through substantial financial support. In that context,
by focusing on enhanced performance, the European
Union helps strengthen the efficiency of efforts in
cooperation on training and capacity-building.
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Thirdly, the OSCE is an example of a positive
role played by a regional organization in conflict
prevention. We cannot omit the positive role played in
particular by its field operations. Such activities prove
that conflict prevention is more cost efficient than
conflict management. It is that guiding principle held
by the OSCE that put early warning and early action at
the forefront of its endeavours by providing dialogue
facilitation and helping in mediation processes.
Effective interaction facilitated by the OSCE enables a
reaction at various stages of the crisis cycle and, in that
sense, remains an effective conflict-prevention tool. We
see growing space for strengthening OSCE cooperation
with the United Nations. It is urgently needed in places
such as the conflict-affected parts of Ukraine. Such
cooperation should be guided by good practices and
lessons learned, which both the OSCE and the United
Nations could offer.
In conclusion, let me emphasize the great added
value of the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations. On one hand, it provides
us with invaluable regional perspective and expertise
to address regional challenges, and, on the other, it
enables the United Nations to share the best practices
and standards in implementing relevant strategies and
frameworks. Let me reiterate Poland’s full support for
strengthening closer cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations. Let me assure the
Council that we stand ready to continue engaging with
our partners in regional organizations to work together
in the field of conflict prevention and resolution.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank you,
Sir, for convening and presiding over today’s important
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and our
briefers from the African Union (AU) and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
The United States remains committed to working
with regional organizations to address priority issues of
peace and security. Regional organizations can also be
force multipliers for the United Nations in meeting the
challenges we all face. Nonetheless, the Security Council
must always retain its autonomous decision-making
authority. We should ensure that new opportunities
for cooperation address real and critical political,
security, development, human rights and humanitarian
challenges. There is much that regional organizations,
such as the African Union, can do to resolve ongoing
conflicts and crises, independent of our discussions on
new initiatives or new financing mechanisms. Regional

S/PV. 8414

organizations bring critical expertise to negotiations,
while identifying appropriate options and solutions
and mobilizing resources for response. Many times,
the only resource required for regional and subregional
organizations to play a stronger role is political will and
an invitation.
We have been pleased to see the Organization
of American States (OAS) engage on Nicaragua and
Venezuela, particularly the adoption of resolutions at
the OAS condemning human rights violations against
the people of Nicaragua and encouraging that steps
be taken to identify the individuals responsible and
demand that para-police groups be disbanded. The
OAS established a working group in August, which is
the beginning, we hope, of a stronger regional effort
to improve the lives of Nicaraguan citizens. We also
welcomed the June OAS resolution condemning the
20 May sham elections in Venezuela, which proposes
concrete actions to press the regime and highlights the
worsening humanitarian crisis. But those steps should
be the beginning, not the end, of a stronger regional
effort to improve the lives of the citizens of the region.
Similarly, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) has been engaged on Burma and has
expressed concern about the humanitarian situation in
Rakhine state and its support for the full implementation
of the memorandum of understanding signed among
Myanmar, the United Nations Office of the High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Development Programme to facilitate the repatriation
process of displaced persons from Rakhine state. The
ASEAN Humanitarian Assistance Centre is helping
address concerns in Rakhine state. In the past year,
the Centre facilitated the provision of relief items to
vulnerable Burmese citizens and deployed emergency
response and assessment team personnel to assist in the
work of Burma’s relief and resettlement department.
That, again, should be the beginning, not the end, of a
stronger regional effort.
In Africa, the United Nations and the African
Union have worked together to improve local security
environments and create space for political processes
to take shape. There are many other situations where
high-level political engagement by subregional groups
has been critical for conflict resolution and prevention
throughout the African continent. One example in
particular, as mentioned by a number of other speakers,
was the role ECOWAS played, in partnership with the
AU and the United Nations, in resolving the political

18-4157927/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

crisis in the Gambia in 2017. It mitigated a situation
that could have necessitated a larger and much
costlier intervention. When we look at South Sudan,
the continued political impasse in Burundi and the
volatile political environment ahead of elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we see situations
where regional and subregional organizations have
long been involved in attempting to advance political
processes, but where much more work remains to be
done to reach satisfactory solutions. Again, the main
resources required to contribute to those situations are
political will and regional leadership.
A number of Member States today have addressed
the draft resolution on the financing of AU peace
support operations in their remarks. The United
States regrets that we have so far been unable to reach
agreement on a consensus text. We continue to believe
there is room for agreement on language that goes
well beyond the Council’s two prior resolutions on the
matter, while respecting important concerns, especially
related to financing, Council oversight and Council
primacy for the maintenance of international peace and
security. Any draft resolution must not rush forward
on the matter of assessed contributions, acknowledge
the AU’s unfinished work to meet the benchmarks
the Council previously established, affirm the AU’s
commitment to fund 25 per cent of any peace support
operations supported through that framework and
apply only to future AU-led operations. Ultimately, the
Security Council must maintain oversight and control
of any peace support operation conducted using United
Nations funds. We urge the penholder to continue to
work with us and to show flexibility in finding a way
forward that enjoys unanimous support.
In conclusion, the United States welcomes a closer
working relationship between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. It also welcomes
regional and subregional organizations leading the way
in crisis resolution and conflict prevention. We need
not wait for the establishment of new mechanisms or for
the allocation of new funding for that work to intensify.
There is plenty of work to be done right now.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We express our
sincere thanks to you, Sir, for presiding over today’s
important debate. We congratulate Côte d’Ivoire on a
successful presidency thus far, and are honoured by
your presence.
28/74

06/12/2018

We thank Secretary-General Guterres, African
Union Chairperson Faki Mahamat and the President of
the Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States, Mr. Brou, for their briefings.
We align ourselves with the statement to be made
later by the observer of the European Union.
Conflict prevention and peacebuilding are at the
core of the external action of the European Union,
and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations is a key
element for prevention and peacebuilding. In that
context, I will highlight three points: first, the need
to strengthen cooperation; secondly, the need for
complementarity; and thirdly, the need to better use the
Peacebuilding Commission.
On my first point, enhanced cooperation of
subregional and regional organizations with the
United Nations is crucial to preventing the outbreak
of conflicts. An example of this — and my American
colleague just mentioned it as well — is the cooperation
between the Economic Community of West African
States, the African Union (AU) and the United Nations,
in preventing the outbreak of conflict in the Gambia
last year, when Italy was in this chair during our twoyear split-term on the Council.
Further
institutionalizing
cooperation
will
strengthen our efforts aimed at prevention. A good
example of this is joint risk assessment and joint
analysis. In particular, we would welcome joint risk
assessment for all root causes of conflict, and this
especially includes the adverse effects of climate change
and water stress. Various Security Council mandates,
together with conclusions of the AU Peace and Security
Council and of the Council of the European Union (EU),
recognize the link between climate change and conflict.
This recognition creates a possibility to work together
to address climate-related risks. If relevant regional
and international organizations work together better to
assess, analyse and address these kind of security risks,
we ensure collective thinking for collective action.
My second point concerns complementarity. One
of the priorities of the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, as he mentioned this
morning, is partnerships. Through the signing of the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, some 151 Member States so
far have committed to enhancing cooperation between
international, regional and subregional organizations.
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Partnerships are essential to really improving
peacekeeping, and there are several examples
of this. One example is the EU-United Nations
Strategic Partnership on Peace Operations and Crisis
Management, and the trilateral cooperation between
the AU, the EU and the United Nations in peacekeeping
is another prime example of this cooperation and should
be further institutionalized.
Joint fact-finding missions should be the rule
rather than the exception. An example of this are those
with the Security Council, the AU Peace and Security
Council and the EU Political and Security Committee
to countries on the Council’s agenda. Regional and
subregional organizations should enhance partnerships
through these joint missions.
Additionally, let me emphasize the need for
sustainable funding and streamlined compliance
mechanisms for future AU peace support operations.
We feel that the time has come for a draft resolution
in this context by the Security Council, which will
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union, and we commend the leadership
of Côte d’Ivoire on this point and on peacekeeping
more generally.
As previous reports of the Secretary-General
have rightly observed, regional interests and the
proximity of neighbours sometimes complicate
conflict prevention and efforts aimed at resolving
conflicts. Cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organization should
therefore be determined by comparative advantage,
complementarity and organizations’ willingness to act.
That brings me to my third point — the important
role of the Peacebuilding Commission. In the SecretaryGeneral’s prevention and sustaining peace agendas,
peacebuilding is increasingly important, and the
Peacebuilding Commission has to play a central role.
The Peacebuilding Commission is a hinge between
the United Nations, host Governments and affected
countries. It is also a hinge between the United Nations,
regional organizations, subregional organizations and
civil society. In building sustainable peace, the role of
the Peacebuilding Commission is essential and should
be enhanced. The Commission should ensure that
experiences on the ground are shared here in New York
both with the United Nations system and with other
countries. Especially in transitional situations, the
Peacebuilding Commission can provide subregional

S/PV. 8414

and regional organizations with a link to the Security
Council, thereby ensuring that peacebuilding
is inclusive.
In conclusion, enhanced cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is imperative in all phases of the conflict
cycle. By better working together, we can do what the
Charter calls upon us to do: “to unite our strength to
maintain international peace and security”.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Children and Youth Affairs
of Ireland, whom I thank for her presence in the
Council today.
Ms. Zappone (Ireland): I would like to extend, on
behalf of the Irish Government, our deepest sympathies
to the American people on the loss of their former
President, George H. W. Bush. Ireland has lost a friend.
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
important debate. Increasingly, it is recognized that
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations is crucial to conflict
resolution and prevention. Regional organizations have
a central interest in promoting peace, given the capacity
for conflict to spread across borders.
I am conscious, Mr. President, that you are from a
region of Africa that has witnessed some of the most
successful cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations. Your own country, Sir,
emerged from conflict after receiving vital support
from the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the United Nations. Indeed, as President
Ouattara said in this Chamber yesterday, the Security
Council passed over 50 unprecedented and courageous
resolutions on Côte d’Ivoire, helping your country to
overcome and resolve conflict (see S/PV.8413).
Ireland shares your strong support for
multilateralism, Sir, and your President’s assessment
that peace and stability in one country are largely
dependent on the stability of the region. More recently,
mediation by ECOWAS in the post-election crisis in the
Gambia is a further example of the success that can be
achieved when regional efforts are provided with wider
international support.
On the island of Ireland, our own locally led peace
process has benefited hugely from the sustained,
generous and sensitive support of the European Union
(EU) — the regional organization of which Ireland is

18-4157929/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

a member. Indeed, our simple membership in the EU
played a key role in putting us on the road to ending
violent conflict.
Ireland wishes to acknowledge the recent successes
of regional actors in conflict prevention and resolution,
such as the African Union’s recent advances in
developing continental early-warning systems, the
Panel of the Wise, Special Envoys, and ad hoc mediation
panels. These steps all make a tangible and incremental
difference to conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
We believe that regional analysis, cooperation and
shared outcomes can facilitate more effective responses
to conflict and to building peaceful societies. With
this in mind, Ireland has facilitated two workshops
bringing together gender advisers from the AU,
the EU, NATO, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the United Nations Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, and UN Women, to
enhance practical implementation of women and peace
and security agenda priorities. We all know that if
women are included in peace processes, the agreements
they reach are more durable. Ireland’s support for the
women and peace and security agenda is wide-ranging,
including support for the work of the AU Special Envoy
on Women, Peace and Security and the Women’s Peace
and Humanitarian Fund.
On peacekeeping, Ireland is aware of the importance
of ensuring that our efforts respond to the needs of the
situation, that resources match mandates, and that they
are reinforced by political will and political support.
Irrespective of the environment, how we approach,
design and decide on a peacekeeping mission has to be
cognizant of local needs.
Secretary-General
Guterres’s
Action
for
Peacekeeping initiative and its accompanying
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations provide us with the concrete
steps that we need to take. The effectiveness of our
peacekeeping operations depends not just on their
design but on the conduct of those whom we charge to
implement them. There is a responsibility on Member
States to ensure that the capabilities and capacities
that will aid the delivery of effective peacekeeping
are provided.
Ireland is playing its part when it comes to effective
peacekeeping. We have put at the disposal of United
Nations partners a range of courses that will respond to
a number of the training needs identified. We will also
30/74

06/12/2018

ensure that Irish peacekeepers operate to the highest
standards in accordance with international humanitarian
and human rights law. Ireland’s commitment to the
highest possible standards has also led to a whole-ofgovernment approach to the implementation of the
United Nations voluntary compact on the elimination
of sexual exploitation and abuse. We must ensure that
we continue to eradicate such behaviour from every
part of our system.
In conclusion, Ireland believes that the most
effective pathway to sustainable peace is by
supporting inclusive, locally led and nationally owned
peacebuilding initiatives. As we seek membership of
the Security Council for the term from 2021 to 2022,
we will continue to prioritize support for the increased
participation of women and young people in all
mediation and peacebuilding activities. We also seek to
work with local partners to support interventions that
will bring about sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, the Secretary-General and
the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States for their briefings.
(spoke in English)
I once again congratulate Côte d’Ivoire on its
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s open
debate, which is of the utmost importance not only to
Member States but also to the Security Council.
At the outset, I would like to say that my delegation
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, which
fully represents the views of African Member States on
the topic that we are debating today. I am honoured to
make this statement at a time when the African Union is
making remarkable progress in the effort to strengthen
its cooperation with the United Nations. I believe that
this debate comes at the right time, as the African
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Union seeks the Security Council’s endorsement of a
predictable cost-sharing framework for the funding of
peace-support operations led by Africa and authorized
by the Council.
On a number of occasions in this Chamber,
members of the Security Council and Member States
have called for effective United Nations cooperation
with regional bodies, particularly the African Union.
We may recall that in November 2016 the Council
held a debate on modalities of stronger cooperation on
peace and security between the United Nations and the
African Union (see S/PV.7816). The Security Council
welcomed the efforts of the regional organization to
establish a predictable cost-sharing structure for the
funding of peace-support operations authorized by the
Council and led by Africa. My remarks focus on the
progress made by Africa with a view to strengthening
its capabilities to streamline its partnership with the
United Nations in the areas of conflict prevention,
mediation, conflict resolution and sustaining peace in a
predictable and sustainable manner.
Building
on
previous
arrangements,
the
Chairperson of the African Union and the SecretaryGeneral further demonstrated strong commitment
towards strengthening the strategic partnership
between the two organizations. That was reinforced
by the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
which was signed in New York on 19 April 2017 and
has been mentioned by many speakers. Accordingly, let
me take this opportunity to commend the work done by
the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission to follow up on the relevant provisions of
resolution 2320 (2016), particularly the consultative
process undertaken between March and April 2017.
I am delighted to note that the consultative process
was conducted in a true spirit of partnership and
cooperation. I look forward to the realization of deeper
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations on more substantive matters of mutual interest.
Last month, the African Union relaunched its Peace
Fund. The Fund entails three core aims: first, mediation
and preventive diplomacy activities; secondly, capacitybuilding; and thirdly, peace-support operations. The
Fund will certainly allow the African Union to meet
its commitment to finance 25 per cent of its budget
for peace operations, while also enabling it to finance
mediation and preventive diplomacy activities.

S/PV. 8414

Rwanda believes that, while African Union member
States are primarily responsible for financing the Peace
Fund, that does not preclude the role of partnership in
supporting peace and security activities of the African
Union. Strengthening cooperation with partners such
as the United Nations in the context of Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations remains highly
relevant and imperative. This comes at a time when the
current international peace and security architecture
is under extreme pressure given the complexity of
the peace and security challenges that the world
is facing today. Building an effective partnership
between the two organizations is therefore strategic for
collective security.
My country appeals for an enhanced form of
partnership, which must be based on the respective
authorities, competencies and capacities of the
two organizations. That partnership must observe
the principles of burden-sharing, consultative
decision-making processes, comparative advantage and
division of labour, as well as mutual accountability.
The continent is not seeking handouts or charity
but a partnership of collective responsibility in
addressing conflicts on the continent. I believe that
the co-financing of African Union-led peace-support
operations authorized by the Security Council on
a case-by-case basis is an opportunity for us all to
enhance our partnership in the spirit of the United
Nations-African Union partnership framework, based
on the principles of mutual respect, shared values and
comparative advantage.
In that respect, the African Union has called on the
African members of the Security Council to propose
and to champion a draft resolution on financing African
Union-led peace-support operations that are authorized
by the Council. That is in the spirit of building on what
has been achieved through resolutions 2320 (2016) and
2378 (2017).
The draft resolution proposed by the African
members of the Security Council has embedded within
it important elements that are of mutual concern, such
as accountability, compliance of policies related to
human rights and cases of sexual exploitation, conduct,
discipline and coordination.
Africa is ready to play its part. Indeed, it is already
doing so in many ways. Apart from the significant
reforms and Peace Fund governance arrangements
in place, the continent currently hosts the largest

18-4157931/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

number of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
and the majority of peacekeeping personnel are from
Africa. With more sustained and predictable financing
for African Union-led peace-support operations, we
can significantly improve our capacity to prevent,
respond to and manage crisis situations in a timely and
efficient manner.
The crux is that there is clearly agreement on
the urgency of improving the international peace
and security architecture to address today’s security
challenges and to reach a consensus solution to
predictable and sustainable financing for African
Union-led peace-support operations authorized by the
Security Council. I believe that the problem lies in our
different understanding of the sense of urgency and of
the best way to exercise our collective responsibility
to prevent and respond to conflicts. Rwanda believes
that a well-funded and predictable African Peace and
Security Architecture is not only an African priority;
it is our collective priority for the promotion and
maintenance of peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Senegal.
Mr. Niang (Senegal) (spoke in French): I shall
read out am abridged version of my statement. The full
version will be distributed afterward.
I would like to express Senegal’s support to the
African members of the Security Council in trying
to find solutions for the predictable funding of the
African Union-led operations authorized through the
Council’s contributions.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Côte d’Ivoire on the topics chosen for
today and yesterday (see S/PV.8413), which are of great
importance for the continent and the world. We also
highly appreciate the efforts made by the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in trying to find solutions to conflicts. This
is a crucial issue insofar as, when a State is threatened
in its foundations by the imminent outbreak of conflict,
or is already in the grip of conflict, only assistance
from other States and regional and international
organizations can prove to be life-saving. Moreover,
the upsurge in conflicts in recent years makes it even
more imperative to reflect on the contribution of those
entities to conflict resolution and prevention.
32/74

06/12/2018

A 2018 report published by the United Nations
Development Programme emphasized that, after a long
period of calm, violent conflicts are now on the rise,
with real risks of spreading beyond national borders.
For example, of the 47 conflicts recorded in 2016, 18
have become international in nature. Those conflicts
lead to major population movements, and at the same
time asymmetrical threats such as terrorist attacks
have become frequent. Therefore, the involvement of
all actors is necessary — Member States, regional and
subregional organizations and the United Nations — in
order to find together, in the spirit of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, the most appropriate
responses to political and security challenges.
The responsibility for ensuring peace, security
and sustainable socioeconomic development lies first
and foremost with States — through sound political
governance, transparent democratic rules and respect
for human rights. Indeed, most conflicts have their
roots in poverty, exclusion, social inequalities, poor
governance, human rights violations, monopolization
of political power, and impunity — in summary,
inappropriate management and sharing of power and
resources. Hence it is clear the role that must fall to
leaders to take the necessary measures to ensure
inclusion and social cohesion.
As Secretary-General António Guterres mentioned
this morning, no country, particularly in Africa, can
address the many challenges and threats to stability
alone — terrorism, violent extremism, maritime piracy
and so on. Consequently, partnerships are essential for
pooling efforts and means of action in crisis prevention
and resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In that
respect, it would be wise, as a matter of priority, to focus
on prevention in order to minimize the possible costs,
which are often more expensive than those associated
with conflict resolution and reconstruction. That gives
full meaning to the statement of the Secretary-General
that prevention is not just a priority, it is the priority.
With regard to cooperation between the United
Nations and the Africa, it is important, as recalled by
Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat, to contribute to
the implementation of the African Union’s initiative of
Silencing the Guns by 2020, its Agenda 2063 and 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. The relationship
with the United Nations, which has a unique experience
in this area, should also work to strengthen African
capacities in early warning and response with a more
dynamic role for the African Union’s Peace and
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Security Council, the Continental Early Warning
System and the Panel of the Wise, which will make
prevention the cornerstone of the African Peace and
Security Architecture.
Along the same lines, we welcome the key role played
by subregional organizations. For example, ECOWAS
is one of the subregional structures most proactive in
prevention and conflict resolution, having adopted
various strategic instruments that have equipped it with
effective early-warning mechanisms that authorize the
taking of life-saving preventive action. Recent history
gives us successful examples, whether in the Gambia,
where the African Union, the United Nations and
ECOWAS worked in close collaboration to defuse a
potentially dangerous crisis in the region, or elsewhere
where other subregional organizations have acted in
other countries.
My delegation welcomes the relevance of the
Secretary-General’s reform, in particular with regard
to the peace and security pillar, including peacekeeping
operations. We think that the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and its Declaration of Shared Commitments
should lead to a revitalization of efforts aimed at
inclusiveness and mission performance by prioritizing
conflict-prevention mechanisms through mediation
and giving priority to early warning at the international
and regional levels. In launching that initiative, the
Secretary-General called on Member States to work
resolutely to make those operations more effective
and efficient in the service of international peace
and security by basing them on a well-articulated
political strategy with targeted, clear, realistic and
achievable mandates.
Whether in subregional or regional contexts, Senegal
will continue its work in concert with other actors, such
as the United Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS,
which have demonstrated their effectiveness, so as to
make prevention and mediation priorities in ensuring
lasting peace, particularly in Africa. As part of that
preventive approach, which requires in-depth reflection
for a better understanding of crises in Africa, President
Sall has also invested his efforts in establishing the
Dakar International Forum, which was recently held in
Senegal. My country stands ready to share its unique
experience in peacekeeping, including through SouthSouth and triangular cooperation, and in particular by
way of its dedicated training centre, established along
the lines of United Nations standards.

S/PV. 8414

In conclusion, the success of our efforts requires
a renewed joint commitment to multilateralism as
an essential mechanism for preserving international
peace and security and promoting economic and social
progress. In keeping with the guidelines and principles
of its foreign policy, Senegal reaffirms its constant
commitment to work for international peace and
security, particularly in Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important open debate. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General, the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, and the President of
the Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States for their insightful briefings. The global
security landscape has changed significantly since the
end of the Cold War. Terrorism, transnational organized
crime, natural disasters, public health emergencies and
cybercrime demonstrate how threats to international
security have become highly complex. To tackle today’s
challenges, multi-layered cooperation has become ever
more indispensable.
Twenty-five years ago, the difficulties that Africa
faced in the new international political climate were
profound. Japan saw that Africa wanted to change
its own narrative and we wished to be a part of that
endeavour. By looking at how Southeast Asian
countries have grown steadily with the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, we recognized the value of
regional and sub-regional organizations. We wanted
to work together with multilateral partners with
expertise and relevant knowledge of local dynamics to
join together to promote Africa’s peace, stability and
development in an open and inclusive process. That is
how the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development began in 1993, trusting in the power of
multi-layered cooperation with States, regional and
subregional organizations, and the United Nations. The
seventh such conference will be held in Yokohama in
August 2019.
As we approach the end of 2018, both the United
Nations and the AU have made progress in their
institutional reform. We especially commend the AU
for its efforts to revitalize the AU Peace Fund in recent
years. In 1993, Salim Ahmed Salim, Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), said on
the occasion of the OAU’s thirtieth anniversary, “Africa

18-4157933/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

must cultivate the virtues of self-reliance, for there is no
alternative”. Japan respects that spirit of ownership. It
is no coincidence that the AU Peace Fund and the Tokyo
International Conference on Africa’s Development
were born in the same year — 1993.
As means of both conflict resolution and conflict
prevention, the United Nations peacekeeping
operations and the AU peace-support operations are
complementary in responding to today’s evolving
peace and security challenges. With that perspective in
mind, Japan is encouraged that the Security Council
is considering practical steps to establish a mechanism
through which AU-led peace-support operations could
be partly financed through United Nations assessed
contributions, as stated in resolution 2378 (2017).
In order to maximize the effect of that mechanism,
Japan believes the Council’s discussions should seek
operational improvements and accountability for
both the United Nations peacekeeping operations and
the AU peace-support operations, including through
streamlining their mandates so as to allow each to focus
on the tasks that it is best equipped to perform. Given
the increased responsibilities and heightened security
threats that many missions face, it is in our best interest
to ensure that peace operations are optimized for
operational efficiency.
Of course, the best and most efficient way to
resolve conflicts is to prevent conflicts, and Japan
hopes to see conflict prevention become paramount in
the work of the United Nations, as well as in the work of
regional and subregional organizations. In that respect,
subregional organizations — in particular the Economic
Community of West African States — have proven
to be highly effective at prevention. By utilizing the
capacities that various organizations bring to the table,
we can maximize the effectiveness of our endeavours
in both peace operations and development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Fernández de Soto Valderrama (Colombia)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to congratulate Côte
d’Ivoire on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. I would also like to highlight the importance
of the holding of this open debate for my country and
region. We welcome all efforts aimed at improving
communication between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, as posited by
the Security Council in resolution 1631 (2005).
34/74

06/12/2018

History reminds us, day after day, that the solidity
of the global institutions that ensure the effective
maintenance of international peace and security
emanates from the commitment of all States to
multilateralism. Colombia has always placed its trust
in the search for diplomatic and peaceful multilateral
solutions. That constant is reflected in our foreign
policy, which led to our becoming a founding member
of the United Nations and of the Organization of
American States (OAS).
It is undeniable that the characteristics and
dynamics of the threats to international peace and
security that we face today have changed. Currently,
most conflicts are of a domestic nature and require
States to respond to attacks on democratic structures
and principles, and they often trigger various kinds
of humanitarian crises. That all has repercussions on
entire regions, extending beyond the country affected,
and requiring various forms of global cooperation.
Reality has shown us without a doubt that such threats
cannot be addressed unilaterally — whether they
involve mass migration resulting from the breakdown
of the democratic system, the shortage of medicines or
food in the community of the affected country; or the
challenges of facing effectively, and from a perspective
of shared responsibility, phenomena such as the global
problem of illicit drugs and transnational crimes, which
know no borders or profit from weakened borders; or
when the institutional order of a country breaks down,
which leads to disregard for constitutional and legal
principles to the detriment of the population and the
commission of clear and serious violations of the human
rights that are recognized by international instruments.
The conclusion is clear. It is essential to strengthen
the multilateral system and to implement all established
or defined mechanisms so that multilateralism can
fulfil the purposes of its existence. In that sense, in our
region the Organization of American States has legal,
significant tools for building consensus and defining
strategies that provide access to States and in-depth
knowledge of the specific conditions of situations on the
ground, making that regional organization a decisive
interlocutor in the success of the objectives proposed by
the United Nations to prevent the escalation of conflicts
and restore democratic order.
Regional and subregional organizations, owing to
their proximity, knowledge and shared historical and
cultural links, are called on to play a more relevant
role in prevention and peacebuilding activities, some
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

of which we have witnessed in initiatives such as
the OAS Electoral Observation Mission in Haiti or
our regional body’s Electoral Observation Mission,
among others. In that context, the African Union is
another tangible example. On many occasions, as has
been pointed out here, the African Union, thanks to
its geographical proximity and direct knowledge, has
responded in times of crisis and has carried out actions
that have subsequently garnered consensus within
the international community. The added value of the
involvement of regional organizations in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts should not be seen as a
substitute for national ownership, which is a sine qua
non requirement for the achievement of positive and
effective results in such situations.
I would like to conclude by referring to the remarks
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, made
in the context of the seventy-third anniversary of the
United Nations and in the presence of the country team
in Colombia, which with 23 agencies and programmes
is one of the Organization’s largest in the world. On
that occasion Foreign Minister Trujillo Garcia stated
that Colombia has a multilateralist Government.
Colombia has been a friend of multilateralism, and
it will continue to strengthen multilateralism. We
understand multilateralism to be the natural space
within which to share concerns in order to develop
common solutions — even more so in today’s world
where global problems require global solutions. The
United Nations can count on Colombia.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy) (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate the Ivorian presidency of the
Security Council for having convened this meeting. I
should also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Chairperson of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) for the compelling briefings
that we have heard.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
Italy believes that an effective and efficient peace
architecture must be based on partnerships between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, as set out in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. First and foremost, that means
further strengthening ties between the United Nations

S/PV. 8414

and the African Union (AU), based on mutual respect,
shared values and comparative advantages. We welcome
the progress achieved under the leadership of SecretaryGeneral Guterres and Mr. Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, since the signing of
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security in April
2017, and we encourage the strengthening of relations
between the two organizations. At the same time, we
welcome the strengthening of the African Peace and
Security Architecture.
We also welcome the progress made with regard to
the implementation of the African Union Peace Fund.
We believe that it is important to stress that the Fund
must finance mediation and preventive diplomacy
activities in addition to peace operations. The
continent is currently experiencing historic changes.
Reconciliation between Ethiopia and Eritrea and the
mediation efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), which led to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement in the Sudan and South Sudan,
attest to the possibility of finding African solutions to
African problems, while, at the same time, pursuing the
objectives of the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.
Italy continues to advocate for the use of United
Nations assessed contributions to finance African
peace operations, provided that they meet the highest
standards in the areas of troop quality, training,
equipment, financial transparency, respect for
human rights and discipline. It is also necessary to
develop a reference framework concerning respect
for international humanitarian law and human rights.
In that context, let me to broach the issue of Africa’s
representation within United Nations bodies. Africa’s
underrepresentation in the Security Council must be
redressed. As a member of the Uniting for Consensus
group, Italy hopes to strengthen cooperation with
African countries by addressing the important issue
of the reform of the Security Council with the aim of
making it more democratic, representative, transparent
and accountable. The United Nations and the European
Union (EU) have a long history of cooperation in the
areas of conflict prevention and peacebuilding. Italy
fully supports the strengthening of that strategic
relationship, while valuing the complementarity of the
work of those two organizations. Similarly, triangular
United Nations-EU-AU cooperation, which has already
shown itself to be extremely effective on the ground,
must be further developed.

18-4157935/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The partnership with the United Nations came
up for discussion during our chairmanship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) this year. In keeping with the motto
of our presidency — “dialogue, ownership and
responsibility” — we have promoted initiatives aimed
at strengthening the synergy and complementarity
of the United Nations and the OSCE’s work and at
encouraging dialogue and the regular exchange of
information between the two organizations, while,
at the same time, contributing to the financing of its
Liaison Office with the United Nations in Vienna. We
have focused on priority sectors for the international
community, while considering the connections
linking the Eurasian and Euro-Mediterranean security
dimensions. In that regard, I will mention only Ukraine
and the central role played by the OSCE in every
aspect related to the solution of that crisis. The OSCE
Ministerial Council, which is meeting in Milan today,
provides us with the opportunity to take stock of and
identify the next steps to be taken. The United Nations
is playing an active role in that process with a view to
strengthening cooperation.
In the same spirit, as Chairman of the Central
European Initiative for 2019, Italy will make the
development of synergies with the United Nations one
its mandate’s objectives. It is also important to recall
long-term cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe. There is clear complementarity
linking the values and goals of the two organizations,
in particular the fight for democracy, the rule of law,
the promotion and the protection of human rights, and
basic freedoms.
At the subregional level, we believe that it is crucial
to deepen cooperation between the United Nations
and other bodies that can complement the work of
continental organizations, based on the principle of
subsidiarity. In Africa, for example, the United Nations
could benefit from the prominence and effectiveness
of organizations such as ECOWAS and IGAD. In that
regard, I would like to mention the case of the Gambia,
where the Security Council, working in cooperation
with ECOWAS, enabled the Gambian crisis to end in a
peaceful transition of power in 2017. At that time, Italy
was a non-permanent member of the Council during its
split-term with the Netherlands.
In conclusion, let me point out that effective
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
bodies must increasingly focus on the prevention
36/74

06/12/2018

dimension of conflicts. In that regard, I reiterate
Italy’s full support for the Secretary-General’s reform
and the implementation of his Agenda for Peace in a
coherent and global vision with a holistic approach
encompassing the peace and security, human rights and
development pillars.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): Let me also begin by
thanking you, Sir, for convening this important open
debate. We also thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
President of Commission of the Economic Community
of West African States for their insightful briefings.
In 1945, as the world emerged from the most
destructive war in human history, it became apparent
that, if succeeding generations were indeed to be saved
from the scourge of war, the impulse of warmongering
had to be subdued by the ideal of peacemaking. It is
therefore no coincidence that the Charter of the United
Nations places such a high premium on the pursuit of
friendly relations among States, based on the principles
of sovereign equality, non-interference and the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
The repository of measures outlined in Chapter VI
of the Charter provides a framework of action to place
the pacific settlement of disputes at the centre of the
global peace and security architecture. Chapter VIII
then expands on that by synergizing the efforts of the
United Nations and regional organizations. The reasons
for that are obvious: more often than not, countries of
a particular region are better equipped to understand
the challenges faced by that region and respond to
them. The existing cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) serves as a point
of inflection. We welcome the joint declaration on
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union today, which is being signed as we speak.
The active engagement of the international
community and the consent of the host Government
are essential throughout the peace continuum — from
containing conflict to building peaceful, sustainable
and inclusive societies. What better celebration of that
is there than the success of Côte d’Ivoire transforming
itself into a peaceful, vibrant and thriving State.
Pakistan takes pride in contributing to that endeavour
through its peacekeepers serving with professionalism,
commitment and dedication in the United Nations
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Operation in Côte d’Ivoire. We also pay tribute to the
12 Pakistani peacekeepers who laid down their lives for
that cause.
As theatres of conflict through the world increase
in complexity, peacekeeping remains the best tool at
the disposal of the United Nations and a testament to its
effectiveness. The success of peacekeeping is due to the
fact that, with national ownership, it creates space in
conflict zones for locally generated political solutions.
Let me make six specific points in that regard.
First, we support the provision of predictable,
sustainable and flexible funding for AU-led peace
operations, as agreed in the Declaration of Shared
Commitments under the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, especially those authorized by the Security
Council itself.
Secondly, sequenced, prioritized and adequately
resourced Security Council mandates are a prerequisite
for success.
Thirdly, the Secretariat needs to play its part by
highlighting the resource gaps, which the Security
Council must then resolve.
Fourthly, in the crafting of mandates, the safety and
security of peacekeepers should be kept in mind. Troopcontributing countries can provide valuable input, as
they have experience in mandate implementation in the
field.
Fifthly, with regard to the performance of
peacekeepers, reviews must take a holistic view,
starting with mandate formulation, transparency in
force generation and the integration of the various
components of the mission, and not analyse performance
merely using the unifocal lens of the contributions on
the part of troop- and police-contributing countries.

S/PV. 8414

Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela is honoured to deliver this statement on
behalf of the 120 States members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
The Non-Aligned Movement wishes to reiterate its
full commitment to promoting the peaceful settlement
of disputes, in line with the provisions of Article 2
and Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as relevant United Nations resolutions and
international law, based on the conviction that those
principles serve to strengthen international peace and
security, thereby contributing to our collective efforts
to save future generations from the scourge of war and
armed conflicts.
We emphasize that the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
lies with the United Nations and that agreements
reached with regional and subregional organizations
should be pursued under the provisions of Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter. Those agreements
must not in any way serve as a substitute for the
role of this Organization nor should they bypass the
full application of the guiding principles of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. At the same time, we
underscore that the implementation of all tasks entrusted
to peacekeeping operations under the auspices of the
United Nations should be supported by a comprehensive
peace process and the provision of adequate resources
and should be based on national ownership, the support
of the international community, and the consent and
acceptance of all of the parties concerned.

Lastly, we believe that any reform should steer
clear of changing the nature of peacekeeping or diluting
its basic principles. We must not fudge the distinction
between peacekeeping and peace enforcement. That
would run the risk of causing the United Nations
to become a party to the conflict and permanently
damaging not only multilateralism, but also the very
basis on which the success of peacekeeping is built,
namely, neutrality and impartiality.

The role of regional and subregional organizations
has become increasingly more important, and they
should receive support from the United Nations,
bearing in mind that those organizations tend to have
a better understanding of the realities, dynamics and
background of the conflicts in their respective regions.
That means that they have a comparative advantage to
both tackle and prevent conflicts, as well as to support
political processes aimed at achieving the peaceful
settlement of disputes. On many occasions, such as in
the case of the African Union, regional organizations
also have a well-established road map for the region
and enjoy respected political authority.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.

The countries of the Non-Aligned Movement
therefore wish to highlight the role of regional and
subregional agreements or bodies — including those

18-4157937/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

to which Non-Aligned Movement countries and
developing countries are a party — in the promotion
of international peace and security, as well as in the
economic and social development of their peoples,
through cooperation among countries in their
respective regions.
We underscore the need for the Peacebuilding
Commission to establish coordination among regional
and subregional organizations, with a view to ensuring
that regional efforts receive the necessary attention and
support. We also express the need to develop integrated
peacebuilding strategies with programmes that are able
to adapt to the needs of the host countries in order to
ensure national ownership.
Speaking now in our national capacity, Venezuela
rejects the manipulation pursued by certain regional
organizations, such as the Organization of American
States, in contrast to our relations with the African
Union. The United States of America — the most
powerful Power in the hemisphere — is in clear
violation of all of the norms of international law and the
foundational Charter of the Organization of American
States itself, by insulting, coercing and punishing
the States members of that Organization in order to
subject them to United States economic and political
interests and designs. The United States has a political
doctrine — the Monroe Doctrine — that still today,
200 years after its inception, openly considers the
entire American region as part of its own backyard and
states that the United States has the right to act as the
overriding police authority in the region.
The Charter of the Organization of American
States and the Charter of the United Nations are being
deliberately violated in that States are being threatened
with the imposition of unilateral and illegal coercive
measures, if they do not comply with the aggressive
campaign of the United States of America. We have now
reached the point whereby the Secretary-General of the
Organization of American States has made a public
call for war and military intervention, endangering the
peace of the region, while benefiting from the protection
and support of the United States Government. In that
regard, we reject the United States’ manipulation of
that regional organization in order to advance its own
imperial interests, promote its warmongering policy
and attempt to undermine the peace and security of
Latin America and the Caribbean.
38/74

06/12/2018

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Guatemala.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala is grateful to you, Mr. President,
and the delegation of Côte d’Ivoire for having convened
this debate and for having prepared the concept note
(S/2018/1064). We extend our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres, for his briefing and to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Côte
d’Ivoire, Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, for his statement.
The topic that we have gathered here today to
discuss is of particular importance, given that regional
and subregional organizations have assumed a more
significant role in conflict prevention, in addressing the
root causes of conflicts and, in many cases, in providing
their good offices for the prevention and resolution of
disputes. That approach is in line with Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations.
The role of regional organizations is widely
recognized as key to the establishment of partnerships
with global institutions. Regional and subregional
organizations have evolved considerably since the
end of the Cold War. Despite their variability in size,
membership structure and strategic objectives, many
of those organizations have experienced an expansion
of their mandates, legal frameworks and organizational
capacities to address a wide range of political, security
and human rights issues.
The growing importance of regional and subregional
organizations in the prevention of conflicts reflects
the need for more complex and multidimensional
cooperation, which, despite varying circumstances,
has always proven to be useful and complementary.
That is the case in the relationship between the
Security Council and the African Union regarding the
adoption of mandates for peacekeeping operations,
which are based on the principle that Governments and
national authorities have the primary responsibility
for determining, bolstering and steering the priorities,
strategies and activities aimed at sustaining peace.
The need for regional and subregional organizations
is clear. Some 33 regional economic organizations
have been founded since 1989, and 29 regional
intergovernmental organizations have established
agendas related to peace and security. The international
community has developed various tools and has learned
lessons on preventing the outbreak, escalation and
re-emergence of conflicts.
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

In the particular case of my delegation,
we commend the significant role played by the
Organization of American States (OAS) as a forum
enabling the implementation of conflict prevention and
resolution through the strengthening of representative
democracy across the inter-American system, which
is based on the Inter-American Democratic Charter
and is an instrument that seeks to strengthen and
preserve democratic institutions. We also recognize
the work of the Inter-American Defense Board, which
provides the OAS and its member States with technical,
advisory and educational consultation on issues related
to military and defence matters in the hemisphere, in
order to contribute to compliance with the Charter of
the Organization of American States.
To conclude, it is my delegation’s view that the
cooperation of the United Nations with regional
and subregional organizations is fundamental to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, given that those
organizations complement the work of the Security
Council and help it to comply with its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Côte d’Ivoire’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December and express my gratitude to you for the
convening of this debate on the important topic of the
role of States, regional organizations and the United
Nations in conflict prevention and resolution. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, the President
of the Commission of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the Chairperson
of the Commission of the African Union (AU) for their
insightful briefings.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Namibia is currently the Chair of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC). Within the
United Nations framework, we are working towards
holding subregional dialogues and briefings with United
Nations agencies, which will allow for greater learning
opportunities for the countries of the region, as well
as frank and open dialogue and greater cooperation.
We encourage other subregional organizations to

S/PV. 8414

conduct similar meetings to strengthen cooperation and
coherence between subregional organizations and the
United Nations.
There is long-standing cooperation between the
United Nations and SADC on electoral partnership
initiatives. In April, the Organization and SADC
successfully held a joint Building Resources in
Democracy, Governance and Elections regional
training workshop on gender and elections. The
workshop aimed to provide electoral stakeholders with
an opportunity to explore the role of women in electoral
and political processes in the SADC region and to
address ways of enhancing women’s participation in
those processes. SADC is engaged in the electoral
process in Madagascar and is looking forward to a
peaceful outcome to the country’s elections, which are
on course for 19 December. We also look forward to the
holding of additional workshops and other important
discussions within our region, in the interest of peace
and security.
SADC plays an important role in maintaining
peace and security in the region. In Lesotho, the
SADC Preventive Mission has generated a stable and
secure environment that now paves the way for the
implementation of constitutional and institutional
reforms, as recommended by SADC. Crucial elections
will be held in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in less than two-weeks’ time. Those elections will
mark an important step for the country, the region
and the continent. The contribution of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the region is important for
the region’s social and economic development. Both
the African Union and SADC are actively cooperating
and monitoring to ensure the successful holding of
peaceful elections.
The open debate held last month in the Chamber
on strengthening peacekeeping operations in Africa
(see S/PV.8407)highlighted the increased cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU in the context of
peacekeeping operations. Many delegations, including
Namibia, singled out the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, signed in April 2017. The
Framework provides guidance for deepening peace and
security cooperation between the two organizations at
all levels. Numerous Security Council resolutions have
also underscored the important United Nations-AU
partnership in the context of peacekeeping cooperation.
Delegations also mentioned the successful partnership

18-4157939/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

06/12/2018

between the organizations with regard to the African
Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. Your country, Mr. President, also serves as
an excellent example of successful cooperation and
working relationship among the United Nations, the
AU and ECOWAS, as demonstrated by the successful
ending of the peacekeeping United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire in June 2017.

Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): Allow me to begin by
congratulating the Permanent Mission of Côte d’Ivoire
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of December and for holding this important
debate. I would also like to thank President Ouattara for
his inspiring speech yesterday (see S/PV.8413), as well
as Secretary-General Guterres and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, for their insightful remarks.

African-led peace support operations authorized
by the Security Council are an essential and vital
component in ensuring peace and security on the
African continent. Given Africa’s decision, taken at
the highest level, to bear financial responsibility for
25 per cent of its peace activities, which further attests
to its unflinching commitment to securing peace in
the continent, and the fact that more than half of the
top 20 countries contributing troops to United Nations
peacekeeping operations are African, Namibia fully
supports the call by the AU and the African members
of the Security Council for those operations to have
access to United Nations-assessed contributions, on a
case-by-case basis. That would ensure sustainable and
predictable financing for those operations, which is
critical for their success.

Our world today continues to face unprecedented
serious challenges to peace and security. Those include
persistent traditional challenges, such as internal crises,
wars and regional tensions. We are also seeing the
emergence of new threats — terrorist acts, cybersecurity
threats and the adverse impact of climate change, to
name a few. The United Nations must now, more than
ever, confront security crises of an overwhelming
magnitude — both in number and scope. That gloomy
reality amplifies the importance of collective action for
conflict resolution. It also highlights the need for longterm prevention as a paramount tool for peacebuilding
and sustaining peace.

In the annual open debate on women and peace and
security held recently (see S/PV.8382), we recognized
that progress had been made in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) since its adoption 18 years ago.
However, Member States underscored that much still
remained to be done. Women need to play a greater
role in peacekeeping operations — in mediation and
negotiations and in the post-conflict and peacebuilding
phases. Namibia is playing its part. This past month,
we achieved the target set by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of 15 per cent of women
participating in peacekeeping missions. In January,
15 police officers, including three women, will be
deployed to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.
Furthermore, in the lead-up to the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
Namibia will host the third capital-level Focal Point
Network Meeting in Windhoek from 10 to 11 April next
year — the first of its kind on the continent. All Member
States and civil society are invited to participate.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
40/74

The Secretary-General has put prevention at the
heart of his vision for the reform of the United Nations
peace and security architecture. He has also attached the
highest priority to forging robust partnerships among
all relevant stakeholders in addressing threats to peace
and security. That includes strengthening cooperation
among States, the United Nations and regional and
subregional groupings.
President Ouattara said yesterday that Côte d’Ivoire
should be a source of inspiration for other post-conflict
reconstruction. That is true. Lebanon too can serve as a
source of inspiration for post-conflict rebirth. Lebanon
is a concrete example of how multi-levelled cooperation
can play a decisive role in conflict resolution, postconflict economic reconstruction and peacebuilding.
After a devastating 15 years of civil war, which started
in 1975, Lebanon witnessed a full-fledged Israeli
invasion and a subsequent Israeli occupation of an Arab
capital and a large area of our territory. Thanks to the
Arab world and the international community, Lebanon
was able to stand again on its feet. The international
community worked feverishly to restore peace in
Lebanon and to bring an end to the occupation. The
United Nations played a central role in those efforts.
Various Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 425 (1978), were critical.
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

However, regional initiatives were equally
important. The League of Arab States kept the
situation in Lebanon under its close attention, initiating
political talks, dispatching envoys and, at one point,
even deploying joint forces to stabilize the conflict.
The adoption of the Taif Accords, in 1989, brought
our devastating civil war to an end. The Accords
were the culmination of a national political process
facilitated by a regional initiative and supported by the
United Nations and the international community. The
Lebanese people will remain immensely grateful to the
host, Saudi Arabia, for its efforts, and to the enabling
umbrella of the League of Arab States for achieving
peace. Lebanon has enjoyed two decades of internal
peace thanks to that collective Arab effort. That is the
best example of how regional cooperation and solidarity
can bring about peace.
However, and as the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission said yesterday in the Chamber (see
S/PV.8413), silencing the guns is only the first step.
The real work of making peace starts afterwards. An
enormous amount of work needs to be done after the
end of civil turmoil to preserve peace, achieve national
reconciliation, rebuild the country and society and
solidify the foundations of a revitalized democracy.
Such ongoing collaborative efforts on the national,
regional and international levels also supported
Lebanon’s efforts towards post-conflict recovery.
Once again, Arab assistance and international support
provided an indispensable boost for my country with
regard to its post-war reconstruction and institutional
and economic revival. We could not have done it alone.
Leadership is also just as important, if not more
important, to achieving that end. Late Prime Minister
Rafiq Hariri led an enormous reconstruction effort
that revived the country and its economy. We are still
enjoying the fruits of that effort.
The United Nations remains a major contributor
to peace and security in Lebanon today. Thanks to
its peacekeeping mission, the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, the situation in southern Lebanon
remains generally calm, contributing positively to
the overall stability in the country and beyond. The
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
Lebanon and various United Nations agencies continue
to support the Lebanese Government’s tireless work
towards sustaining peace and economic well-being in
the face of colossal challenges, especially the burdens
that arise from the Syrian refugee situation.

S/PV. 8414

The Rome II, CEDRE, and Brussels Conferences
of 2018 are the latest demonstrations of the generous
international and regional commitment to the stability
and welfare of my country. They are also good examples
of how post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding efforts
in one country can be a long-term investment in peace
and security regionally and internationally. While
international organizations are guardians of the pillars
of international law, it is regional and subregional
organizations that provide a contextual angle, enabling
a clearer and closer understanding of and responsiveness
to local and regional security issues. It is evident that
the complementarity of both international and regional
structures is something we should build on in our
collective goal towards achieving global peace and
security. As Secretary-General Guterres said yesterday,
a holistic approach to peace is the right way to achieve
long-term peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal) (spoke in French):
First of all, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on
convening this open debate.
Portugal fully aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the observer of the European
Union and would like to make some comments in its
national capacity.
Conflict prevention, which is a founding principle
of the United Nations and is enshrined in Article 1 of
the Charter of the United Nations, is something that
my country highly values when it comes to promoting
sustainable peace. We support the United Nations
system reform process launched by the SecretaryGeneral, and in particular the emphasis it places on
conflict prevention, the primacy of policy and the use
of diplomacy as the preferred means towards achieving
sustainable peace. The implementation of those
reforms as of 1 January 2019 will constitute a new step
in reaffirming our collective commitment to the central
role of the United Nations in conflict prevention. Those
three components of reform address the importance of
increased cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations based on a broad and integrated
partnership towards peace support. We must expand on
the dual concept of peacekeeping and peace enforcement
to include early warning, mediation, coordination,
political messages and strategic communication in
order to prevent the outbreak and escalation of conflict.

18-4157941/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

With regard to cooperation among the United Nations,
States and regional and subregional organizations in
conflict prevention, management and resolution, we
advocate for a comprehensive approach and, at the
same time, close cooperation with local, regional and
international partners so as to strengthen regional
and local ownership. We see regional organizations
as first responders in international crises that use
their resources and mobilize good offices to reduce
tensions and sometimes even address the deep roots of
conflict, of which include severe underdevelopment. As
such, we support the strengthening of the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
the context of peacekeeping operations. In that regard,
we also support complementary action by the European
Union, including through trilateral cooperation and
regional strategies.
Since the Mediation Support Unit was established in
2006 within the Department of Political Affairs, several
other organizations, such as the European Union, the
African Union (AU), the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Organization
of American States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, have launched similar initiatives, thereby
demonstrating the multifaceted cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations and
strengthening the leadership role of the United Nations
in that area. The action undertaken by the Group of
Friends of Mediation within the United Nations, the EU,
the African Union and the OSCE is another example. It
also bears mentioning that regional organizations are
useful platforms for dialogue and cooperation towards
the promotion of global governance. For its part, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries brings
together very diverse countries from four different
continents. They share two things in common: language
and common values. That is the strength of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries — as an
integral intermediary, it provides added value within
the context of wider international cooperation.
In order to better reform the mandates of the
Security Council, particularly those in the most
vulnerable environments, it is increasingly essential to
consider a new operations framework for situations that
demand significant mobility and rapid responses, in
particular with regard to assisting unprotected civilians
and deterring possible attacks. The rapid reaction force
within the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
42/74

06/12/2018

where Portugal currently has its largest contingent,
of roughly 160 soldiers, is a concrete example of
the increased effectiveness being sought out for the
Council’s mandates.
In conclusion, and with regard to the performance
of peace operations, it is clearly essential to ensure
that human rights and humanitarian law are respected.
Nonetheless, we believe that it is also necessary to
promote a greater gender balance in the military, police
and civilian components of peacekeeping operations,
not only with a view to more accurate representation
but also with the aim of improving the capacity of
missions by involving all segments of the population.
In that context, it is also increasingly important to
integrate into our collective action the contributions of
young people in conflict prevention and resolution.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. González Serafini (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank the Republic
of Côte d’Ivoire for convening this debate and welcome
the presence this morning of Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Côte
d’Ivoire. We also thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States for their briefings.
Argentina reaffirms its firm commitment and
support for the system for maintaining international
peace and security within the framework of the United
Nations, based on the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, which includes international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. We believe
that the United Nations is the only international
organization of which the primary responsibility is
the maintenance of international peace and security
through a number of tools that must come together to
form a comprehensive strategy that includes conflict
prevention, conflict resolution through peaceful means,
peacekeeping and building sustainable peace. Such a
strategy should incorporate a sustainable development
and human rights perspective and address the root
causes of conflict. Prevention efforts, the promotion
of sustainable development, the protection of human
rights, the promotion of the rule of law, access to
justice and accountability, peacekeeping operations,
special political missions, peacebuilding efforts and
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

other initiatives of the Organization constitute political
tools that must be shaped and implemented as part
of a comprehensive and multidimensional strategy in
support of viable political processes and the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
That is why we are convinced of the value of
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security, while acknowledging
the primary responsibility of the Security Council and
the United Nations in that regard, as well as in terms
of building and consolidating sustainable peace. The
development of multilateralism and cooperation among
States at the regional level and regional and subregional
structures and United Nations agencies have proven
to be highly effective in the prevention and peaceful
resolution of conflicts through the promotion of political
dialogue and mediation. In addition to these, greater
in-depth knowledge of the specific characteristics and
unique features of each incidence of conflict or dispute
has also helped generate a greater sense of ownership
within each peace process.
Such cooperation must be consolidated through the
Security Council, in line with the provisions of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard,
the Council should focus its efforts in a coordinated
manner and in cooperation with other United Nations
organs and regional and subregional organizations,
as well as with other entities focused on conflict
prevention, sustainable development, human rights and
rule of law. The effectiveness of both the role played by
the Secretary-General through his good offices and his
Special Envoys and Representatives, as well as that of
United Nations regional offices, to promote processes
of political dialogue for the resolution of conflicts has
also been demonstrated.

S/PV. 8414

can play. The United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti and the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti, as well as the United Nations Mission
in Colombia and the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, are examples of how the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations — such as the OAS, the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States and other
specialized regional agencies — and the United Nations
system can generate invaluable comparative advantages
in efforts to achieve sustainable peace. That is achieved
through processes of prevention, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, the peaceful settlement of disputes,
reconciliation, transitional justice, the promotion of
the rule of law and the strengthening of institutions,
the promotion and protection of human rights and
sustainable development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein is
grateful for this open debate and appreciates the presence
of the Secretary- General among the briefers for today’s
discussion, which underlines the importance of the role
regional organizations can play in the maintenance
of peace and security. It also serves as a reminder
that effective conflict prevention and resolution can
substantially benefit from the mechanisms enshrined
in Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. A recommitment to those tools and their better
operationalization is therefore in the interests of us all.
In our region — Europe — the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has played
an invaluable role to ensure stability. It is therefore
with great concern that we have been witnessing the
constant violation of its fundamental principles.

Through the Declaration of Shared Commitments
issued within the framework of the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, sponsoring States
reaffirm the primacy of politics in the resolution of
conflicts. We also committed ourselves to strengthening
regional and subregional arrangements through
international cooperation and support measures with
the aim of improving the strategic partnership between
those organizations and the United Nations in the areas
of capacity-building and financing.

After the Second World War, which originated in
Europe, our region has undergone successful political
and economic integration. The European Union (EU)
in particular has been an important element of stability
and an actor for peace to the benefit of all European
partners, including those that are not EU members, such
as ourselves. Unfortunately, since the 1990s, we have
also witnessed a proliferation of conflicts, and today
we face growing tensions and an overall deterioration
of the security situation in Europe.

Finally, in context of my region — the Americas — I
must to highlight the role that the Organization of American
States (OAS) and other subregional organizations

With the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
Treaty, Europe risks losing a vital element of its
security architecture. Liechtenstein supports the

18-4157943/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

06/12/2018

painstaking efforts in the framework of the OSCE
to resolve European conflicts, including those in
and around Ukraine and in Georgia, as well as the
Transnistrian and the Nagorno Karabakh conflicts. Its
important work continues to take place, while we seem
to continue drifting further away from a consensus on
the fundamental principles of our common European
security. That is both a reflection of the practical value
of the OSCE and an urgent task for Europe to underpin
the OSCE’s work with a renewed consensus on a set
of strong and values-based principles on security and
cooperation, as reflected in the Helsinki Final Act
and the Charter of the United Nations. Liechtenstein
is strongly convinced that the OSCE continues to have
an important role to play as a platform for dialogue in
that regard.

Liechtenstein is a long-standing supporter of the
right to self-determination as a means of preventing
and resolving internal conflicts when applied in
conformity with international law, including the
principle of territorial integrity. Many of today’s
intra-State conflicts are rooted in a community’s desire
for a greater measure of self-governance and resistance
to their claim by the State. States should be encouraged
to engage peacefully with communities with a view to
finding an appropriate measure of self-governance in
order to prevent and mitigate conflict. We will continue
our work in partnership with others to develop tools and
strategies for mediators to identify and properly address
intra-State conflicts that are driven by grievances
related to self-governance. We look forward to sharing
the results of this work with all interested delegations.

The recent dangerous increase of tensions in the
Azov Sea and the Kerch Strait is of high concern to
us. It has once again demonstrated that the conflict
in and around Ukraine is driven by continued serious
violations of international law. Against the backdrop
of increasing militarization in the area, Liechtenstein
joins the calls for the utmost restraint and an immediate
de-escalation, as well as a return to a rules-based
order in accordance with applicable international
law. Liechtenstein reiterates its full support for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders,
including Crimea.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.

The concept note for this meeting (see S/2018/1064,
annex) rightfully points to the fact that many
contemporary conflicts are internal crises, which are
perpetuated or repeated in the absence of political
processes to end them. That is the new reality of
conflict that the United Nations needs to fully embrace
if it is to play its role as the primary guardian of
international peace and security, with the help of
regional organizations. In addressing such crises, it
appears that we often fall short of penetrating their root
causes. Upgrading our toolbox in dealing with internal
crises to strengthen the ability of the United Nations
to prevent conflict is a key aspect of the prevention
agenda outlined by the Secretary-General, which we
fully support. As a member of the Group of Friends on
Mediation, Liechtenstein also welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s commitment to inclusive mediation and to
increasing the capacity of the United Nations in terms
of prevention and early action.
44/74

Mr. Molefe (South Africa): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the delegation
of Côte d’Ivoire for assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and thank you for organizing this
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations and the role of
States, regional arrangements and the United Nations
in the prevention of conflicts.
Allow me to start with a quote from former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali from An
Agenda for Peace, his report to the General Assembly on
preventive diplomacy, peacemaking and peacekeeping,
published on 17 June 1992. With regard to a new era of
opportunity for regional arrangements, he stated that
“regional action as a matter of decentralization,
delegation and cooperation with United Nations
efforts could not only lighten the burden of the
Council but also contribute to a deeper sense of
participation, consensus and democratization in
international affairs.” (S/24111, para. 64).
South Africa has always prioritized an enhanced
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in conflict
prevention and resolution. In its previous terms on
the Security Council, South Africa championed
the landmark decision on strengthening strategic
cooperation between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council in resolution
2033 (2012), adopted during South Africa’s presidency
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV. 8414

of the Council and building on the South Africansponsored resolution 1809 (2008).

form the platform for renewed cooperation between the
two organizations.

Since then, South Africa has been consistent in
its efforts to deepen cooperation between the African
Union (AU) and the United Nations. Those resolutions
and the subsequent efforts to draw on the comparative
advantages of regional organizations in the context
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
build on the principle of subsidiarity, which allows the
Security Council to be more effective and efficient
in the pursuit of its central mandate. Therefore, as
an incoming non-permanent member of the Security
Council, South Africa will continue to work together
with the three non-permanent Security Council
members from Africa and other Council members to
strengthen that cooperation.

However, we believe that more work needs to be done
to facilitate joint visits, as well as regular consultations
between the AU Peace and Security Council and the
United Nations Security Council, to guarantee greater
coherence and convergence of strategic direction. That
will also enhance the conflict-prevention and early
warning systems of the two organizations. It is also
critical to enhance cooperation between the AU postconflict reconstruction and development mechanisms
and the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). South Africa believes that there is a need for
a strong focus and strengthened support for the PBC,
which can no longer be seen as an afterthought,
but should take centre stage, with a more proactive
approach of the Security Council on conflict prevention
and resolution.

Furthermore, South Africa firmly supports the
Secretary-General’s call for a surge in diplomacy and
conflict prevention, which gains much from greater
cooperation with regional organizations. South
Africa’s own commitment to mediation and conflict
prevention is well known, and we have responded, in
that regard, to assist in resolving conflicts in countries
such as Burundi, the Sudan, South Sudan, Lesotho,
Madagascar and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
by employing a wide variety of diplomatic tools to help
stabilize the situation in those countries. Those have
included mediation, good offices, troop deployment
and direct technical and financial assistance.
However, due to the lack of support for and focus on
peacebuilding, as well as the lack of sustained attention
on post-conflict economies, we often see those efforts
undone by the continuation of instability and conflict.
That shows a failure to consolidate peace gains and an
inability to learn from past inaction. It also highlights
the importance of addressing conflict in the broader
sense by dealing with the root causes of instability, based
on the understanding that peace, stability, development
and human rights are interdependent. South Africa
believes that regional organizations are best placed to
implement actions that prevent instability and conflict.
For that reason, South Africa welcomes the positive
developments in the signing of two agreements — the
Joint Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security — which

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union is an excellent example of the potential
of cooperation with regional organizations. Over the
years, African Union member States have demonstrated
their willingness and intent to lead the way in preventing
and resolving conflicts on the African continent. Those
efforts should be enhanced in order to maximize the
gains that have been made so far.
The AU has undertaken peace operations in Somalia
and Darfur, and has been first respondent in cases such
as Mali and the Central African Republic, risking much
and often paying the ultimate price in terms of the lives
of African troops. However, the continent continues to
face the challenge of a lack of predictable funding for
its peace operations. While Africans risk their lives in
efforts to take responsibility for peace and security on
the continent, which is a large part of the mandate of
the Security Council, Africa is not being afforded the
sustained, predictable and flexible funding for African
Union-led peace operations.
Therefore, while we welcome resolutions 1809
(2008), 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017), which allude to
the need of addressing that lack of financial support,
we call for unanimous Council support for the draft
resolution, presented by the African members on the
Council, that seeks to address the issue of financing
for AU-led peace operations. Africa has demonstrated
its political will and committed human resources
and lives to silencing the guns on the continent, but

18-4157945/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

needs assistance to enhance some of its capacities and
capabilities in order to adequately respond to conflicts.
With the African Standby Force having been
declared fully operational, the AU has demonstrated
that it is capable and ready to address its own security
challenges within the continent. The AU Commission
in 2016 also developed a five-year work plan for the
period 2016-2020 for the African Standby Force, and
thus far command-post training and exercises to boost
the military, police and civilian components of the
African Standby Force have been carried out.
It is also vital that the Council realize the importance
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
agenda of enhancing the role of women in peace and
security, not only as peacekeepers but as mediators in
conflict. South Africa believes that the involvement of
women in the peaceful resolution of conflict and the
protection of women and children as vulnerable groups
will prove crucial in achieving sustainable peace
and development.
Allow me to conclude by recalling the political
declaration adopted at the Nelson Mandela Peace
Summit, which was adopted during the high-level week
in September, in which world leaders acknowledged
“the incontrovertible truth that conflict is in all ways
more costly than preventive diplomacy” (resolution
73/1, para. 14) and expressed their full support for
the work of the United Nations. They also agreed to
“strive to support peace processes, conflict prevention
and resolution efforts, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction and development” (ibid.). We trust that
today’s debate will work towards achieving those goals
through enhanced cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Singapore.
Mr. Chua (Singapore): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on the very important
topic of the role of States, regional arrangements and
the United Nations in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts.
As a small country, Singapore’s security and
prosperity are highly dependent on a stable regional
and international order. We therefore firmly believe in
conflict prevention and preventive diplomacy. Timely
political action must be taken to prevent disputes
that could threaten regional peace and stability from
46/74

06/12/2018

escalating into all-out confrontation. Singapore
also believes that regional security and stability are
best served by a robust, open and inclusive security
architecture that encourages all relevant parties to
have a voice at the table and engage constructively in
dialogue with one another.
As a founding member of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), which was established 51
years ago, Singapore has seen the strides that ASEAN
has taken over the decades in its contributions to peace
and stability in the region. ASEAN was formed at a
time of great geopolitical instability. South-East Asia
was divided and conflicts were rife. The fact that the
founding members of ASEAN — Indonesia, Malaysia,
the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand — could get
together to establish ASEAN, despite their fundamental
differences, was a major achievement. Since then, the
ASEAN family has grown to 10 members. There has
been no outright conflict or war between ASEAN
member States. There are and will be disagreements,
but what is important is that each ASEAN member
State remains committed to consensus and resolving
differences through words rather than weapons. In this
day and age, that is an achievement worth celebrating
and must also be preserved at all costs.
ASEAN also recognizes that an effective regional
security framework for peace and stability has to be
based on strong support for a rules-based multilateral
system and international law. We also need to have
greater communication, mutual trust and confidence
among all relevant stakeholders in the region so that
miscalculations and mishaps are minimized. The
ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting-Plus (ADMMPlus), which involves eight of ASEAN’s dialogue
partners — namely, Australia, China, India, Japan,
New Zealand, South Korea, Russia and the United
States — aims to achieve that at the highest level among
the respective Defence Ministers. The ASEAN Regional
Forum (ARF) comprises 27 members, including the
European Union, and seeks to do the same. Both the
ADMM-Plus and the ARF are ASEAN-led mechanisms
that provide avenues for greater interaction and
dialogue among countries. They play an important role
in conflict prevention and in the development of a more
robust, rules-based regional security order.
The United Nations cannot prevent conflict or deal
with these transboundary and contemporary threats
alone. States and regional organizations must be
meaningfully engaged to complement the work of the
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

United Nations in addressing these issues. The Plan of
Action (2016-2020) to Implement the Joint Declaration
on Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN
and the United Nations is an example. It outlines the
strategic priorities that will be undertaken by both sides
to further enhance political, security, economic and
sociocultural cooperation. Of note, it promotes closer
cooperation for sustaining peace, preventive diplomacy
and confidence-building measures though capacitybuilding activities. The importance of enhancing
cooperation in preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention was further emphasized in the recent
meeting between ASEAN members and the United
Nations Secretary-General in September.
The recognition of the contributions of regional
organizations to peace and security is not new, and
has been outlined in Security Council resolution
1631 (2005) and General Assembly resolution 69/277,
entitled “Political declaration on strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations”. Just last week, the
General Assembly adopted seven resolutions that
highlighted the further collaboration and deepening
engagement between regional organizations and the
United Nations. Given their specialized knowledge,
functional expertise and holistic understanding of
regional contexts, such organizations can contribute to
enhancing the work of the United Nations in a manner
that takes into account the specific circumstances and
needs of each Member State. This is an important
element in gaining the trust and confidence of the
parties involved. Trust and confidence are integral to
any dialogue and negotiation process.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Licharz (Germany) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by congratulating Côte d’Ivoire on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month and by thanking you for having convened this
debate on a subject of vital importance.
(spoke in English)
To begin, Germany would like to commend Côte
d’Ivoire. As recently as last year, it was still the host
country of a United Nations peacekeeping mission.
Today, it is a member of the Security Council. We
can learn a great deal from this success story, and we
appreciate the lessons Côte d’Ivoire has shared with us.
Let me make two brief points.

S/PV. 8414

First, Germany strongly supports cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations on prevention, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. Such cooperation, if
complementary and coordinated, enables more effective
implementation of mandates and thus better results on
the ground. The United Nations-European Union Action
Plan for Crisis Management and Peace Operations, the
United Nations-European Union Steering Committee
on Crisis Management and the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security are excellent examples of
successful cooperation. The international community
should invest more in such cooperation by building
capacities and networks to sustain peace. Let me give a
few examples.
For instance, Germany co-hosted a conference
on the Lake Chad region in September with Nigeria,
Norway and the United Nations. The event focused on
the humanitarian-development-peace-nexus and the
implementation of resolution 2349 (2017). The Lake
Chad Basin Governors’ Forum is another successful
example of cross-border regional cooperation called for
under resolution 2349 (2017). Germany welcomes the
fact that the Lake Chad countries have demonstrated
ownership by adopting a stabilization strategy
developed by the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the
African Union.
Germany provides assistance to African partners
for early warning, prevention and mediation activities.
We are an active partner in mediation efforts conducted
under the umbrella of the African Union, for example
in the Sudan and South Sudan. We are proud to support
the African Union Mediation Support Unit, which will
increase the efficiency of African-led mediation efforts.
The European Union and the African Union have
also shown great leadership in putting the women and
peace and security agenda into action. Germany is
proud to support these efforts, especially the African
Women Leaders Network. We are convinced that
women’s access to political leadership, in particular
their participation in peace processes, leads to a more
sustainable peace.
Secondly, we need to strive for international and
regional responses that are context specific, sequenced
and well-coordinated. In that regard, the Security
Council must take a more comprehensive approach
to crisis management in order to prevent relapse into

18-4157947/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

conflict. Too often, we have seen conflicts re-escalate
following the conclusion of peacekeeping missions.
When devising its strategy for a specific conflict,
the Security Council must develop realistic, politically
sound and sufficiently financed mandates, as well
as transition strategies that include prevention,
stabilization and peacebuilding measures for all phases
of the conflict. Regional organizations and troopcontributing countries can offer their expertise to
help develop such mandates and ensure a coordinated
international response from the start. That will also
enable smooth transitions.
Regional and subregional organizations have unique
skill sets and play a paramount role in implementing
Security Council mandates. However, any contribution
should be subject to clear performance standards and
adhere to human rights and humanitarian law. The
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
should play a significant role in developing a human
rights framework for all peace operations.
Germany is committed to working with all Council
members and the broader United Nations community to
make transitions from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
work. This also reflects the strong shared commitment
to the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
On the issue of peacebuilding, it is important to
make better use of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). Germany is currently Vice-Chair of the
PBC and one of the largest contributors to conflict
prevention and peacebuilding within the United
Nations system. We should encourage States that are
seeking assistance with peacebuilding efforts to come
to the Peacebuilding Commission. We should also
encourage others to contribute to the quantum leap in
the Peacebuilding Fund and jointly make better use of
the PBC’s convening and advisory role.
In conclusion, cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
enables the sharing of responsibilities based on the
comparative strengths of each one. This leads to
complementarity and avoids competition. Germany
remains committed to supporting regional and
subregional organizations, and their cooperation with
the United Nations. We will continue to promote a
holistic and coordinated approach to sustaining peace.
We, as Member States, cannot afford to waste scarce
resources or lack coherence. We should be seeking
synergies and working closely together to sustain peace.
48/74

06/12/2018

Let me finish by saying that Germany aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Sweden and my own country, Norway.
The United Nations ability to create effective
partnerships
with
regional
and
subregional
organizations is important for the prevention of and
effective response to violent conflicts. The ongoing
reforms in the United Nations and the African Union
(AU) can further improve our ability to address the
present challenges to international peace and security.
Regional actors are often the first to experience early
warning signs of conflict and can play a key role in
prevention. They can also be essential partners to the
United Nations in ensuring the implementation of peace
agreements, countering terrorism, preventing violent
extremism and addressing migration issues.
Partnerships with regional organizations are, quite
rightly, given priority in the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. Mandates for United Nations
peace operations must be tailor-made to conditions on
the ground, taking into account the importance of such
partnerships. The ever-stronger partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union, including
subregional organizations, is very positive.
The Nordic countries welcome and support the
efforts of the United Nations and the AU to strengthen
cooperation and coordination in the area of peace
and security and the implementation of Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
African leadership and ownership are essential, as
are partnerships. By joining forces, the AU and the
United Nations can provide more efficient and coherent
support to member countries’ efforts to sustain peace
and build resilient and prosperous nations.
It is encouraging to see how relations between the
United Nations and the African Union are maturing and
growing stronger. In less than two years, the institutions
have signed and embarked upon the implementation of
two important framework agreements. We will actively
support the establishment of an open-ended group
of friends of the United Nations-AU partnership in
Addis Ababa. The purpose is to provide the support
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and backing of member States for further joint United
Nations-AU efforts for sustainable development,
conflict prevention, preventive diplomacy and
mediation, including enhanced cooperation between
the AU Peace and Security Council and the United
Nations Security Council. The Nordic countries remain
committed to continuing our substantial support to AUUnited Nations cooperation.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
remains essential to maintaining peace and security, as
well as preventing conflicts and achieving sustainable
development in that region. It is inspiring to see how
members of the United Nations family and ASEAN
are working closely together in implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the ASEAN
Community Vision 2025.
The Nordic countries are consistent partners in
the efforts of the United Nations to further deepen
existing arrangements with regional and subregional
organizations and seek new opportunities for our
common future. In order to realize the full potential
of the AU-United Nations partnership, additional
financial and political support is needed. We therefore
welcome the ongoing work to enable access to assessed
United Nations contributions.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Mali welcomes the convening of this open
debate by the presidency of Côte d’Ivoire on the role
of States, regional agreements and the United Nations
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts. I hardly
need to point out the relevance and acutely topical
nature of this matter, especially for African countries,
including Mali.
I thank the Secretary-General, the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the President
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Commission for their very informative
briefings this morning.
No country better encapsulates the relevance of
this topic than Côte d’Ivoire. Indeed, we deeply admire
the continued leadership, vision and appropriate
measures undertaken by President Alassane Ouattara
to bring lasting stability and genuine reconciliation
to our neighbour Côte d’Ivoire after years of crisis,

S/PV. 8414

the resolution of which required the crucial support
of ECOWAS, the African Union and, notably, the
United Nations.
I am aware that each crisis situation is unique, but I
remain convinced that Côte d’Ivoire’s model — I should
say the country’s success story, to use the expression
President Ouattara used yesterday (see S/PV.8413) — is
certainly a great source of inspiration for many countries
seeking to emerge from crisis and instability. That is
the essence of the regular high-level contact between
Mali and Côte d’Ivoire.
For its part, Mali is resolutely committed to
resolving the crisis that has affected it since 2012. To that
end, under the authority of President Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita, the Government is working to strengthen State
institutions and enhance the legitimacy of the State in
the eyes of the population. We are also working to bring
the State closer to its citizens by improving governance
in all areas, at both the national and local levels, in
order to better address the concerns of our population,
including with the provision of basic social services.
Moreover, we have always fostered inclusive dialogue
and regular consultation as a means of settling national
problems, with a sustained focus on economic and
social recovery, which includes creating employment
opportunities, particularly for young people, and
income-generating activities for the population, placing
women and children at the heart of those policies.
For that reason, and to achieve a lasting resolution
to the multidimensional crisis afflicting our country,
the Government and other signatories are resolutely
working towards the prompt implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
emanating from the Algiers process. It must be recalled
that the Agreement contains relevant provisions for the
political and institutional realms, those of defence and
security, as well as for the economy and the areas of
social development and national reconciliation. I remain
convinced that the agreement, if fully implemented,
will guarantee sustainable stability in Mali and beyond.
As part of the implementation of the agreement,
Mali welcomes the active solidarity of several friendly
countries and subregional and regional organizations,
including the African Union, ECOWAS, the Group of
Five for the Sahel and the United Nations.
I will conclude by saying that Mali fully supports
the work undertaken by the three African members of

18-4157949/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

the Security Council on a draft resolution for financing
peacekeeping operations in Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I welcome and thank Côte d’Ivoire for
its initiative to convene a debate on a subject that is so
crucial to the work of the Security Council in exercising
its responsibilities.
For Belgium, the importance of regional and
subregional organizations in conflict prevention is
irrefutable, particularly in Africa, where African
ownership of the continent’s security challenges
has led to undeniable progress over the past decade.
Our observation and creed are simple and shared by
many — when a crisis looms on the horizon, or when
a crisis breaks out, neighbouring States, the subregion
and continent are often better placed than the United
Nations to act quickly and efficiently.
As a matter of principle, Belgium supports regional
integration as the best way to resolve cross-border
issues consensually, unite regions and create solidarity.
I remain convinced that the European experience
is a success story. Indeed, the European Union has
enabled the longest period of peace in modern Europe.
Moreover, I would like to reiterate our commitment to
supporting the African Union in its efforts to strengthen
and implement its policies, procedures and capabilities,
as well as to making the financing of African Union-led
peace operations more predictable, sustainable and
flexible. For Belgium, that goal has been achieved, and
it is now a question of making practical arrangements
in that regard.
In the division of tasks and responsibilities among
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, our approach is guided by two core
principles: complementarity and subsidiarity.
I will first broach subsidiarity. In The Gambia, we
recently saw a fine example of putting that principle into
practice, namely, the decisive action of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), under
the auspices of the African Union and the United
Nations, that has allowed for a transition towards
democracy in a largely peaceful manner.
Turning to complementarity, Guinea-Bissau
is a textbook example of the principle. True
complementarity is demonstrated on the ground in the
50/74

06/12/2018

country, where the key commitment of the international
community in support of its crisis recovery is embodied
in the group of five international partners in Bissau,
which brings together the United Nations, the African
Union, the European Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and ECOWAS.
The success of an electoral poll sometimes makes
it possible to prevent or resolve a conflict. Electoral
processes are another example of complementarity.
Although the United Nations is sometimes involved in
the preparations for and the holding of a ballot, electoral
monitoring is regularly undertaken by the African
Union, the Southern African Development Community
or ECOWAS. Operational commitment, such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, helps to reduce
tension by implementing independent observation
capacity, thereby complementing the political process.
Finally, with respect to mediation, regional
organizations can bring their local knowledge and
expertise to the field, while the United Nations offers
neutrality, as well as universal authority and norms.
Beyond those principles, we must also recognize
that each situation is different and ever-changing.
Pre-establishing strict rules is not effective. What
is certain is that different tiers each have their own
uses and legitimacy and must be used in concert and
combined in a coherent and effective way.
Regardless of the colour of the helmet, it is essential
that the basic rules of international humanitarian law
and human rights not be subject to any exception and be
fully upheld during operations. Personnel are deployed
with a view to seeking peace and a way out of the crisis;
as such, their conduct must be exemplary. Belgium
welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to fight
relentlessly against sexual violence in the United
Nations, and the Council should set equally stringent
standards for the regional operations that it authorizes.
Finally, I wish to reiterate our support for the work
of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Commission of the African Union in
establishing a compliance framework for the respect of
human rights and international and humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Amayo (Kenya): We are indeed honoured
to participate in this important discussion, which
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

highlights the role of Member States, regional
arrangements and the United Nations as important
stakeholders that need to collaborate in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts within their respective levels
of responsibilities and mandates.
My delegation wishes to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December, and for convening
this important open debate, including the concept note
(S/2018/1063, annex) that has been circulated to guide
our discussions today.
We also welcome the briefings of Secretary-General
Guterres; Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission; and Mr. JeanClaude Kassi Brou, President of the Commission of the
Economic Community of West African States.
At the outset, let me indicate that Kenya aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
When it comes to the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, the roles of the various stakeholders — be
they States, regional and subregional organizations or
the United Nations — are inextricably linked. In the
pursuit of peaceful diplomacy, a nation State’s quest for
its own sustainable peace and security can be drawn
from properly functioning, well-resourced security and
judicial and development institutions. Those institutions
also need to be inclusive. Additionally, given the
changing nature of conflicts in our contemporary
world, with many internal crises that often become
transnational, the State is forced to look within and
beyond its borders and be equipped in the areas of
mediation and conflict resolution. All of those tools,
if properly utilized, are important in strengthening
internal and bilateral relations, as well as regional
cooperation and enhanced multilateral engagements.

S/PV. 8414

preventive diplomacy and conflict resolution. Their
role is becoming increasingly important and should be
strengthened. Regional and subregional arrangements
have the comparative advantage of proximity in
understanding the context and layout of conflicts,
including the background and dynamics of the cultural,
economic and political processes involved. It is worth
noting that Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations recognizes the important role of regional
arrangements and agencies in the pacific settlement of
local disputes.
Unless those regional arrangements are reinforced
with sustainable and predictable funding, the efforts
of some of those entities will always be threatened by
fragility and the risk of relapse into conflict, leading
to a lack of consolidation of sustainable peace and
development. An example of that is the funding
challenge that the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) continues to face. Funding for AMISOM
remains unpredictable and unreliable. In order for the
Government of Somalia to fully establish its authority
over the entire country of Somalia, AMISOM requires
assured resources, including funding and personnel.
It is on that principle of sustainability that my
delegation supports the African Union initiative and
the proposed Security Council draft resolution on
the financing of African peacekeeping operations
to ensure predictable and sustainable financing for
peace operations in Africa, as well as the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which
is aimed at renewing States’ political commitment to
peacekeeping operations.

However, for conflict-affected countries in Africa
and beyond, those instruments of peace are not always
readily available. Therefore, during the reconstruction
phase, a State’s efforts to internally build and
restructure both its institutions and its society should
be encouraged and supported within the framework of
national ownership.

The next aspect I would like to address is the
role of the United Nations. While recognizing that
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security lies with the Security
Council, the entire United Nations system needs to
work collaboratively through its various organs and
subsidiary bodies to ensure that the roles of States and
regional arrangements are enhanced. That support to
States and regional arrangements can be in the form
of facilitating action-oriented discussion platforms,
such as our meeting here today, or through facilitating
comprehensive peace processes, peace operations,
mobilization, the provision of resources and through
forging strategic partnerships.

Regional and subregional organizations have
proved to be important vehicles for effective and

Kenya continues to pursue peace diplomacy
by drawing on its own experiences in mediation,

18-4157951/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

conflict resolution and peacekeeping through bilateral
and multilateral engagement with the East African
Community (EAC), the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and the African Union, including
the African Peace and Security Council and the
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
(COMESA), among other arrangements.
The EAC is an important regional arrangement for
fostering and maintaining a conducive peaceful and
stable atmosphere, which is a prerequisite to social and
economic development. On COMESA, it is particularly
important to note that regional arrangements have
the potential to reconfigure themselves, based on
the contextual circumstances, to be more effective.
For example, COMESA is a regional economic
arrangement within Africa, with a programme on peace
and security that contributes to preventive diplomacy
and peacebuilding in the subregion. The United
Nations should therefore explore the ways in which it
can better strategically partner with those subregional
arrangements to enhance preventive diplomacy in the
region, including the Horn of Africa.
In conclusion, Kenya wishes to reiterate its full
commitment to the promotion of preventive diplomacy
through a strengthened multilateral framework that is
aligned with the norms of international law and the
principle of national ownership for a peaceful and
stable world. Indeed, that will be achieved only through
closer cooperation and good will among States, regional
arrangements and the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia) (spoke in French):
Allow me to congratulate Côte d’Ivoire on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council this month. We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s debate
on this crucial topic.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union (EU).
Today’s discussion is very timely. We are
witnessing only an increase in conflicts, and yet many
peace processes are encountering major difficulties,
ceasefire agreements are not respected and an
unprecedented number of people are displaced from
their homes. It is therefore very important to emphasize
that our collective responsibility under the Charter of
52/74

06/12/2018

the United Nations is to do everything in our power to
prevent crises through peaceful means.
(spoke in English)
The United Nations is the foundation of today’s
multilateral architecture. Estonia is an advocate of
maintaining a strong multilateral system, which we
must continue to strengthen. Peace will be sustainable
only if we address the root causes of conflict and help
create conditions for development. We see clear benefits
in a more integrated, flexible and coordinated United
Nations. Estonia supports the Secretary-General’s
reform agenda. It is important to underline that reform
agendas on peace and security, management and
development should reinforce coherence and the One
United Nations and fit-for-purpose vision.
Political will is an essential component of creating
and sustaining peace. We, the international community,
need to redouble our efforts to find ways to support
and incentivize the willingness to move forward
in conflict prevention and resolution. Cooperation
and coordination with international, regional and
subregional stakeholders is crucial to achieving that.
African Union-led peace operations, the cooperation
in Mali among the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the Group
of Five for the Sahel and Operation Barkhane, and the
United Nations-EU partnership on peacekeeping are but
a few examples of how such cooperation is necessary
and how it makes a difference on the ground.
In order to advance beyond merely reacting
to ongoing conflicts, we need to step up and use all
available means to prevent them. Studies, including the
World Bank and United Nations joint study Pathways
for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent
Conflict, have demonstrated that inequality and
political, social and economic exclusion are among
the most common reasons that lead to internal violent
conflict. Therefore, democratic governance, the rule
of law, protection of human rights and transparent,
accountable State institutions are essential to achieving
stability and peace. It is also crucial that we fully
recognize and support the role of women and youth in
sustaining peace.
I would also like to emphasize the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission as a central actor in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding in the United Nations
system. Estonia had the privilege of being a member
of the Peacebuilding Commission last year, and we
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

very much support its broader focus. Additionally,
Estonia has supported the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF)
since 2013. We believe that the PBF is an effective
peacebuilding instrument, as it provides catalytic, fast
and flexible assistance.
In conclusion, it is our collective responsibility
to ensure that the United Nations, as a whole, and
the Security Council live up to their responsibilities
for securing peace in the world, especially through
the prevention and resolution of conflicts. Estonia
is determined to make its contribution to that end.
That is also the reason why Estonia is running for a
non-permanent seat in the Security Council for the
term 2020-2021.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to warmly congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the accession of your brotherly and
friendly country to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December. We thank you for
convening and choosing the topic of this debate, which
is presided over by Mr. Amon-Tano, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of your brotherly country.
Indeed, Côte d’Ivoire managed to emerge from a
crisis that required the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation, the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire. It is no coincidence that the Operation, whose
mandate has ended, is considered a success, given
the national ownership that was made possible by the
strong and democratic institutions of your country.
I would like to warmly thank Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, President of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire,
for presiding over the Security Council yesterday (see
S/PV.8413) and for his statement, which highlighted
Côte d’Ivoire’s experience in building and sustaining
peace, as well as the notable economic and social
progress of the country. That experience and expertise
should serve as models for other countries.
I would also like to commend the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing, which reaffirmed his resolute
commitment to peacekeeping. We welcome and
fully support that new direction. Moreover, Morocco
commends the presence and briefing of the Chairperson
of the African Union (AU) Commission, which
demonstrates the strategic character of the United
Nations-AU partnership. We also welcome the briefing

S/PV. 8414

by the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States, one of the most
integrated and committed subregional organizations in
the prevention, maintenance and consolidation of peace.
I take this opportunity to honour the memory of
former United States President George H. W. Bush, and
reiterate the sincere condolences of the Kingdom of
Morocco to his family and the American people.
Morocco, a country that has been strongly
committed to United Nations peacekeeping since
the 1960s, is well placed to know that the nature
of conflicts, which are ever-more complex, is
significantly evolving, with important consequences
for peacekeeping in terms of efficiency, risks and costs,
among others. Recent developments in United Nations
peacekeeping, particularly the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, respond to that need
for adaptation. In that spirit, Morocco has supported
the Secretary-General’s initiative from the beginning.
We welcome the way in which the monitoring of
commitments has been initiated, and we will pursue
our efforts to fulfil our commitments in that regard.
To ensure its development, peacekeeping with
regional and subregional organizations must be
strengthened, as mentioned in the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. To that end, we can draw inspiration
from several experiences in the past when the two
organizations have worked closely, where possible.
Peacekeeping also provides leverage for prevention, IN
the understanding that a given crisis will not reoccur.
In several instances, we have seen that this issue could
not be resolved. We hope that the concept of sustainable
peace will enable us to remedy the relapses into
conflict, of which there are still too many, in particular
on our continent.
As I am aware of time allotted to me, I will limit
my statement to the following three points.
First, the performance of peacekeeping operations
is key to their success. Morocco welcomes the
fact that we were able to agree on the issue of
performance during the most recent meeting of the
Special Committee on Peace Operations, given that
we all shoulder the responsibility and that all actors,
whether on the ground, at Headquarters or in regional
offices, have a part to play. Many factors — such as
mandates, training, equipment, rules of engagement,
planning, caveats and others — come into play when

18-4157953/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

we address the issue of performance. They must all
be fully integrated into the development, renewal and
implementation of peacekeeping mandates.
Secondly, with regard to the strengthening of the
United Nations-African Union partnership, many
lessons can be learned from recent experiences, such
as re-hatting within the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Africa’s sincere desire is to
take its future into its own hands, and the commitment
of the African regional and subregional organizations
prove it. That commitment was underscored by the
signature in April 2017 of the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security. As the Secretary-General
mentioned, the Framework seeks to ensure that the two
organizations work closely on the basis of the principle
of mutual respect and comparative advantage during
a conflict cycle in a predictable and strategic manner.
Morocco welcomes that commitment and will use its
membership of the African Union Peace and Security
Council and of the United Nations to support the
implementation of the agreement.
Thirdly and lastly, with respect to funding peace
support operations of the African Union, the African
Union has clearly expressed its commitment to peace
on our continent by financing approximately 25 per
cent of the cost of the African Union Peace Fund.
Moreover, the Fund is currently funded by African
States in the amount of $80 million. That reflects the
firm and tangible commitment of the African Union,
which should be duly appreciated and supported by
the international community. In addition, in his 2017
report on options for authorization and support for
African Union peace support operations (S/2017/454),
the Secretary-General made several proposals in
that regard. Regrettably, to date, none has received
unanimous support.
Committing to funding African peace operations
is an investment in the future and signifies trust.
The African Union has made considerable efforts to
raise standards in the areas of financial transparency,
conduct, discipline and others, in line with several
requests made in Security Council resolutions, the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
the African Union itself. We are all unanimous in
underscoring the importance of partnerships. It is now
time to provide those partnerships with the means and
efficiency expected of them.
54/74

06/12/2018

In conclusion, I should like to pay tribute to the
African countries that are members of the Council,
including your own, Mr. President, for their tireless
efforts to achieve peace in Africa and in the area of
funding African Union peace operations. We remain
committed to working with them until a realistic
solution that takes into account African aspirations is
found. Lastly, I would like to pay tribute all the men
and women who conduct their peace operations duties,
often in difficult conditions, and in particular to those
who paid the ultimate price to achieve peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): We congratulate Côte d’Ivoire on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council and thank its
delegation for convening today’s open debate.
Cuba fully supports the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Our country is firmly committed to conflict
prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes, in
line with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. We firmly believe that conflict
prevention is the primary responsibility of Member
States. We welcome the strengthening of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
with a view to supporting peacekeeping operations
on a continent that provides nearly 50 per cent of
peacekeeping personnel and the majority of United
Nations police officers to peacekeeping missions.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s initiatives
to improve the work of the Organization. We support
the call for solutions to ensure that United Nations
peacebuilding efforts and Security Council-mandated
African Union operations can count on predictable and
sustainable funding from the Organization. At the same
time, we believe that the United Nations, regional and
subregional organizations and other external actors
involved should support and complement the efforts
made by national Governments in the area of conflict
prevention and conflict resolution, when requested. Such
support must be impartial and unconditional and should
not interfere in their domestic affairs. It should also
fully respect the sovereignty, political independence,
authority, leadership and consent of the host State, in
accordance with its needs and priorities. The main duty
of such actors is to help the host country to settle its
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

conflict and provide the capacity to do so. It is essential
to address and eliminate the root causes of conflict,
in particular issues pertaining to social and economic
development, while supporting the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Cuba believes that success in the area of conflict
prevention and conflict resolution also depends on
peacekeeping operations being endowed with clearly
defined, realistic and viable mandates, the resources
and capabilities required for discharging them and
concrete exit strategies. We reiterate that the basic
principles of peacekeeping operations — the consent
of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force,
except in cases of legitimate defence — must be
respected and implemented with full respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence of States
and non-interference in their domestic affairs.
We are not convinced that operations involving
the use of force, above and beyond the basic principles
involved, can help improve the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations and the security of their
personnel and civilians. On the contrary, the flexible
application or reinterpretation of those principles can
increase the risk of threats and attacks against United
Nations staff, which, regrettably, have occurred
in recent years. Cuba reiterates that protection-ofcivilians activities should also support the efforts of
national authorities and can in no way be used as a
pretext for disregarding the principles of the Charter.
We underscore that peacekeeping operations are neither
geared towards nor equipped to combat terrorism or
protect human rights.
With respect to the performance demands on
peacekeeping operations, we believe that operations
should be deployed with the resources and conditions
required to discharge their mandates. Improving and
increasing the number of consultations between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop- and/
or police-contributing countries would also allow for
a better understanding of the situation and help in the
design of mandates. Peacekeeping operations must
have the logistical support and resources required.
Personnel training should be improved and the capacity
of contributing countries enhanced.
Lastly, we believe that conflict prevention and
resolution also require the United Nations to ensure an

S/PV. 8414

environment of international peace and security that
allows for the implementation of sustainable economic
and social development strategies. The coordination and
consistency of efforts between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter, will be essential.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Galbavy (Slovakia): Mr. President, I wish to
congratulate your country on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council and to thank you for convening
today’s open debate to underscore the need to enhance
the cooperation between the Council and regional
entities and highlight that sustaining peace requires
collective responsibility.
My delegation fully aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered shortly by the observer of the European
Union. Allow me to make a few additional remarks.
We should like to encourage the Security Council
to continue identifying ways of enhancing partnerships
with various stakeholders and multilateral institutions
as well as regional and subregional organizations, with
greater emphasis on conflict prevention and the concept
of sustaining peace. We should also like to stress that
successful implementation of the current reform of the
United Nations, together with such further initiatives
as the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, are critical to
strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to react
to future challenges, including in terms of mediation,
prevention and sustaining peace. Besides having
close proximity to conflicts, regional and subregional
organizations have the local networks, knowledge and
expertise that allow them to play a leading role in the
area of peace and security, including in mediation and
settlement of disputes.
Slovakia will chair the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) next year. As the
Chairperson-in-Office for 2019, my country will work
to build bridges in support of multilateralism, promote
conflict prevention and focus on addressing the needs
of people on the ground. Over the years, the scope of
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations
has broadened and deepened on a range of matters.
We are ready to build on this enhanced collaboration
between the two organizations, based on the principles
of complementarity, subsidiarity and synergy.

18-4157955/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Security sector reform plays a critical role in
preventing conflict and sustaining peace. We are
encouraged to see that the place of security sector reform
in the sustaining peace agenda has been strengthened,
based on the constructive discussions Member States
have had on peacebuilding and sustaining peace this
year. We are of the view that a strong focus on security
sector reform and sustaining peace must continue in
the work of the United Nations, including that of the
Security Council.
Broad frameworks that outline the principles and
approaches to support for security sector reform have
been put in place by the African Union, the European
Union and the OSCE. Accordingly, I would like to
draw the Council’s attention to the mapping study
on enhancing multilateral support for security sector
reform undertaken by the Geneva Centre for the
Democratic Control of Armed Forces at the request of
the United Nations. The study presents the findings
on normative frameworks, institutional capacities
and operational practices of these three organizations
in support of security sector reform processes led
by individual States themselves. The report will be
presented at next week’s meeting of the Group of Friends
of Security Sector Reform. Existing partnerships
would benefit from improvement and, where needed,
new partnerships should be developed with a view to
strengthening the impact of support for international
security sector reform on the ground. I would also like
to take this opportunity to welcome the outcome of the
second Africa Forum on Security Sector Reform, held on
22 to 24 October at the African Union Headquarters in
Addis Ababa, on the topic of promoting the continent’s
security, justice and development agenda.
In conclusion, multilateralism has been broadly
recognized as the only way to address the problems
facing humankind. The work of regional organizations
in the area of peace and security is anchored in
multilateralism and is in the interest of all stakeholders
and Member States.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Mr. President, I would like to begin by thanking you for
organizing today’s open debate and for your valuable
remarks. I would also like to extend my gratitude to
56/74

06/12/2018

the Secretary-General and to the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for their meaningful input.
Furthermore, I associate myself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The most effective contribution that States can make
to the prevention and resolution of conflicts is to adhere
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations in
their relations with other States in word and deed and in
good faith. This, first and foremost, requires respecting
the political independence and territorial integrity of
other States, refraining from the threat or use of force,
settling international disputes by peaceful means, and
avoiding intervening in the internal matters of States.
The emergence of conflicts in certain cases is due to
lack of compliance with these important principles on
the part of one party or all parties concerned.
Our region has paid and continues to pay a heavy
price as certain countries have chosen to resort to
force to secure their national interests. If they remain
unchecked, such policies will cause new conflicts
to emerge or lead to the extension or deterioration of
ongoing ones. Moreover, we should stress the important
roles that States can play using their good offices to
de-escalate tensions, restore confidence, encourage
consultations and facilitate negotiations aimed at
preventing and resolving conflicts.
With respect to regional arrangements and agencies,
Chapter VIII of the Charter has clearly identified
the role that can be played by such arrangements or
agencies in conflict prevention and resolution. With the
consent of concerned parties, Chapter VIII can be borne
in mind when dealing with the peaceful settlement of
local disputes. It is clear that the effectiveness of the
efforts of such agencies and arrangements is dependent
to a large extent on their impartiality. Therefore, such
arrangements cannot and should not be abused by
some that seek to impose their will on the countries
of a region. This would be counterproductive, and, of
course, it violates the Charter of the United Nations.
In our view, neither can the United Nations disregard
the potentials of regional arrangements in conflict
prevention and resolution, nor can such arrangements
substitute for the United Nations in the discharge of
the duties entrusted to it by the Charter. The respective
roles of the United Nations and regional arrangements
should be considered to be complementary. Similarly,
all such activities must be carried out in full conformity
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

with the Charter, either by the United Nations or by the
regional arrangements.
In our view, the effectiveness of the role of the
United Nations in conflict prevention and resolution
hinges on its fully conforming with the Charter, on
consistency in the application of provisions thereof and
by avoiding politicization, selective approaches and so
on. Ultimately, nothing can better contribute to helping
the United Nations effectively fulfil its role in conflict
prevention and resolution than the trust and confidence
of the concerned parties to the Charter.
Last but not least, there is no alternative for the
principles of national ownership and the explicit consent
of parties concerned in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): We congratulate
Côte d’Ivoire on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December and for
convening today’s important debate.
We consider the proposed topic for today’s debate
to be pertinent to the overall workings of the United
Nations in terms of addressing various challenges faced
by its members. It is well established that regional
organizations, because of their particular sense of
history and culture and the strong bonds that often
exist among countries, not only know the root causes of
conflicts best but they are also well positioned to resolve
such conflicts peacefully. Indeed, on 20 November, in
this Chamber, we heard how the African Union (AU),
guided by its Agenda 2063 and its Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative, was making an increasingly significant
impact, but we also heard repeated emphasis on strong
cooperation and support among the countries of the
region, as well as from the United Nations and other
international partners (see S/PV.8407).
For its part, Indonesia remains determined to stand
shoulder to shoulder with Africa. Our partnership with
Africa has only become stronger since the historic
Bandung Conference of 1955, thanks to ongoing
mutual trust and our respect for African countries as
they chart their priorities. The partnership is currently
made manifest through numerous multifaceted
support programmes.
As a founding member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Indonesia has

S/PV. 8414

always promoted the role of regional and subregional
organizations in fostering peace. Indonesia also
strongly supports interregional engagement between
South-East Asia and all other regions. With its three
pillars of political-security community, economic
community, and sociocultural community, ASEAN
has truly become an ecosystem of collective peace
and prosperity. Relying exclusively on the peaceful
settlement of disputes, ASEAN’s many mechanisms
of cooperation and cross-fertilization under the three
pillars have led to virtually no conflict in the region
and provided robust peace dividends for development.
In that connection, we believe that greater recourse
to Chapter VI and Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations holds tremendous potential for making
the world more peaceful and stable.
Let me highlight several issues that need to
be taken into consideration in order to improve
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional arrangements for the prevention and
peaceful resolution of conflicts.
First, the restructuring of the United Nations
peace and security pillar should place a stronger
emphasis on cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations. Regular and meaningful consultation
among the United Nations and regional organizations is
critical. In that regard, we welcome the focus to enhance
substantive interaction and practical frameworks
between the United Nations and ASEAN, as well as
with the AU and other regional organizations.
Secondly, countries in the regions, particularly
those that have an important bearing on conflicts, must
act responsibly and become part of the solution. One
of the observations in the Secretary-General’s report
on United Nations activities in support of mediation
(A/72/115) is that there has been a substantial rise
in the regionalization and internationalization of
conflicts, complicating their resolution. The zero-sum
approach must be renounced. Helping to ensure that
peace prevails will ultimately benefit everyone. It is
also imperative that the Security Council maintain the
practice of dialogue involving all countries concerned
with a view to finding a lasting solution to the problem
that is acceptable to all the countries involved.
Thirdly, even when regional organizations are fully
determined to play their role, they can do only so much
if the Security Council does not stand by the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, international law

18-4157957/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and international humanitarian law, based on the spirit
of multilateralism. Just as regional arrangements must
not hold back in advancing credible and regionally
owned solutions to sustaining peace, the Council must
not hold back in enlisting their support, as well as in
upholding the Charter and international law.
Fourthly, adequate resources to ensure that
regional mechanisms can meet their commitments
are critical. Responding to the proposals of the High
Representative for the AU Peace Fund, the SecretaryGeneral has pointed to financial options to support
AU-initiated peace-support operations. It is essential
that the Council also play its part in addressing that
issue. In that regard, we support the draft resolution on
financing African Union-led peace-support operations
currently being discussed by Council members.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
Indonesia will continue to play an active role in
helping to facilitate a better harnessing of the regional
expertise and networks of influence. Through our
upcoming membership of the Security Council, we are
also determined to work intensively to place a higher
emphasis on dialogue, prevention and principles based
on the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to warmly congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Côte d’Ivoire’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to assure you of
our full support in your work.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to join other speakers in expressing
our appreciation for your initiative to convene today’s
discussion on the role on international actors in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts. The subject is
of particular importance to my delegation. I hope that
from my statement, members will understand why
that is so. First, let me say that Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union.
Having faced military aggression for almost five
years, Ukraine firmly believes in the need to strengthen
the existing instruments and to further improve and
fine-tune the applicable practices at the disposal of
the international community in order to increase the
efficiency of our collective efforts in the prevention
58/74

06/12/2018

and resolution of conflicts. It is especially pertinent in
today’s world, where it is extremely difficult to achieve
a climate of trust and confidence. Instead, bellicose and
confrontational policies and actions set the overall tone.
There is no doubt that, as a universal body enjoying
a unique level of legitimacy, the United Nations must be
as active as possible in preventing potential conflicts, as
well as in addressing the ongoing ones. As the previous
Secretary-General stated in his report on the United
Nations and conflict prevention of 2015 (S/2015/730),
while Member States bear the primary responsibility
for conflict prevention, the United Nations, with its
universal membership, impartiality and the legitimacy
derived from the principles of the Charter, has an
important and unique role to play. The United Nations
has played its role in various regions at different times.
However, in a number of cases, it was and still is notably
absent. In our opinion, that means that the potential of
the United Nations is far from being fully realized. It
also means that the Organization must, as a priority,
step up its efforts in the areas of both the prevention
and the resolution of conflicts.
In that regard, from the perspective of a European
country, we would like to see more robust practical
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). It is highly commendable that the practice of
yearly briefings to the Security Council by the OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office has been established. Annual
staff-level meetings also contribute to building closer
ties between the two organizations. However, the
practical cooperation is rather limited, while the two
sides could benefit greatly from a closer partnership.
It is well known that the OSCE remains at the
forefront of international efforts towards the resolution
of the Russian-Ukrainian conflict. The OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine has indeed become
an indispensable part of the political efforts to find a
solution to the conflict. The Mission’s reports serve as
a valuable source of information about the real situation
in the temporarily occupied areas of Ukraine, marked
by a significant Russian presence and regular inflows
of modern Russian weaponry through the uncontrolled
segment of the Ukraine-Russia State border.
The idea of establishing a full-fledged peacekeeping
operation in the occupied areas of the Donbas region
of Ukraine mandated by the Security Council is still
on the table. If it comes to fruition — and we hope
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

that it does — the eventual multinational presence,
in implementing its tasks, will also have to closely
coordinate with and support the work of the OSCE,
including by creating the proper security conditions for
the unhindered implementation of its mandate by the
Special Monitoring Mission.
We are convinced that confidence-building
measures constitute an important step in the process
towards a political and diplomatic resolution of any
conflict. From that perspective, the release by the
Russian Federation of all Ukrainian political prisoners
and illegally detained persons, including the crews
of the three Ukrainian naval vessels captured on
26 November in international waters in the Black Sea,
will be a crucial benchmark for assessing Moscow’s
readiness to embark on the path of de-escalation.
In order to make progress towards the resolution of
the Russian-Ukrainian conflict, it is also necessary to
create a solid security foundation, which should involve
not only concrete measures and steps in the conflictaffected areas of Donbas but also the de-escalation of
the situation in the Black Sea and Azov Sea region. The
latter includes the immediate release by Russia of the
24 Ukrainian prisoners of war whom I mentioned and
the return of the vessels seized in the Black Sea, as well
as restoration of the freedom of navigation through the
Kerch Strait and in the Sea of Azov.
We believe that the OSCE and its Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, with the support of
the Normandy format countries and other partners, can
play an indispensable role to that end. For our part, we
are ready for constructive negotiations to find a solution
to the conflict. We will also welcome productive and
results-oriented contributions to the process from
the United Nations, the OSCE, the Normandy format
countries and other partners.
In conclusion, my delegation strongly believes
that boosting United Nations conflict prevention and
resolution capacities, expanding its respective toolbox,
and encouraging and supporting its cooperation with
relevant regional organizations on such issues is a
worthy goal for States Members of the United Nations
to pursue.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): The Dominican Republic commends

S/PV. 8414

the initiative of Côte d’Ivoire to hold this open debate on
the role of States, regional arrangements and the United
Nations in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
At the same time, we thank the Secretary-General,
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States for their briefings
this morning.
Today’s debate comes at a particularly opportune
time, as threats to international peace and security
have become increasingly complex, with cross-border
elements and regional dimensions. The Dominican
Republic believes that the strategic partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations is vital
to address the current global security challenges. In
addition, the multifaceted partnership between the
Security Council and regional organizations could
serve as a solid foundation for the future global security
agenda.
Latin America and the Caribbean is a zone of
peace, which has allowed us to cooperate in the pursuit
of sustainable development as one of the pillars of
stability. For us, meeting the needs of the people
constitutes, essentially, support for peace. That vision
guides the Organization of American States, the Union
of South American Nations, the Southern Common
Market, the Central American Integration System and
the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States.
The Charter of the United Nations underlines
the critical importance of conflict prevention as a
responsibility of the entire United Nations system. That
is the Dominican Republic’s interpretation of Chapter
VIII of the Charter, which prompts us to promote
multilateralism as an effective means for including
regional and subregional organizations in addressing
crises or conflicts that may affect security and peace.
We therefore believe that collective action can be
strengthened by involving regional and subregional
bodies, particularly in prevention, development and
post-conflict work. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, with its objective of peaceful, inclusive
and sustainable societies, together with the sustaining
peace agenda, is the blueprint for prevention.
In order to overcome the great challenges of our
times, it is becoming increasingly imperative to address
the immediate and deep-seated causes of conflicts,
allowing communities, civil society, Governments,

18-4157959/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

organizations and other international institutions to
participate in a more meaningful way. It is crucial to
address the root causes of conflict and instability long
before they reach the agenda of the Council. The United
Nations must continue its excellent effort to cooperate
closely with regional partners, whether in a leadership
or support role, to prevent conflict and to maintain
international peace and security. We have seen
many successful examples of regional organizations
responding to emerging crises in order to prevent
an escalation into conflict. However, for successful
cooperation over the long term, a more systematic
arrangement is needed based on recognizing threats
and working together to deal with them.
Finally, we must identify and tackle the social roots
of violence. As the international community continues
to struggle to address destabilizing conflicts and their
repercussions, it is necessary to establish guidelines
for increased United Nations participation in efforts to
address conflicts. Prevention work requires a political
commitment on the part of the relevant actors to deal
with situations that, due to their nature, pose the risk of
a resurgence of or a return to conflict. In that regard,
the Dominican Republic reiterates its commitment to
international peace and security, which is the objective
towards which we must work together so that the United
Nations can consistently fulfil its fundamental tasks.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank your country, Mr. President, for
organizing this important open debate, which deals
with one of the highest priorities on the agenda of the
international community, namely, the issue of conflict
prevention and resolution. That topic is being discussed
in the context of reforming the international peace and
security system of the United Nations and promoting
the concept of preventive diplomacy.
We thank the Secretary-General, the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the President of
the Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States for their valuable briefings this morning.
We also associate ourselves with the statement delivered
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
There is no doubt that Côte d’Ivoire embodies one of
the success stories in the maintenance of peace and the
peaceful settlement of disputes through the utilization
of available United Nations tools. That begins with
60/74

06/12/2018

the activation of peacekeeping mechanisms, followed
by peacebuilding and strengthening reconstruction
and development, and culminates in the achievement
of peace and its sustainability. President Alassane
Ouattara described that positive example in detail when
he presided over yesterday’s productive meeting (see
S/PV.8413).
We all feel that we need more support for the efforts
being made in Africa to ensure a more integrated and
comprehensive approach in dealing with the challenges
and the root causes of the problems. In that regard, I
would like to mention that Cairo stands ready to host
the headquarters of the African Union Centre for PostConflict Reconstruction and Development.
Egypt is also preparing to preside over the African
Union at the beginning of next year. We express our
commitment to leading the efforts of the African Union
in order to establish a real partnership with the United
Nations and Africa’s main partners, with a view to
supporting a more coherent and practical approach
in dealing with the countless challenges facing the
continent.
Egypt is especially committed to the African Union
concerning participation in revitalizing and adopting
a framework of action for the African Union and its
policies with regard to post-conflict reconstruction
and development. We seek to encourage an approach
that focuses on sustaining peace in order to ensure that
we can adopt a long-term vision for dealing with the
challenges facing the relevant African States.
We believe that a partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations based on a stronger
sense of ownership by the African Union would help
to advance the implementation of the relevant United
Nations plans and strategies. We must consider those
plans and strategies as a whole and as a comprehensive
framework that aligns the various initiatives and
strategies focusing on Africa’s real needs and priorities.
In an attempt to achieve that, Egypt held a workshop
on the Sahel region in Cairo on 15 and 16 October in
order to entrench that approach at the regional and
international levels. Various relevant stakeholders from
the Group of Five for the Sahel met with representatives
of the African Union Commission, the United Nations
and other major partners. Egypt continues to play a
constructive role and to be active as a member of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

We would like to highlight the following points for
the Council’s consideration.
First, the complex, multidimensional and regional
nature of the challenges facing peace and security in
the world today, in particular in Africa, makes it all
the more difficult to move from short-term stability to
long-term peace and development.
Second, the real challenge facing us is how to
translate political and strategic commitments into
concrete programmes and practical projects that deal
with the root causes of instability, while focusing
particularly on marginalized border areas in conflict
zones.
Third, international assistance must prioritize pilot
programmes aimed at strengthening institutions and
national and local capacities in the areas of security
and socioeconomic development. Such an approach
would ensure sustainability and feasibility of collective
investment in international peace.
Fourth, we should adopt an approach that focuses on
people, including all local communities and population
centres, and gives priority to the empowerment of
women and young people, while ensuring the inclusion
of all sectors of society in the peacemaking operations
and their engagement in the future of their country.
Fifth, despite is extreme importance with regard to
saving lives and meeting urgent demands, humanitarian
aid must not be to the detriment of technical cooperation
aimed at the capacity-building of the relevant countries.
Once again, long-term sustainability requires
investments in the areas of capacity-building and
governance.
Sixth, partnerships and resources must be based
on long-term strategies for reconstruction and
development. It is therefore important to mobilize
and allocate predictable and sustainable resources in
order to ensure the implementation of peacebuilding
programmes.
Seventh and lastly, as Cairo prepares to inaugurate
the African Union Post-Conflict Reconstruction and
Development Centre, we stress that the new Centre
should be a foundation for planning and for supporting
partners.
In conclusion, in September my country endorsed
the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, as part of the

S/PV. 8414

Secretary-General’s Action for Peace initiative, as well
as the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians.
That is an affirmation of Egypt’s continued commitment
to achieving more effective peacekeeping operations in
the future.
In November, the Foreign Ministry of Egypt and
the Cairo International Centre for Conflict Resolution
hosted a high-level regional conference on improving
the performance of peacekeeping operations with the
participation of senior United Nations officials. Its goal
was to build on the Declaration of Shared Commitments
and to provide troop-contributing countries with the
opportunity to participate in the relevant discussions on
developing peace operations. Under its chairmanship
of the African Union next year, Egypt will continue
to focus on deepening the strategic partnership with
the United Nations in the areas of peacebuilding,
peacekeeping and post-conflict development and
reconstruction in Africa. We look forward to further
international cooperation in order to pool efforts for
achieving peace, stability and security in our continent
and throughout the world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): I thank the
Permanent Mission of Côte d’Ivoire for organizing
this open debate. It provides an opportunity for us to
reflect on the roles of the United Nations, regional
organizations and Member States in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts.
Let me start with the role of the United Nations,
whose peacekeepers are broadly seen as one of the most
effective tools available to help prevent and resolve
conflicts and promote international peace and security,
as reiterated in the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations in the
context of the alliance for peacekeeping. The Action for
Peacekeeping initiative has already received extensive
support from the United Nations membership and
partners. The Declaration also reiterates the principle
of the primacy of politics and emphasizes the need for
innovative partnerships with regional organizations.
In our view, those two recommendations reinforce
one another. Regional organizations often provide a
unique perspective of conflict dynamics, and taking
their views into account can help us to strengthen our
prevention and mediation capacities. To mention but a
few examples in our own region, Brazil highlights the

18-4157961/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

important role that the Organization of American States
and the Caribbean Community can play and has played
in ensuring peaceful relations in the region, including
in cooperation with the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti. We also commend the engagement
of regional and subregional actors in peace processes
in other regions, such as in South Sudan, Burundi and
the Central African Republic, among others, in Africa.
Those are sound examples of how regional arrangements
can contribute to the peaceful resolution of disputes,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The notion that the United Nations should ensure
peace and prevent conflict is deeply rooted in the
identity of our Organization. It translates, for instance,
into the three basic principles of peacekeeping — the
consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of
force — which are deemed one of the reasons for the
success of United Nations peacekeeping operations. In
his most recent briefings, the Secretary-General clearly
made his point in arguing that regional organizations
might be a more suitable tool for addressing situations
that require peace enforcement and counter-terrorism
activities. Under exceptional circumstances, the
Security Council can and has authorized Member
States and regional organizations to use force in order
to achieve peace. Brazil has consistently argued that
any such actions must be judicious and proportionate
and adhere to international law. We emphasize the need
to remain vigilant so as to avoid causing unnecessary
harm to civilian populations, to monitor the situation
and to require periodic reporting. We therefore welcome
initiatives such as resolution 2391 (2017), which calls
for the Group of Five for the Sahel States (G-5 Sahel) to
uphold international law, including international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, as well
as to take into account a gender perspective in all G-5
Sahel Joint Force operations. We are following the
Secretary-General’s reports on the operationalization
of that initiative and encourage the Council to continue
to pay attention to those aspects whenever it considers
authorizing third parties to use force.
In their role as troop/police-contributors, Member
States have a responsibility to provide peacekeeping
operations with disciplined, well-trained and motivated
personnel. On that front, Brazil has been engaged in the
predeployment training of African military engineers
through triangular partnership projects. The Brazilian
Peace Operations Joint Training Centre maintains
62/74

06/12/2018

several cooperation projects with troop-contributing
countries, with a view to exchanging best practices
in peacekeeping operations and to improving the
predeployment training of peacekeepers.
Another task attributed to Member States is
ensuring that all peacekeeping operations pursuing
mandates that were established by the Security
Council are adequately funded. That is particularly
critical in the context of the expanding mandates and
responsibilities of peacekeeping missions, combined
with increasing security concerns with regard to the
troops on the ground. Permanent members of the
Council should therefore be expected to assume a larger
share of the responsibility in that regard, as reflected
in the current peacekeeping scale of assessment. It is
not reasonable to expect developing countries to have
additional financial responsibilities for the Security
Council’s decisions without the corresponding reform
of its composition.
Allow me to reiterate Brazil’s long-standing
support for non-military means to address security
challenges. As stated by the Secretary-General in one
of his previous reports: “It costs far more to pick up
the pieces after crisis than it does to prevent crisis.”
(S/2018/525, p. 1)
The challenge ahead of us is to shift from a
crisis-oriented approach to long-term engagement
aimed at promoting self-sustaining cycles of peace
and development. It is essential in that regard that we
remain committed to the continuous strengthening
of the peacebuilding architecture, in particular to the
need of achieving a quantum leap in the Peacebuilding
Fund. In our experience of chairing the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, we
can testify that creating lasting peace is necessarily
a collaborative endeavour. As such, it often
requires external partners, regional and subregional
organizations, Government authorities and local actors
to work together.
United Nations resolutions often state that Member
States bear the primary responsibility for preventing
conflict, protecting civilians and sustaining peace. But
when we evoke the principle of national ownership, we
should not be oblivious to the important roles of the
international community, international and regional
organizations and the United Nations in collaborating
with Member States in their efforts to realize lasting
peace and sustainable development.
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Serge Christiane, Acting Deputy Head
of Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Christiane (spoke in French): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate country Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align
themselves with this statement.
Due to the trauma and suffering caused by
conflicts around the world, since the first day of
his mandate, the Secretary-General has called for
greater diplomatic efforts to put an end to crises. This
year, he also reminded us that prevention, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding are and will remain
top priorities for the entire United Nations system.
In response to that call, we have focused our efforts
on the critical importance of conflict prevention
during several high-level meetings, such as the highlevel debate on peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
as well as the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit. In the
political declaration that we unanimously adopted on
that occasion (General Assembly resolution 73/1), we
expressed our full support for the work of the United
Nations and said that we would make every possible
effort to support peace processes, conflict prevention
and resolution, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction and development. We also commended
the establishment of the High-level Advisory Board on
Mediation and intend to support its future contributions
to the maintenance of international peace and security
and the prevention of armed conflict, in particular by
exercising its good offices.
Achieving peace and conflict prevention and the
promotion and protection of human rights are priorities
for the European Union. Those principles are at the
heart of multilateralism. In that context, I would like
to focus on the first guiding question in the concept
note prepared by the Council presidency (S/2018/1064,
annex), which looks at how the United Nations,
States and subregional and regional organizations
can strengthen their cooperation on the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts in practice.

S/PV. 8414

The strategic vision of the European Union is to
support the multilateral system and join forces with
our partners through international cooperation. The
European Union and the United Nations have a long
history of cooperation in the area of conflict prevention,
including through support for mediation. We have
initiated a dialogue on conflict prevention, focusing
on both thematic and geographical issues. We have
also engaged in similar dialogues with other partners,
including the African Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. In October,
the United Nations Mediation Support Unit and the
European Union Mediation Support Team jointly
organized an informal seminar on mediation support
structures in international organizations. That allowed
us to take stock, exchange experiences and discuss the
possibilities for joint missions.
We continue to assess the complementarity of
our actions with a view to improving their impact on
the ground. Those priorities are within the broader
context of the partnership between the European Union
and the United Nations, within which we continue to
promote the rules-based international order as the most
effective means of strengthening conflict prevention
and resolution. As part of our strategic cooperation, the
twenty-fourth meeting of the United Nations-European
Union Steering Committee on Crisis Management
concluded last week, having identified eight priority
areas for action over the coming three years. Those
priorities are aligned with United Nations reform
efforts, in particular the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. The pre-eminence of politics is the common
theme of our partnership, with conflict prevention as a
guiding principle. In that regard, strengthening the use
of preventive instruments in peace operations, such as
mediation, early-warning systems, consistent political
messages and strategic communication are high on
the agenda. In all those priority areas, respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms, international
humanitarian law and the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda remain essential.
Despite all those efforts, there is room to improve
efficiency. We have all nurtured strong relationships
with international and regional organizations, such
as the African Union. Partnerships are a catalyst for
achieving our common goals. Therefore, at the trilateral
meeting between the African Union, the European
Union and the United Nations, our leaders decided
to increase and broaden trilateral cooperation at the

18-4157963/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

political, economic and operational levels in the area
of peace and security, including conflict prevention
and mediation; on implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the African Union’s
Agenda 2063; as well as with a view to ensuring
inclusive and sustainable growth, the promotion of
human rights and the fight against climate change.
Together, we will seek to translate our common
priorities into concrete actions by strengthening
our cooperation and making it more operational, as
recommended at the joint meeting between the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union and the
Political and Security Committee of the Council of
the European Union in October. Over the past year,
the Security Council has adopted mandates calling for
joint assessments of climate security risks, particularly
in Africa. Similarly, both the African Union and the
European Union have confirmed the link between
climate and security. By working together across
regional and international organizations to analyse and
assess risks, we can ensure that we are using the same
benchmarks.
Instability is no longer the result of open conflict
alone, but increasingly of the unmet political and
economic expectations of a young and growing
population, compounded by challenges such as violent
extremism and organized crime. We must continue
to focus on empowering women and young people
and bolstering social cohesion, while responding to
precarious situations. We must also focus more on
strengthening the link between peacebuilding and the
participation of local populations, particularly through
civil society organizations on the ground. Our action
must adapt to that new reality and take into account the
complex dynamics of conflict by adopting an integrated
approach that applies to all phases of the conflict cycle.
Beyond our peacebuilding aspirations, we must
also aim to make peace sustainable, particularly in the
pursuit of our 2030 Agenda commitments. Inclusive
economic development and building resilience are
at the heart of prevention. Our cooperation with the
United Nations and the World Bank on joint recovery
and peacebuilding assessments in a number of postconflict countries is a promising development in that
regard.
The European Consensus on Development, in line
with the 2030 Agenda, considers peace as one of the
main priorities. The European Union-United Nations
64/74

06/12/2018

joint communiqué issued in September emphasizes
strengthening the link between humanitarian assistance
and development and its relationship with sustaining
peace. Joint efforts by the European Union and the
United Nations must address the root causes of conflict
and promote economic and social stability.
The new momentum for United Nations reform
seeks to ensure better coordination between the
pillars of peace and security, development and human
rights. In that context, we attach great importance
to the implementation of the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. We also stress the need to make maximum use
of the unifying role of the Peacebuilding Commission,
as well as its advisory role to the Security Council.
The Charter of the United Nations encourages
us to take effective collective action and to pursue
international cooperation to strengthen universal peace.
To that end and for the benefit of present and future
generations, we would like to once again stress the need
to work towards establishing new partnerships in an
effective and coherent way and in close collaboration
with key international and regional partners.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ghana.
Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): Ghana joins previous speakers
in thanking the Côte d’Ivoire presidency of the Security
Council for convening this high-level meeting on the
role of States, regional arrangements and the United
Nations in the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
a theme that is at the very heart of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We all have a primary responsibility as Member
States to individually and collectively pursue
the overriding moral, political and humanitarian
imperative of preventing the outbreak, continuation
and escalation of or relapse into conflict. The complex,
multidimensional and transboundary nature of conflicts
today, as well as new and emerging threats to peace and
security, call for enhancing strategic and operational
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations. As implied under Chapter VIII of the
Charter, the responsibility for peace and security must
be shared, and the success of our joint efforts will
depend to a large extent on our political commitment
to more effectively utilize the tools provided in the
Charter under regional and subregional arrangements.
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Joint collaborative efforts between the United
Nations and regional and subregional arrangements
have proved successful in conflict prevention and
resolution. Your own country, Mr. President, is a
glowing example of such successful outcomes. Such
efforts have been particularly instrumental in dealing
with difficult political transitions, defusing tensions
and encouraging political dialogues ahead of highly
contentious elections, resolving electoral crises and
ending political deadlocks.
The conclusion in April 2017 of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security is therefore a welcome
development. The Joint Framework provides a platform
for regular consultations, joint horizon scanning,
joint assessment and good offices missions, joint or
similar messaging and mutual capacity enhancement
towards conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.
The memorandum of understanding between the
African Union Commission and the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office, together with the African
Union’s post-conflict reconstruction and development
policy, will foster collaborative actions that are critical
for sustaining peace. It is my delegation’s hope that
those initiatives will benefit from greater support from
Member States in order to ensure maximum benefits
for peacebuilding.
In a similar vein, the Organization’s multifaceted
engagement and partnership with the Economic
Community of West African States has effectively
made the subregional body a vital partner in the areas
of conflict prevention, mediation and resolution,
as well as in peacebuilding and the strengthening of
regional capacities. We call for the strengthening
of that partnership through regular thematic
intergovernmental dialogues on critical areas for the
West Africa subregion.
Cooperation between the United Nations, regional
arrangements and Member States in the maintenance
of peace and security has been more pronounced in
the area of peacekeeping. All Member States, and
particularly troop- and police-contributing countries,
are important stakeholders in peacekeeping. In that
regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, which is aimed at enhancing
partnerships and efficiencies in that important pillar.
Burden-sharing is paramount for success, and we wish
to add our voice to calls for enhancing the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for African

S/PV. 8414

Union-led peace support operations authorized by the
Security Council.
My delegation also wishes to take this opportunity
to call for greater harmonization of standards between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations as a way of improving transitions from
regional operations to United Nations-supervised
missions. Increased systematic coordination and
consultation on policies, guidance and training
standards would ensure coherence in all phases, from
the planning to the drawdown of operations.
In conclusion, we wish to stress the importance
of fostering political dialogue, national reconciliation,
democratic governance, justice and accountability,
respect for human rights and the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security. A
comprehensive approach to sustaining peace must
include sustainable development, with inclusiveness at
the heart of our efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): Before I begin my
statement, allow me, on behalf of Romania, to convey
our heartfelt condolences to the American people and
the Government of the United States on the passing of
former President George H. W. Bush.
(spoke in French)
I wish to commend Côte d’Ivoire for having taken
the initiative to organize this open debate on the role of
States, regional organizations and the United Nations
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would now
like to make a few remarks in my national capacity.
Prevention is a pivotal instrument for the
maintenance of international peace and security, a
concept that lies at the heart of the Charter of the United
Nations. Prevention is also a quiet and often overlooked
strategy, as media attention most often focuses on
the conflicts that have erupted and not on those that
have been averted. In this connection, I wish to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, for his
commitment to making conflict prevention one of his
priorities and thereby giving it the visibility it deserves.
Romania has 100 years of experience in multilateral
diplomacy. My country was a founding member of the

18-4157965/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

League of Nations in 1919 and, since joining the United
Nations in 1955, has invested heavily in preventive
diplomacy, conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
mediation. Over the past 27 years, Romania has
contributed more than 12,500 police officers, military
and close protection officers to 25 United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Today, Romania is among
the European Union’s highest contributors of police
officers under the flag of the United Nations and is the
sole State Member of the United Nations to provide
close protection units for senior dignitaries in high-risk
areas.
The particular importance that my country attaches
to the subject we are discussing today is also reflected
in the fact that Romania chairs the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as in our priorities as Chair. These
include promoting a regional approach in the work of
the Commission and strengthening partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations — particularly
the African Union — and with international financial
institutions such as the World Bank and the African
Development Bank, as well as with civil-society
organizations. Equally important is the implementation
of peacebuilding and peacekeeping by lending support
to conflict-affected countries throughout the entire
conflict cycle — from prevention to reconstruction and
development. Here I would add that prevention not only
saves lives but also constitutes a cost-effective strategy.
As Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Romania has consistently supported the efforts of the
Secretary-General and all actions aimed at reforming
and improving the peacebuilding and peacekeeping
architecture to ensure better coordination among
the pillars, from the conflict-prevention stage to the
peacebuilding stage. Romania has also promoted a
more visible role for the Peacebuilding Commission
as a liaison between the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. It
has also striven to improve cooperation among these
three United Nations organs to ensure more coherent
peacebuilding efforts.
Above all, we believe that preventive diplomacy
requires inclusion. In this context and in terms of crosscutting issues, we wish to highlight the importance
of the participation of women and young people in
mediation processes. No progress can be made without
their involvement.
66/74

06/12/2018

We are also pleased that Côte d’Ivoire is drawing
attention to the subject of cooperation with regional
organizations, as Romania submitted the first draft
resolution on cooperation with regional organizations,
namely, resolution 1631 (2005), which was adopted
under the Romanian presidency of the Security Council.
This resolution was based on our firm belief that the
creation of complementarity and subsidiarity between
the United Nations and regional undertakings would
lead to their mutual strengthening.
As Romania prepares to assume the presidency of
the Council of the European Union from 1 January 2019,
we remain convinced of the need for the promotion of
cooperation with regional organizations.
Finally, I would like to reiterate the commitment of
Romania, as a candidate country for a non-permanent
seat on the Security Council for the period 2020-2021,
to preventive diplomacy in all its aspects.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Denktaş (Turkey): The number of conflicts in
the world is on the rise, and they are increasingly of
an intra-State nature. Asymmetrical threats are more
serious than ever and transcend national borders.
The various root causes of conflict can be adequately
addressed only through a combination of tools. In the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, a strengthened
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, is indispensable.
We must do better to strengthen the bonds the United
Nations shares with regional bodies, which requires
strategic, long-term and mutually beneficial efforts.
Turkey fully supports the leading role of the
United Nations, and we are committed to expanding
the partnership of the United Nations with regional
organizations in conflict-prevention, mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.
A large portion of the Council’s agenda deals with
peace and security challenges in Africa. We are pleased
to note that the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations has been strengthened,
enhanced and deepened, especially in the last decade.
We also welcome the increasing coordination and
coherence between the African Union and subregional
organizations on the continent, whose efforts will
further consolidate African leadership and ownership
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

in overcoming the challenges that Africa faces.
The United Nations-AU partnership can be further
intensified by strengthening the institutionalization of
this relationship.
Besides the African Union, organizations such
as the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building
Measures in Asia, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, NATO, the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States and the Organization of American
States all have important roles to play in ensuring peace
and stability, together with the United Nations.
There are a number of principles that we deem
important when it comes to the engagement of the
United Nations with regional organizations. First,
effective partnerships between the United Nations
and regional organizations must be rooted in respect
for regional processes and contexts. Secondly, every
conflict situation has its own circumstances, and no
organization can impose a one-size-fits-all approach to
the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
Thirdly, we can benefit from the experiences of
different regional settings to improve our problemsolving practices, and lastly, we need more innovative
and flexible partnerships that draw on the strengths of
the respective organizations and also take account of
their comparative advantages.
We see this open debate as a good opportunity
to take stock of what we have achieved so far and
reflect on the way forward. We hope that the ideas
expressed today will be helpful in paving the way
for a strengthened, enhanced and mutually beneficial
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We thank the Côte d’Ivoire presidency
for having organized it.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Ms. Boucher (Canada) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to join other speakers in thanking
Côte d’Ivoire for having organized this open debate, as
well as yesterday’s debate, which was presided over by
President Ouattara (see S/PV.8413). I can think of no
more critical subject to discuss in this Chamber.
The prevention of violent conflict is at the heart of
both the Charter of the United Nations and of the rulesbased international order that we have built together.

S/PV. 8414

Together, we have achieved considerable success in
preventing and resolving conflicts. This is especially
clear in the case of West Africa. Fifteen years ago, the
Council was seized of crises such as the civil wars in
Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire and Sierra Leone. Today, the last
peacekeepers have withdrawn, and those three countries
are no longer on the Council’s agenda. This is a story
of determination and perseverance, as demonstrated
by the Economic Community of West African States
and the African Union and its member States. It is a
story of partnership. As the response to the crisis in
the Gambia demonstrated, when action among regional
and international partners is closely coordinated, such
partnerships deliver results.
Canada recognizes the important contributions and
key leadership of African States, the African Union
(AU) and subregional organizations in improving
the effectiveness of United Nations peace operations
and peacebuilding more generally. We welcome the
development of regional and subregional early-warning
mechanisms across the continent. We welcome also
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security and
encourage its full implementation.
We are committed to contributing to capacitybuilding in African countries and to working together
to develop African-led solutions to increase the impact
of efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts. Furthermore,
we believe that, beyond the annual joint consultative
meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the United Nations Security Council,
further opportunities exist to strengthen cooperation
between the Councils, including through joint field
visits.
Together, we can accomplish more. This is why
we encourage efforts to find more predictable, flexible
and sustainable financing mechanisms for African-led
peace operations, and we hope to see concrete progress
on developing such mechanisms.
(spoke in English)
Fundamentally, preventing conflict and sustaining
peace is about building trust between Governments
and their peoples. Such trust cannot be established
haphazardly. Only by fostering inclusive institutions
that bring in and amplify diverse voices — including
those of women, young people and indigenous, ethnic
and religious minorities — can meaningful and
sustainable peace take hold.

18-4157967/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Peace cannot be imposed from the outside, and
it cannot be built overnight. But the United Nations,
its Member States and regional organizations have a
critical role to play in helping Governments respond
to the needs of their populations and protect their
human rights, and in helping populations to hold their
Governments to account.
On the ground, in Mali, Canada is assisting
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, working with the Institut
malien de recherche-action pour la paix and Interpeace,
to better understand the conflict dynamics and sources
of resilience in Ansongo, Bourem and Gao. This
process has involved consultation with local authorities,
women’s groups, youth groups and security and defence
forces with a view to finding consensus-based solutions
to the priorities for peace as they define them. Better
understanding between communities builds trust; trust
builds confidence; and trusting, confident communities
build peace together.
Finally, in order for the international community
itself to remain a trusted partner in conflict prevention,
our own systems need to reform to ensure greater
accountability, transparency, predictability and
coherence.
Canada strongly supports the Secretary-General’s
vision on conflict prevention and sustaining peace. We
welcome his plans to restructure the United Nations
peace and security architecture, his 2018 report on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2018/43) and the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. The United NationsWorld Bank Pathways for Peace report sets forward a
compelling, evidence-based case for these reforms, and
we endorse without reservation its recommendations to
reduce fragmentation.
As a stalwart defender of multilateral approaches
to addressing conflict, Canada is committed to
working together, with the Council, to ensure that our
institutions and approaches embody the very best that
the international community has to offer. Should we be
elected to serve on the Security Council for the 20212022 term, Council members can be sure that Canada
will continue to work tirelessly towards this goal.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would like
to thank the presidency of the Security Council, held by
68/74

06/12/2018

the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, for having convened this
important open debate on the role of States, regional
arrangements and the United Nations in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts.
Azerbaijan aligns itself with the statement made
earlier today by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. I would like to make some
additional remarks in my national capacity.
The prevention of conflict is critical to ensuring
a peaceful international environment. In a number of
situations, efforts to that end have successfully reduced
tensions and helped prevent bloodshed. Furthermore,
important progress has been achieved in enhancing
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
arrangements across a full range of areas — from
the maintenance of international peace and security
and humanitarian assistance to development and the
protection of human rights.
However, serious challenges remain, and my
country’s practical experience of facing armed
aggression, foreign military occupation and ethnic
cleansing is illustrative in that regard. Despite Security
Council resolutions, demands and condemnation by
the international community and ongoing conflictsettlement efforts within the framework of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the
Nagorno Karabakh region and seven other surrounding
districts of Azerbaijan remain under unlawful military
occupation, even as deliberate actions are being carried
out in the occupied territories with a view to securing
their colonization and annexation, in clear violation of
international law.
As the concept note (S/2018/1064, annex) rightly
emphasizes, many contemporary conflicts are internal
crises, which in a growing number of cases are taking
place in environments where the situation is severely
exacerbated by new threats and challenges. At the same
time, the nature of conflict has changed significantly
over the years. It is abundantly clear that the boundary
between intra-State and inter-State conflicts has
become increasingly blurred in recent decades.
The most frequent and complicated instances
include attempts by States to camouflage aggression and
disguise their role in fuelling conflicts on the territories
of other States. This obviously imposes an additional
burden on the international system and mechanisms and
on the various regional and subregional organizations
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

dealing with conflict prevention and resolution.
Against this background, in some instances regional
arrangements are clearly misused by those who violate
international law as a shield for consolidating military
gains and undermining efforts to achieve solutions to
regional conflicts and other security problems.
The concept note raises a fundamental question
as to how cooperation between the United Nations,
States and regional and subregional organizations in
the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts
can be strengthened in practice. Most importantly,
consistency should be maintained in identifying ways
and means for the international community to respond
to crises and conflicts, as well as to any apparent
distortion of international legal norms and principles.
Needless to say, the implementation of the resolutions
adopted by the principal organs of the United Nations
as well as accountability must be part and parcel of the
collective efforts towards that end.
The purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations constitute a foundational normative
framework in international relations. There is no
alternative to commonly agreed rules and their universal
application, including in particular with regard to the
resolution of conflicts, whatever their distinct root
causes and characteristics.
The fulfilment in good faith of the obligations
assumed by States based on full respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
the inviolability of their international borders are
prerequisites for the maintenance of international
and regional peace and security and are at the core of
economic cooperation and sustainable development.
It is our common duty to promote and support a
reinvigorated and strengthened multilateral system.
The involvement of States and regional, subregional and
other intergovernmental organizations and their close
cooperation with the United Nations must be reinforced
and integrated into a reformed peace architecture.
My country, Azerbaijan, will continue to be an active
partner in that process.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Allow me to express my
sincere gratitude to Côte d’Ivoire for its presidency and
for convening today’s debate.

S/PV. 8414

Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to make a few remarks in my national
capacity.
Today’s topic allows us to brainstorm on how
to make the best use of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, which addresses regional
arrangements. Indeed, regional organizations naturally
have a deeper expertise and understanding of regional
security matters.
With respect to our region, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has at
its disposal a useful toolbox for preventive and earlywarning purposes, including its mechanisms, such as
the High Commissioner on National Minorities and the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights.
The Council of Europe also has an important instrument
at its disposal — the Commissioner for Human Rights.
I can speak from country’s own experience. For
almost two decades, Georgia has enjoyed very fruitful
engagement and cooperation with the United Nations
and the OSCE. They both have done invaluable work in
terms of conflict prevention and resolution in the now
occupied Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions of Georgia.
Both the United Nations and the OSCE deployed
their missions in Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region — the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia and the
OSCE Mission to Georgia, respectively — and their
work was vital on the ground. Ironically, both were
discontinued by a permanent member of the Security
Council, which cast a veto in a similar manner, thereby
creating a vacuum of international presence.
Luckily, the European Union stepped in and the
European Union Monitoring Mission (EUMM) was
dispatched to monitor the situation on the ground.
While the importance of the presence of the EUMM
cannot be underestimated, unfortunately it is yet unable
to fulfil its mandate, since the Russian Federation, as
the occupying Power, is blocking access to the occupied
regions.
The United Nations, the European Union
and the OSCE are complementing each other as
the three co-Chairs of the Geneva International
Discussions — the format launched as a result and to
implement the 12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement
between Russia and Georgia. The Geneva International
Discussions is a valuable instrument to address security
and humanitarian needs on the ground but, like the

18-4157969/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

EUMM, the full potential of the Geneva International
Discussions is yet to be unlocked. Progress on key
issues remains elusive due to the lack of political will
on the part of Russian Federation, while the work of the
Incident Prevention and Response Mechanisms, under
the umbrella of the Geneva International Discussions,
is becoming unduly politicized and hampered. It
is crucial to safeguard the Incident Prevention and
Response Mechanisms and return without further delay
to the usual work setting, in full respect of the founding
principles and ground rules.
Lastly, given the close interlinkages and mutually
reinforcing nature of security, development and human
rights, strengthening engagement on prevention
between the Human Rights Council and the wider
United Nations system is of vital importance. In that
context, we regard cooperation under agenda item 10
of the Human Rights Council, on technical assistance
and capacity-building, as an extremely practical and
efficient tool for preventive purposes.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to express my condolences to the delegation
and the people of the United States on the passing away
of former President George Herbert Walker Bush.
I would also like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your sisterly country on presiding over the Security
Council during December. I congratulate China as well
on its able leadership of the Council in November. I
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening today’s open
debate on the role of States, regional arrangements and
the United Nations in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts, and for the concept note that you have
prepared in that regard (see S/2018/1064, annex). I
also thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, as well as Mr. Jean-Claude Kassi Brou,
for their valuable briefings this morning.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
We would like to add the following comments in
our national capacity and highlight the role of the Sudan
and members of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) in peace processes in our region.
70/74

06/12/2018

Today’s open debate comes at a critical time for
my country. The Sudan has made great efforts to settle
conflicts in neighbouring countries — the Republic
of South Sudan, the Central African Republic and
Libya — because we believe in the importance of
peace and the relationship between peace and security
in the Sudan and peace and security in neighbouring
countries. Today’s meeting is also being held as IGAD
members, including the Sudan, have stepped up their
efforts to achieve peace in the Republic of South Sudan.
The phase of implementing the revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan has begun. That Agreement was signed on
12 September in Addis Ababa, after considerable efforts
by IGAD, led by the Sudan, and intensive negotiations
that took place in Khartoum. We hope that the Security
Council will support our efforts and those of IGAD and
the African Union to achieve peace in those sisterly
States — the Republic of South Sudan, Libya and the
Central African Republic.
We stress the importance of strengthening
coordinating regional and national efforts, on one
hand, and international efforts, on the other, to achieve
peace, stability and development, and we stress the
importance of avoiding any negative repercussions
in neighbouring countries. There was a divergence of
views in 2011 between the African Union and certain
permanent members of the Security Council with
regard to the situation in one of the African countries.
That divergence of views had dangerous repercussions
in that country, which continue to this day. Over the
past few months, and as the peace process in South
Sudan reached an advanced stage, there was another
divergence of views between IGAD members, on one
hand, and certain Security Council members, on the
other, with respect to the usefulness of sanctions and
their impact on the peace process in South Sudan.
Sanctions were imposed by the Council. My country
hopes that, in the coming weeks, the Security Council
will support the requests made by IGAD to review and
expand the mandate of the Regional Protection Force in
South Sudan, in order for it to play its role in supporting
the implementation of the revitalized Agreement in
South Sudan.
There is an urgent need to strengthen coordination
and cooperation among the Security Council, the
African Union Peace and Security Council and IGAD
to support the peace process in South Sudan. The two
Councils and IGAD must organize joint field visits
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

to South Sudan and the countries of the region and
strengthen trilateral cooperation among the United
Nations, the African Union and IGAD during the
upcoming period. We also stress the need to promote the
presence of Security Council members in South Sudan
and in the region so as to closely follow developments
on the ground and cooperate with national and regional
partners in support of the implementation of the
revitalized Agreement.
The signing of the revitalized Agreement is just
the first step towards achieving peace and stability
in the sisterly Republic of South Sudan. Many steps
and challenges remain ahead, which will require
strengthened coordination and cooperation among all
national and regional partners on a number of issues.
They include national reconciliation, social cohesion
and transitional justice; the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons; reconstruction and
development; building the capacity of State institutions;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as well
as building the capacity of security institutions; and
providing job opportunities for young people.
With regard to the special relations between the
Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan, in addition to
the many ties between the peoples of the two countries,
as well as the link between their peace processes, there
is a need for the international community, especially
the United Nations and the Security Council, to
support the efforts of the two countries in order to
strengthen their cross-border cooperation and to build
and rehabilitate the basic infrastructure linking the
two countries. That includes roads, railways, riverine
transport and electricity, in addition to supporting the
efforts made by the two countries to complete the peace
process in Southern Kordofan, Blue Nile and Darfur
states by putting pressure on the rebel movements that
continue to obstruct the peace process, and by actively
participating in the high-level event on transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and development in
Darfur.
In conclusion, we have a historic opportunity to
make significant progress in the Republic of South
Sudan, strengthen regional cooperation and build
a better future for IGAD countries, especially in the
wake of the ongoing positive developments in the
Horn of Africa region. My country’s delegation hopes
that the Security Council will send a message to the
international community in support of the countries of
the region in that regard. The existing grave challenges

S/PV. 8414

require concerted regional and international efforts in
order to achieve our desired objective. Let us therefore
work together to create a new success story in East
Africa to be added to the other success stories in Côte
d’Ivoire and its neighbours Liberia and Sierra Leone.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Moldova.
Mr. Moraru (Republic of Moldova): Allow me to
first to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
open debate on the role of States, regional arrangements
and the United Nations in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts.
The Republic of Moldova aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union
and would like to add some remarks from a national
perspective.
It is widely recognized that the nature of
contemporary conflicts is changing rapidly and has
become more complex. The prevention and resolution
of conflicts, particularly protracted ones, is not the
sole responsibility or prerogative of one multilateral
organization or one country. It is a responsibility shared
by the entire international community. The Republic
of Moldova fully supports the further development of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
arrangements in that field.
The United Nations and regional arrangements
can work together more effectively by gathering,
consolidating and sharing good practices and lessons
learned. Effective conflict prevention and resolution
requires building coherent and proactive partnerships
between the United Nations and regional arrangements.
The focus on conflict prevention and resolution is
already a notable feature of the existing partnerships
between the United Nations and some regional
arrangements, including the European Union and the
African Union. In line with their respective mandates
and comparative advantages, the United Nations and
regional arrangements should strive to share the burden
of their efforts by pooling resources and creating
new synergies. We encourage the establishment of
coordination mechanisms at the Secretariat level to
operationalize cooperation among organizations in the
field of conflict prevention and resolution.
The current restructuring of the peace and security
pillar of the United Nations, with conflict prevention
and sustaining peace at the core, offers an excellent

18-4157971/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

opportunity to enhance the Secretariat’s capacities to
work on regional issues and strengthen the interaction
between the United Nations and the regional
arrangements. We commend the Secretary-General’s
efforts in that direction and thank him for his insightful
briefing today and related reports.
In pursuing their agendas and applying their
distinctive approaches to conflict prevention and
resolution, regional arrangements and their member
States must act in good faith and in strict compliance
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
in particular when it comes to ensuring respect for the
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of States.
States have the primary responsibility for conflict
prevention, a prerogative that has been stressed several
times in Security Council resolutions. Nonetheless, the
constructive potential of regional organizations in that
area is often undermined by the limited interests of
individual members that use their authority to obstruct
important initiatives or to limit the scope of cooperation
between regional arrangements and the United Nations
that could be valuable to settlement processes. It is
our firm belief that there is much more that can be
drawn from regional partnerships, so long as all actors
involved abide by Charter principles.
The deteriorating security situation and lack of
progress in the settlement of protracted conflicts in the
post-Soviet space cannot go unnoticed. In that regard, a
question arises as to the actual role and effectiveness of
relevant regional arrangements and their coordination
efforts with the United Nations. We believe that no
conflict in the world should be disregarded by the
United Nations, irrespective of whether or not they
are on the Security Council’s agenda. The protracted
conflict situation in the eastern part of the Republic
of Moldova — a problem that is also complicated by
an illegal foreign military presence on our national
territory — is one such conflict.
By adopting a resolution in June on the complete
and unconditional withdrawal of Russian military
forces from the territory of the Republic of Moldova
(resolution 72/282), the General Assembly renewed
the linkage between regional efforts at the level of
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
on the matter and on the United Nations platform. The
withdrawal of foreign troops is essential for creating
the prerequisites for conflict prevention and conflict
resolution in the Republic of Moldova.
72/74

06/12/2018

The lack of progress in the settlement of protracted
conflicts and the continued illegal foreign military
presence on the national territories of some Member
States require not only more direct involvement from
the appropriate United Nations bodies and regional
organizations but also common action that takes into
account both the prevention and resolution aspects of
the problems. We clearly need productive partnerships
that can prevent conflicts, address the root causes of
conflicts and end them.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that
strengthening the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional entities is not merely an alternative
approach to multilateralism. It is a necessity of today’s
world, requiring all those involved to apply United
Nations principles and call for accountability when
they are violated.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to express our
appreciation to Cote d’Ivoire’s presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today’s very important debate.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
President of the Economic Community of West African
States for their valuable insights.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Vietnam shares the view of other Member States
on the primary importance of conflict prevention
in all peace processes and the need to strengthen the
cooperation between and among the United Nations,
regional and subregional organizations and States. We
are pleased to see that the United Nations, including
the Security Council, has attached greater importance
to its ties with regional actors at all stages of conflict
prevention and resolution. With a view to making that
collaboration more effective, we would like to highlight
the following points.
First, the State has a crucial role in the maintenance
of law and order, in addressing the root causes of
conflict and in fully adhering to international law
while conducting its relations with other countries.
At the same time, the United Nations and regional
organizations play a vital role in upholding and
18-41579

06/12/2018

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

promoting the principles of international law that
govern friendly relations among States.
Secondly, the United Nations, with its vast
experience and expertise in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping should provide support and assistance to
Member States and regional organizations. Meanwhile,
regional organizations have comparative advantages
with their in-depth understanding of all aspects of
conflict dynamics. Therefore, synergy among the
United Nations and regional organizations should be
strengthened, including through information-sharing,
the exchange of experiences and dialogue facilitation
and mediation, where appropriate.
Thirdly, a comprehensive approach should be
developed in the prevention and settlement of conflicts,
given the interlinkage of all of the issues that we are
dealing with in today’s world. Economic development
and social progress cannot be achieved without a
peaceful, stable and secure environment, and vice
versa. We therefore strongly believe that it is necessary
to enhance the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations in all political, security,
economic and sociocultural areas so as to strengthen
their collaboration, including by jointly addressing
emerging regional and global challenges.
Finally, as a member State of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Viet Nam would
like to share our experience deriving from what we
have done in ASEAN and within the cooperation
framework of ASEAN and the United Nations. Since its
creation, ASEAN has made continuous efforts to turn
Southeast Asia from a region of mistrust, turbulence
and instability into a region of mutual confidence
and cooperation. That achievement may be attributed
to ASEAN’s efforts at norm-building and sharing.
Dialogue and consultation have long been the so-called
ASEAN Way, which seeks to narrow differences,
promote mutual trust and understanding and build
consensus. ASEAN has been taking a leading role
in the creation of various ASEAN-led frameworks to
engage external partners.
The cooperation between ASEAN and the United
Nations is of great importance to ASEAN. We are
pleased with the progress in the implementation of the
Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration on
Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN and the
United Nations (2016-2020) through various practical
activities, including the holding of regular meetings,

S/PV. 8414

dialogues on global issues of common concern, capacitybuilding, information-sharing, training and technical
assistance in humanitarian affairs, peacekeeping,
efforts to counter terrorism, cybersecurity and so forth.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our strong commitment
to working closely with other Member States at the
bilateral, regional and international levels towards our
common goal of global peace, security and development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): Permit me,
through you, Mr. President, to condole with our host,
the Government of the United States of America, for the
loss of their forty-first President, Mr. George Herbert
Walker Bush.
I thank the presidency of Côte d’Ivoire for
convening this open debate. My sincere appreciation
goes to Mr. Amon-Tanoh, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, Mr. António Guterres,
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, and Mr. Jean-Claude Brou, Chairperson
of the Commission of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), for their statements.
Violent conflicts fuelled by bad governance,
terrorism and the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, among other factors, hamper socioeconomic
development,
thereby
keeping
the
populace,
particularly women and children, in perpetual misery.
Sadly, resolving large-scale conflict is often beyond
the capacity of any single country. While the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security resides with the Security Council,
conflict prevention and conflict resolution involve
a range of actors who provide distinct, but mutually
reinforcing, ways of addressing both the immediate and
deeper causes of violent conflict.
Regional and subregional organizations have been
engaged in conflict prevention and resolution and postconflict rehabilitation in many parts of the world. They
are able to reduce the burden on the Security Council
and to provide a key layer of legitimacy to actions taken
by the Security Council. They are also better placed to
work with stakeholders so as to facilitate dialogue and
ensure broader inclusivity.
Consequently, now more than ever, there is a need
to strengthen collaboration between the United Nations

18-4157973/74

S/PV.8414

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

and the various regional and subregional organizations
around the world. Central to that collaboration is the
need to ensure that effective and mutually reinforcing
mechanisms — both regional and global — that are
flexible and responsive enough to ensure peaceful
coexistence among communities are prioritized. In
addition, it is imperative to ensure that a means of
financing regional-body-led peace-support operations
that are authorized by the Security Council and
consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations can be predictably and sustainably
worked out. We owe that to the millions who suffer
and are waiting for our help. In that regard, I wish to
commend the Secretary-General on the current Joint
United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which is a
step in the right direction.
In our efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts,
we need also to take due cognizance of the structural
challenges to peace and security. Those challenges,
such as climate change, the mismanagement of natural
resources, and cross-border and international crime, are
at the root of some of the worst conflicts of our time,
and they are best tackled through a broad collaboration
among States, subregional and regional organizations
and the United Nations.
As we all know, the Lake Chad region has been
facing its worst crisis ever, primarily because of the

74/74

06/12/2018

impact of climate change. However, the Lake Chad basin
countries have worked together to obtain international
support and attention, which is paying off. An array of
countries — Norway, Germany, the United Kingdom,
the United States of America, China, Canada and
others — have joined the United Nations in providing
financial and technical support to the ongoing efforts
aimed not only at conquering Boko Haram but also
at working at the same time across all the pillars, as
that is the only way forward. Indeed, so successful
has that been, since the visit by the Security Council
under the United Kingdom presidency in March 2017
and the various pledging conferences in Abuja, Oslo
and Berlin, that we are even talking of recharging the
basin, so as to restore and/or stabilize the livelihoods
of the approximately 45 million people affected by
that unfortunate situation. Through it all, ECOWAS,
the African Union and United Nations, as was stated
yesterday by the President of Côte d’Ivoire (see
S/PV.8413), have been working together to galvanize
support to that end.
In conclusion, let me reiterate my appreciation to
the organizers of this meeting and pledge Nigeria’s
resolve to continue to support efforts to maintain peace
and security in all regions of the world, as we have done
since 1960 in the context of peacekeeping and other
joint efforts.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

18-41579
