S/PV.7288

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7288th meeting

Monday, 27 October 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Perceval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Baublys
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Jones

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region (S/2014/697)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2014/698)

14-58942 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1458942*

S/PV.7288

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

introducing the report of the Secretary-General,
I would also like to update the Council on the latest
developments in the country.

Adoption of the agenda

(spoke in English)

The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region
(S/2014/697)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2014/698)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/697, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. I
also wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/698, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.
Mr. Kobler (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to
express my thanks to the Argentine Republic, which
holds this month’s presidency of the Security Council,
for convening this meeting on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition to

2/13

27/10/2014

First, I am glad to brief the Council for the first
time with Special Envoy Said Djinnit. After working
together for only a few weeks, I already feel that we
are in sync, like a pair of rowers, pulling our oars in
perfect rhythm up the mighty Congo River. I feel sure
that together we will swiftly move ahead and avoid the
dangerous rapids.
Today, I will focus on three pressing issues: first,
the recent massacres in Beni; secondly, the voluntary
disarmament of the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda (FDLR); and thirdly, implementing
the human rights mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
In less than one month, between 21 September
and 18 October, we witnessed the extremes of hope
and despair in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On 21 September, in Goma, a concert organized by
Peace One Day brought 15,000 people together to
sing, dance and celebrate peace in their city. A highly
symbolic event, the concert showed just how far Goma
had come since its liberation from the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) 10 months before. And it raised hopes
that the seed of peace, sprouting in Goma, would spread
throughout the East.
However, two weeks later, the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF) reminded us just how fragile those hopes
can be. Between 2 and 17 October, in villages in and
around Beni, ADF combatants brutally massacred
over 80 civilians, mostly women and children. They
used machetes to mutilate the bodies of their victims
in order to instill fear and to warn the living not to
help Government forces eradicate them. The ADF has
been weakened over the past months through effective
operations of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC), resulting in the
capture of their strongholds. Hostages have been
released. Tens of thousands of refugees and internally
displaced persons have returned to the Kamango region.
These lamentable attacks, however, demonstrate the
group’s resilience and its capacity to use asymmetric
guerrilla and terrorist tactics against civilians. Under
pressure and on the run, they may be trying to draw
FARDC attention away by attacking population centres.

14-58942

27/10/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

I have made several visits to Beni in the past weeks
and days. I have paid my respects to the victims, giving
what consolation I could to the grieving families and
communities in the face of dozens of coffins lined
up side by side. On 22 October last Wednesday, an
angry crowd of 2,000 tried to storm the MONUSCO
base in Beni. We owe it to the decisive action of our
peacekeepers from Jordan, Nepal and Tanzania, along
with the efforts of local authorities and the Congolese
army and police, that the situation did not spiral out of
control.
I am extremely grateful to the Special Envoy Said
Djinnnit and the Special Envoy of the African Union,
Ambassador Boubacar Diarra, for having accompanied
me last Thursday in a difficult visit to Beni to deliver
two strong joint messages. First, only action against
the ADF, not words, will restitute the confidence of
the population in the FARDC and MONUSCO. We
must establish a triangle of confidence between the
population, the FARDC and MONUSCO. In any war,
no victory is possible without the support of the local
population. Secondly, we strongly advocated for decisive
joint military — including combat — operations
between the FARDC and MONUSCO against the ADF
to bring an end to this scourge.
Next, let me turn our attention to the issue which has
most occupied the Mission over the past five months,
even possibly to the detriment of our focus on the ADF
threat — the FDLR voluntary disarmament process. I
regret to say that, despite much promise, the process is
at an impasse. All special envoys of the Great Lakes
region attended the mid-term ministerial conference in
Luanda last week. I must congratulate Angola on its
leadership of this Luanda process. I have no doubt that
Angola will continue to play a positive role as regional
peacemaker. I also applaud the high-level attention and
the dedication that the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region have given to this process. All
agreed that there had been no progress since 2 July.
We all share the same objective — to neutralize
the FLDR — and the same conviction that the path
of non-violence is the best option. We all agree, as
expressed in Luanda, that the FLDR has to voluntarily
disarm by 2 January 2015. And all are determined that,
after the expiry of this deadline, military action against
the FDLR will be inevitable against those among the
FDLR who do not voluntarily disarm. In this regard,
I truly appreciate the Council’s press statement of

S/PV.7288

3 October (SC/11586), recalling that the FDLR is a
group under United Nations sanctions that continues
to violate human rights. The Council reiterated the
importance of the FDLR’s swift neutralization. I thank
Council members for their support and unequivocal
instructions.
Taking this fight to the jungle will be long and
difficult. It will result in many casualties. I, for one, do
not want to see that, but it is up to the FDLR to prevent
this scenario. It has exactly two months and six days
left to disarm, unconditionally, and to go to Kisangani
transit camp, as envisaged by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, or leave the country,
either voluntarily via the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement process,
or to third countries. The credibility of the United
Nations, the Congolese Government and the region are
at stake here.
The region’s credibility is also challenged by the
long-overdue repatriation of former M-23 combatants
from Uganda and Rwanda. I urge the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to expedite
the outstanding amnesty requests and to finalize the
road map for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former M-23 combatants. I will leave
it to Special Envoy Djinnit to further elaborate on the
M-23 reintegration process. The military defeat of the
M-23 will not be sustainable if Nairobi declarations are
not quickly implemented. MONUSCO stands ready to
facilitate the repatriation of M-23 ex-combatants.
I congratulate the Force Intervention Brigade,
supported by all MONUSCO forces, who fought
bravely and successfully alongside the FARDC to bring
an end to the M-23. I am more than confident that, if the
FDLR does not disarm before 2 January, the Brigade,
supported by all MONUSCO forces, will fight equally
bravely and successfully against it.
The third issue I bring before the Council today
relates to the Mission’s work on human rights in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Justice,
accountability and respect for human rights are the
cornerstones upon which peace and stability are built.
For many years now, the Joint Human Rights Office
has helped to document grave human rights violations
against the Congolese people and to advocate for and
protect their rights. This work is not undertaken to
weaken or blame the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, it is undertaken to strengthen

14-589423/13

S/PV.7288

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

good governance, one of the national commitments
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
Respect for human rights and good governance leads to
more stability, not to instability. We want to empower
the Government in its fight against impunity, and
to support its efforts, which have been notable, for
improved governance and long-term stability.
MONUSCO and its Joint Human Rights Office are
and must continue to be partners for the Government
in those efforts. We have had very good day-to-day
cooperation — most of it discreet — and notable
progress, especially with regard to the security
services. The human rights due diligence policy is a
good example of how our human rights work impacts
on the respect for human rights demonstrated by the
security forces.
However, public human rights reports are and will
remain an instrument of the human rights work of the
Mission. Over the past two weeks, we have issued
two such reports, jointly with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights: one on the human
rights violations committed by the M-23 during its
reign over parts of the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and the other on 15 October on the
Government’s Operation Likofi against street gangs
in Kinshasa. The report documents the extrajudicial
killings of 9 persons and the enforced disappearance
of 32 others. In accordance with the strict methodology
of the Joint Human Rights Office, these figures are
conservative.
The Likofi report led to the Government’s decision
to expel the head of the Joint Human Rights Office,
Mr. Scott Campbell, within 48 hours. I asked the
Government to reconsider this decision. I express my
absolute confidence in the professionalism of Scott
Campbell and that of his team, and I stand firmly
by the report they produced, for which I take full
responsibility.
I am equally concerned by recent threats against
other staff in the Joint Human Rights Office. It is
unacceptable for these dedicated individuals to be
intimidated or menaced for doing the work which is at
the core of the Council’s mandate to us, in line with the
Secretary-General’s “Rights Up Front” policy, as well
as the Charter of the United Nations. This work must
continue unimpeded. I am extremely grateful for the
support of the Secretary-General, as well as from the
members of the Council that have expressed solidarity
in urging the Government to revise its decision and to
4/13

27/10/2014

take action to address threats against MONUSCO staff.
I would like to draw four conclusions.
First, respect for human rights leads to stability.
Secondly, it is those who commit human rights violations
and go unpunished who tarnish the image of the the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and weaken its
security institutions, not those who make them public.
Thirdly, our work is collaborative and constructive and
aims to strengthen the Government’s moral authority.
Fourthly, I intend to offer to the Congolese Government
a regular high-level human rights dialogue. In that
dialogue, which may be discreet, all pending human
rights questions can be discussed and confidence can
be built. It will be of particular importance during the
forthcoming electoral period.
Allow me to touch briefly on a number of other
important issues. Just as our human rights work is
critical to our protection-of-civilians mandate, so too
is the approach of our military component. The Force
Commander and I agree that the protection of civilians
is more than a mandated task, it is our raison d’etre in
the the Democratic Republic of the Congo and a moral
imperative of the United Nations. We also agree that to
be effective, we need a new paradigm.
Presence alone is not enough. Presence without
action, in the face of violence, undermines our
credibility. Patrolling in hermetic armoured personnel
carriers is not enough: troops must get out of their
vehicles and interact directly with communities. Staying
in safe areas is not enough: the force must pursue the
danger where it lies. If necessary, they need to march
for days into the jungle, as the Force Commander has
done, to take the protection of civilians to the source.
We need action, not in action. We must be proactive,
not reactive. There must be mobile forces, not static
battalions. And we need feet, not wheels. I reiterate my
August messages to all contingents: when civilians are
at risk, they must act, not ask. We need protection of
civilians up front. I ask for the support of the Council.
I especially ask those United Nations States Members
that contribute troops to endorse and promote this
guidance.
The last point I wish to raise is the absolute urgency
to see the the Democratic Republic of the Congo — the
country geographically at the heart of Africa and a
nation with immense wealth and potential — become
also the economic heart of Africa. It has made
substantial progress over the past 10 years, particularly
in terms of macroeconomic stability, with a stable
14-58942

27/10/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

currency and inflation under control at one 1 cent. But
its people remain among the poorest in the world, with
70 per cent under the poverty line and unemployment
among its youth estimated by the African Development
Bank at over 70 per cent. That has to change.
It is time for Congo’s money abroad to come home
and for that money, and more, to be invested in the the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is time to move
from a war economy to a peace economy. It is time to
see illegal exploitation turned into legitimate trade.
It is time to move from excessive wealth for a few, to
sufficiency for all. I fully support Mr. Djinnit’s focus
on stimulating private investment. I encourage the
Government to put the necessary legal protections in
place and to enforce them.
As always, I wish to conclude by acknowledging the
national and international staff of the United Nations
for their dedication and tireless efforts to improve the
lives of the people of the the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Today I especially wish to thank those
colleagues deployed in a very remote corner of Equateur
province where an outbreak of the Ebola virus once
again erupted — the seventh time since its discovery
in 1976 in the the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I recently visited the Ebola-infected area in Lokolia.
I witnessed the selflessness, courage and outstanding
efforts of Mr. Thapa Rabindra and his team. At great
personal risk and sacrifice, they have set up the Lokolia
camp, from which the sick can be treated in a safe,
controlled environment. They exemplify the values of
the United Nations, and I commend every single one of
them. I also congratulate the the Democratic Republic
of the Congo on its swift and effective action, which has
limited the spread of this horrific disease. I am pleased
to report that there have been no new infections since
4 October, a hopeful sign that the worst may be over in
the the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Finally, please allow me to express my most
heartfelt congratulations to Caddy Adzuba, a colleague
from Radio Okapi in Bukavu, who last Friday received
the prestigious Prince of Asturias Award from the
King of Spain for her outstanding reporting on sexual
violence suffered by women in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is truly gratifying to work with such
committed and courageous colleagues as Caddy, and
to see that her efforts to bring attention to the issue of
sexual violance have met with international recognition
of the highest order.

S/PV.7288

(spoke in Spanish)
Allow me once again to thank the members of the
Council for their ongoing support, attention and interest
on critical issues for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is always a pleasure and an honour to be here,
and I think members for this opportunity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I want especially
to thank Mr. Kobler for the information he has given us
and for his multilingualism.
I now give the floor to Mr. Djinnit.
Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I am pleased to
address the Security Council for the first time in my
capacity as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region. I take this opportunity
to thank the Council for its support for my mandate
and for the opportunity to present the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/697) on the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region. I am delighted to do so with my friend and
colleague Martin Kobler, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). I want to express the full
support that he and his colleagues have extended to me
since my appointment. I have no doubt that our strong
and close collaboration will continue and will serve to
further strengthen our efforts to ensure the effective
implementation of the Framework agreement.
Upon taking office, I began to visit the countries of
region to listen and interact with senior officials of the
signatory countries, the guarantors of the Framework
agreement and international partners. Leaders of the
signatory countries say they are determined to end the
cycle of violence and lead the region along the path of
sustainable development and stability. They consider
the Framework agreement to be a useful tool that will
speed up and support that transformation. However, for
the region definitively to emerge from the vicious cycle
of violence and instability and move resolutely towards
that destiny of unity and prosperity, it will have to at
long last rid itself of the problems that keep it bound to
its painful past by perpetuating suspicion and mistrust
between countries and peoples. It is therefore evident
that, as a matter of priority, there is a need to address
sensitive security issues inherited from the troubled
history of the region and to patiently restore trust

14-589425/13

S/PV.7288

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

among the countries. At the first same time, we should
also support efforts and initiatives under way aimed
at harnessing resources and the existing momentum
to ensure integration and speedy socioeconomic
transformation in the region.
(spoke in English)
I am delivering these remarks a month after the
Regional Oversight Mechanism endorsed the first
progress report of the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework. The findings
and recommendations are clear. Overall, there is a need
to accelerate progress, particularly with respect to the
complete neutralization of negative forces operating
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda (FDLR) and the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF), as well as to implement the Nairobi Declarations
on the process regarding the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23).
I am pleased to note that the signatories and
guarantors have taken steps to address those issues. As
regards the FDLR, I would like to recall the conclusions
and recommendations of the recent joint ministerial
meeting of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region (ICGLR) and the Southern African
Development Community on the mid-term review of
the FDLR’s voluntary disarmament by the agreed-on
deadline of 2 January 2015. I call on all the signatories,
guarantors and international partners to ensure that they
are effectively and promptly executed. While we should
continue to facilitate the conditions for full voluntary
disarmament of the FDLR, we should also set in motion
a credible process for enabling military pressure to
be exerted on those not willing to surrender by the
deadline. We must act now. Failure to bring the process
of neutralizing the FDLR to a successful conclusion in
line with Security Council resolutions and the decisions
of the leaders of the region will potentially exacerbate
tensions, undermine our collective credibility and put
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework under
serious stress.
Another concern I have is about the slow pace
in the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations. I
welcome the recent impetus the process has been given
at the initiative of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we also appreciate the
cooperation shown by the Governments of Uganda and
Rwanda. A few weeks ago, my Office participated in a
joint mission with the National Oversight Mechanism
6/13

27/10/2014

of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
ICGLR secretariat in Kampala to explore ways of
revitalizing the process. I am pleased to inform the
Council that, further to consultations, a high-level
follow-up meeting, to which I have been invited, will
be convened in Kinshasa on 7 and 8 November. I will
strongly encourage the concerned parties there to seek
solutions to existing bottlenecks and take the urgent
political and operational action required to fast-track
the amnesty and the repatriation process.
The twin process of dealing with the FDLR and
M-23 should continue to receive our full attention. But
so should the resurgent threat posed by the ADF, whose
horrendous recent acts against the people of Beni are a
sad reminder that the security situation remains fragile
and hard-won gains against negative forces can be
reversed.
I am just back from my first visit to the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where I held
very useful consultations in Goma with a variety of
stakeholders. On Thursday, I visited Beni together with
Special Representative Martin Kobler and Ambassador
Boubacar Diarra, Special Representative of the African
Union for Burundi and the Great Lakes Region, to
show our solidarity with the Government and people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as
our sympathy for the innocent victims of the ADF. We
took the opportunity to commend the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC)
for their successful military campaign against the
ADF, with the effective support of MONUSCO and
its Force Intervention Brigade. We also encouraged
the FARDC and MONUSCO to further enhance their
cooperation and initiate decisive joint actions aimed at
fully neutralizing the ADF, with the full support of the
local populations.
While I am expected to devote serious attention
to supporting efforts to neutralize negative forces and
promoting an environment conducive to the expeditious
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, I am fully committed to strengthening the
foundation laid by my predecessor, Mary Robinson, in
support of women, young people, displaced populations
and civil society, as well as encouraging economic
cooperation and the promotion of justice, human
rights and the fight against impunity. In that regard, I
am pleased to report that, following the launch of the
Women’s Platform, small grants have already been
made to the Global Fund for Women in support of

14-58942

27/10/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

initial activities designed to enhance women’s ability
to advocate for and monitor implementation of the
Framework’s commitments. The grants also provide
seed money for improving women’s access to clean
energy. Regarding resolution 1325 (2000), I plan to
step up my advocacy efforts for broader adoption of a
regional plan of action that builds on the experiences
of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda and Uganda, all of which I commend for
starting to implement their national plans. With regard
to young people, my Office provided support for
organizing the ICGLR Youth Summit and plans to work
with other partners going forward in support of smallscale youth projects and budding young entrepreneurs.
Initiatives aimed at promoting the emergence of a
strong regional coalition of civil society are ongoing.
My Office will work closely with the ICGLR and
other stakeholders to convene a regional workshop
in Bujumbura that will bring together civil-society
organizations from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda before the end
of this year. It will lay the foundation for a wider civilsociety constituency whose task will be to increase
awareness of the Framework in cooperation with the
various Governments, as well as to promote solidarity,
a culture of peace and tolerance among the communities
in the region.
We are also working closely with all stakeholders
to address obstacles impeding the safe and dignified
return of displaced populations and to provide options
for those who may decide to settle in other parts of
the region. In that regard, I would like to commend
the Government and people of Tanzania for granting
citizenship rights to the roughly 200,000 Burundian
nationals and their dependants who took refuge in
Tanzania decades ago. I also encourage all countries
hosting displaced populations, as well as countries
of origin, to step up their efforts to provide durable
solutions. Together with my fellow envoys, I intend to
support all the parties concerned in promoting political
and security conditions propitious to lasting solutions.
Leveraging the strength of various development
partners, such as the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Bank, the European Union
and others, my Office has launched or supported
various initiatives aimed at rebuilding livelihoods and
creating jobs and peace dividends. In that regard, my
Office is supporting the preparation of a development
partners conference designed to mobilize resources for

S/PV.7288

development initiatives identified by signatories of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. Similarly,
we are working closely with the country teams in
signatory countries, as well as the relevant regional
United Nations offices, to develop and align strategies
and programmes in support of the Framework. Jointly
with the ICGLR, we are also strongly promoting the
convening in Luanda in early December of a regional
ministerial consultation on private sector investment,
aimed at considering and evaluating a substantial
portfolio of projects. During my tour of the region, I
encouraged the Framework countries to ensure that
they are adequately represented at the meeting, which
will pave the way for a bigger private-sector investment
forum next year that will signal a new era in the Great
Lakes region, advancing towards shared stability and
prosperity.
The Framework signatories are members of
various regional economic communities, which we
must support if we are to unlock the region’s vast
potential. In that regard, I would like to encourage the
ongoing efforts to convene a summit of the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries (CEPGL),
as part of the revitalization of that organization
called for in the Framework. In that context, I had a
fruitful meeting last week with the CEPGL’s Executive
Secretary and his team, at which we discussed possible
areas of cooperation, including promoting trans-border
security and development programmes that include the
involvement of women.
As I stated at the beginning, I see my role as that
of a catalyst and facilitator. I am committed to working
closely with the signatory countries, the guarantors,
my fellow special envoys and the international partners
committed to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework.
I am confident that together we can help the region
put an end to the recurring cycle of conflicts and
instability, build mutual confidence and trust, and set
in motion an irreversible process towards realizing its
full potential, in peace and stability.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Djinnit for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the member of the
Council who wishes to make a statement.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I wish to welcome Mr. Said
Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to
the Great Lakes Region, and to thank him for his

14-589427/13

S/PV.7288

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

briefing to the Council. I also thank Mr Martin Kobler,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
for his statement. I also recognize the presence of
my colleague, the Permanent Representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In April this year, Rwanda, together with the
whole world, commemorated the twentieth anniversary
of the genocide against the Tutsi (see S/PV.7155),
which claimed the lives of more than 1 million of my
compatriots in just 100 days. I recall, in that regard,
that my country introduced a draft resolution that
became resolution 2150 (2014), which was sponsored
and adopted by all 15 Council members. The resolution
reminds us that leaders and members of the so-called
Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda
(FDLR) were among the perpetrators of the genocide.
The resolution furthermore recalls that the FDLR
“is a group under United Nations sanctions,
operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and which has continued to promote and commit
ethnically based and other killings in Rwanda and in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo” (resolution
2150 (2104), fourteenth preambular paragraph).
This is the FDLR we are talking about it today. This
is the FDLR we have been talking about for the past two
decades. We are not here to talk about simple negative
forces such as the dozen armed groups operating in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, as recalled
by all recent products of the Council. The FDLR is not
the oldest negative force in the area, which has triggered
the creation of a number of other armed groups, but
it is also a genocidal movement that committed the
unspeakable 20 years ago.
Today the FDLR remains the main military and
security threat to Rwanda and the Great Lakes region
due to its genocidal ideology, the mass atrocities
that it regularly commits against civilians in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to its
substantive structural with international networks and
the active support it unfortunately enjoys from State
and non-State actors. Such actors have demonstrated on
multiple occasions their hidden agenda to sanitize and
preserve the FDLR in order to eventually destabilize
Rwanda.

8/13

27/10/2014

To deal with the security situation in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which includes
the FDLR issue, on 30 November 1999 — almost
15 years ago — the Security Council established the
United Nations Observation Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), whose mandate
was expanded by resolution 1291 (2000) to include
the protection civilians “under imminent threat of
physical violence”. In 2010, that Mission was renamed
by resolution 1925 (2010) as the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), with a mandate
including to
“support strategies towards a sustainable solution
of the FDLR issue, including repatriation,
reinsertion or resettlement in other areas, or judicial
prosecution as appropriate” (resolution 1925 (2010),
para. 12 (j)).
However, despite the clear mandate given by
the Council, MONUC and then MONUSCO were
unable — or perhaps I should say, unwilling — to
fully implement it. It is in that context that the Council
adopted resolution 2098 (2013) in March 2013,
establishing Force Intervention Brigade (FIB) operating
under MONUSCO. The Force was given not only a
robust and offensive mandate, including, in the terms of
sub-paragraph 12 (b), the task to “prevent the expansion
of all armed groups, neutralize these groups and disarm
them”. In addition, huge support was provided in terms
of equipment, technology and so forth. That essentially
represented a third mandate for a third force in 14 years.
Regrettably, upon deployment, the FIB chose
to restrict its actions to against the recently created
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and once again failed to
address the question of the FDLR. In November 2013,
the M-23 was totally defeated and Rwanda hoped at
that time that MONUSCO and its FIB would finally
decide to implement resolution 2098 (2013), which we
had sponsored here, and thereby move to subsequently
neutralize the FDLR.
Unfortunately, despite the tough rhetoric by my
good friend the Head of MONUSCO against FDLR,
no concrete action against that genocidal movement
has been taken or even planned by the United Nations
force. In the meantime, the Peace, Security and
Corporation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region — under the good offices
of the Secretary-General, whom I vigorously commend

14-58942

27/10/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

for having initiated it — was signed in Addis Ababa in
February 2014. Through the Framework, the leaders of
the region once again called for the neutralization of all
armed groups, including, of course, the FDLR.
Furthermore, since the beginning of this year,
various summits of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), alone and jointly
with the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), emphasized the need for disarmament and
demobilization of the FDLR as well as the necessity
of military actions against those unwilling to disarm
accordance with resolution 2098 (2013).
To justify FIB inaction against the FDLR,
MONUSCO’s senior leadership attempted to explain
that military action against the FDLR was complicated
because combatants were living among civilians. That
is not true. As a matter of fact, we, Rwanda, provided
extensive evidence to MONUSCO on the location
of the FDLR military camps separated from civilian
areas. In any case, the MONUSCO mandate includes
the protection of civilians by ensuring that women, men
and children are not used as human shields or deprived
of security, health care, education and development.
Military action to separate civilians from combatants
is therefore imperative. Given that impasse, the FDLR
could of course not miss that golden opportunity
to achieve its objective. That genocidal movement
continued to form alliances with subversive opposition
groups against Rwanda in order to engage in activities
aimed at gaining sympathy and support from the region.
In May, the FDLR decided to adjust its stratgey
by committing to voluntary disarm. However, from a
force of 3,500 combatants, the disarmament exercise
that allegedly took place in North and South Kivu on
30 May and 6 June, respectively, comprised 188 lowranking combatants and their dependants. Since then,
the disarmed combatants have refused to relocate from
Walungu and Kanyabayonga to a designated camp in
Kisangani, where no disarmament has taken place since
2 July. On the contrary, acccording to our information,
the FDLR continued to reinforce its troops, and around
200 additional elements have been recruited since May
to replace those 188 troops.
The Council may recall that the FDLR’s delaying
tactics, seen by some as commitments, compelled the
ICGLR and SADC, at the request of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other
countries of the region, to decide in July to give the
FDLR a six-month period, expiring on 2 January 2015,

S/PV.7288

to disarm. However, as all stakeholders have now
noticed, the FDLR never had any intention of disarming.
On the contrary, even recently at the summit of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Southern African Development Community in
Luanda, Angola — I would like to commend Angola
for its leadership — the FDLR, through its allies in
the region, attempted to ensure that military action
against it is removed from the region’s agenda, thereby
contradicting the Security Council resolutions that I
have mentioned above and its recent press statement
SC/11586.
Given the background that I have just provided, I
have several questions that occur to me. I would wish to
ask all of us why 20 years after our collective resolve of
the abused phrase “never again” the Security Council is
still struggling to find a lasting solution to the genocidal
negative force whose leaders and members are among
the perpetrators of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi.
Instead of addressing the main root cause of insecurity
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, why has the Security Council, which comprises
at least five countries that have the required background
on that situation — I am talking about the permanent
members — prefer to manage that insecurity and focus
on the consequences of the FDLR presence in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo?
Why cannot the Security Council follow up on the
implementation of the multiple resolutions that it has
adopted and hold accountable the United Nations force
that it has established and to which it has provided a
clear mandate. The consequential budget is more than
$2 billion a year. I remember The Right Honourable
Matata Ponyo Mapon telling us that if he could get a
tenth of the MONUSCO budget, he could truly achieve
a strong police force and restore security to the entire
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
soon as possible. That is $2 billion per year, and we
have been sitting in this Chamber for 20 years. That is
insane and a humiliation. What do Council members
want to tell their taxpayers today? To keep spending
and feeding an Organization that is not doing anything?
After 20 years, we are still talking about a genocidal
force. We are all committed to that great phrase “never
again”.
I believe that such questions are legitimate not
only from the Rwandan or regional perspective but also
from the broader perspective of the maintenance of
international peace and security and of the responsibility

14-589429/13

S/PV.7288

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

to protect. In that regard, it would be unfortunate if the
Security Council were to spend the next 20 years dealing
with the FDLR and its consequences for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. Indeed, beyond
the absolute need to restore peace and security in our
region, I think that such collective inaction also further
undermines the credibility of such a lofty organ as the
Security Council.
Despite that picture, let me conclude on an
optimistic note. As the deadline given to the FDLR is
fast approaching, I am nonetheless convinced that the
overall momentum for peace, security and cooperation
in the Great Lakes region is so strong that it will
eventually enable MONUSCO’s FIB and the supervision
of the Council to live up to our collective expectation
of a secure and stable Great Lakes region free of armed
groups, including the last genocidal movement on our
continent — indeed, in the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): As the
Argentine presidency of the Security Council draws to
a close, allow me to congratulate you, Madam, on your
stewardship of the discussions within this principal
organ of the United Nations tasked with the maintenance
of international peace and security. I would like to
once again express how pleased we are at seeing you,
Madam, presiding over the Security Council during
the month of October. On behalf of the people and the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
I would like to thank the Council once again for the
efforts undertaken by the United Nations to uphold the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of our country and
to ensure its peace and stability. Finally, I would like
to pay heartfelt tribute to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for the constant commitment
he has unfailingly shown and for his personal efforts
aimed at peace in my country.
We have carefully followed the presentation of the
two reports of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
the report on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region (S/2017/697).
Those reports were just introduced by Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
10/13

27/10/2014

for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Mr. Said
Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region of Africa, and I thank them very
much. The briefings prompt us to make the following
comments.
Generally speaking, it is important to note that
the commendable efforts mentioned in the follow-up
report (S/2014/698) of September have continued in
the various sectors related to the implementation of the
national commitments undertaken by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo under the Addis Ababa Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework and the Nairobi
Declarations, which marked the end of the Kampala
dialogue between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23). My delegation believes it is important to go
back to the situation of the former members of the M-23
and the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations. In
that regard, my delegation would like to note that the
Government has undertaken several actions, including
the drawing up of a road map and a follow-up timetable
for its implementation. An amnesty law was put into
effect on 11 February by our Head of State, while a
decree regarding the measures for its implementation
was signed and issued, withthe individual commitment
forms published in our four national languages.
Furthermore, a technical monitoring and
identification team has been established and has
visited Uganda and Kigali to identify former M-23
combatants; explain the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process; explain the amnesty; and
facilitate the signing of the individual commitment
document for former combatants. An oversight mission
to verify the viability of locations has been established,
and it visited, on 24 to 29 July 2014, Walikale and
Kisangani, which are to be used as transit centres and
for the reintegration of former М-23 combatants, before
the centre in Kisangani is established. Orders granting
amnesty to 410 former M-23 members have been
issued and prisoners have gradually been released,
and that process is being accelerated. A road map
has been drawn up outlining the repatriation process
for the ех-М23 combatants in Uganda and Rwanda
through the National Oversight Mechanism of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, assisted by the
Executive Secretariat of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) in accordance
with the Nairobi declaration and the recommendation
of the joint ministerial meeting of the ICGLR and the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
14-58942

27/10/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

on 2 July and the relevant decision of the mini-summit
of the ICGLR of 14 August in Luanda.
It should be noted that a harmonization meeting
with the Executive Secretariat of the ICGLR on the
content of the draft road map was held on the premises
of the National Oversight Mechanism on 1 September.
At that time, the Coordinator designated by the former
М-23 members, Mr. René Abandi, was invited to
participate in that meeting as a focal point, in line
with the Nairobi declaration. However, he could not
participate for personal reasons.
It is also important to clarify that the road map
integrates the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo’s decision, taken on 17 September 2014, to
conduct an immediate repatriation of ех-М-23 members
who are eligible and who wished to be repatriated.
The Coordinator of the former M-23 members was
notified of the Government decision’s on 18 September
by the Executive Secretariat of the ICGLR, which
then organized a confirmation meeting on l October
in Kampala. Mr. Abandi and the Ugandan authorities
also participated in the meeting. Unexpectedly,
through his letter dated 2 October addressed to
the Government, Mr. Abandi, refused the offer of
immediate repatriation of ех-М23 members. However,
a joint agreement was reached with the Executive
Secretariat of the ICGLR that the Coordinator of the
ех-М-23 members would be summoned for a new
meeting to harmonize the viewpoints. That meeting
will be held on 7 and 8 November at the headquarters
of the National Oversight Mechanism in Kinshasa. This
time it will be attended by the special envoys, regional
and international observers for the process of the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework agreement and representatives of other
countries of the Great Lakes region.
As we have underscored many times to the Council,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo seeks peace
on its territory and throughout the territories of the
States of the region. That is why it has never shirked
its responsibilities and remains determined to combat
all negative forces still present in its territory to ensure
that peace and harmony return to the region. In that
regard, the country will continue to fight the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF) and the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda (FDLR).
The resurgence of the terrorist activities of the
ADF, whose strike force was significantly weakened
following Operation Sokola, launched in January by

S/PV.7288

the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) with MONUSCO’s support, is once
again a challenge, which must be resolved. After having
driven the ADF from its stongholds and destroyed its
chains of command, the ADF terrorist elements today
are rebuilding their ranks and operate randomly in
small groups. In just one month, as Mr. Kobler has
just underscored, the territory of Beni in the North
Kivu province was struck, leaving at least 80 victims.
The FARDC and MONUSCO have already taken the
necessary security measures by deploying to that part
of the country.
With regard to the FDLR, Council members
will recall that in August, the Foreign Minister of
my country, in his statement (see S/PV.7237) to the
Council, described the time frame given to the FDLR
for disarmament and the agreement of all the States
of the region to uphold the deadline with a mid-term
assessment. This assessment was recently completed in
Luanda during a joint meeting of the ICGLR and the
SADC on 18 to 20 October, which brought together the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Defence of the States
members of those organizations.
The conclusion reached was that, as of 20 October,
the FDLR had not disarmed, despite some movement
recorded in June, when some 200 elements laid down
their arms. All participants in the Luanda meeting
formally affirmed that there would be no extension and
that, as of 2 January 2015, military actions would be
taken to disarm that noxious force. For my Government,
all FDLR elements that resist disarmament will face
forcible disarmament operations. They must all leave
Congolese territory and return to their country, Rwanda,
or look for other host countries. There is no place for
them in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In view of the reconfiguration of the MONUSCO
mandate and the transfer of responsibilities, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has taken note of the road map being developed with
respect to the reassignment of certain MONUSCO tasks
to the United Nations country team. The Government
stands ready to discuss the concrete implementation of
the road map and wishes to express its full confidence
in the joint evaluation team that calls for more
circumspection in the reconfiguration of the United
Nations Mission in terms of the logical perspective of a
gradual and orderly withdrawal.
The Council also received a letter dated 22 October
2014 in which my Government made clear​​to you,

14-5894211/13

S/PV.7288

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Madam President, its position in the Scott Campbell
case. I want to confirm the content of this letter and
thank you for agreeing to circulate it as a document of
the Security Council.
It is important to remember in that context that
everything began with Operation Coup de Poing, which
Congolese National Police launched at the request of
the population exasperated and upset by the persistence
of urban violent crime in Kinshasa, a metropolis of
nearly 12 million. We call it the “Kuluna phenomenon”,
referring to the name of the bands of outlaws and young
delinquents who, at the time of the Operation, were
stealing, engaging in racketeering, injuring people,
going so far as to cut the arms of peaceful bystanders or
even killing for a cell phone, a small chain, a watch or
simply for the fun of doing harm. Entire neighbourhoods
were thus terrorized and shops vandalized.
Those young people, for those who do not know,
feared neither the law enforcement officers nor
soldiers, who moreover were also among the victims
of their violence. The first phase of the Operation was
a resounding success with the people who, reassured
now that they are safe, no longer ask the police to
pursue those criminals in order to put an end to the
phenomenon.
It is in that context that, on 15 October, Mr. Campbell
released a report containing falsehoods and unverified
assertions that unfairly, gratuitously and without any
evidence made charges against the Congolese National
Police. Among those falsehoods, we would cite the
32 alleged cases of enforced disappearances mentioned
in the report, as all of Kinshasa knows that most of
these supposedly missing Kulunas had left Kinshasa
themselves to take refuge in Brazzaville and in
neighbouring provinces, such as Bandundu, Bas-Congo
and Equateur, when they realized that they were being
targeted and surrounded in their neighbourhoods.
Rather than providing documentation for his
reports or supporting his allegations with evidence,
Mr. Campbell apparently believed that the Congolese
authorities had to prove their innocence in those real
or imagined crimes, although it is up to the person
making an allegation to provide supporting evidence.
In addition, there was the issue of Mr. Campbell’s
systematic refusal to take into account the properly
documented comments and clarifications provided to
him by the relevant Government authorities for each
report. The contempt thus shown for a Government from
which he had received accreditation made it impossible
12/13

27/10/2014

for him to continue to do useful work in promoting
human rights values, ​​to which the Democratic Republic
of Congo remains attached.
Generally speaking, the behaviour of Mr. Campbell
has compromised not only the image of our institutions
but also and especially the security of the State, because
of the subsequent demoralization of our defence and
security forces. His recurrent lack of concern despite
all entreaties on this subject shook the Government’s
trust in him and led it to resolve the problem with the
radical solution of removing him.
It should be noted here that the Democratic Republic
of Congo does not have a culture of expelling diplomats.
The case of Mr. Campbell, as you may have noticed,
Madam President, is due to his repeat offences that
exceeded tolerable limits. However, my Government
wishes to reassure the Council that this decision does
not undermine or do anything to taint relations between
MONUSCO and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It does not constitute either a closure of the United
Nations Joint Human Rights Office in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo or a questioning of its mandate.
In fact, the office remains open and operational.
My Government is awaiting the new replacement
to be appointed by the Secretary-General and is ready
to give him or her its full cooperation. Furthermore,
my delegation also wishes to clarify that, in respect
of allegations in the criticized report, my Government
did not wait for the report from Mr. Campbell to act. It
published a list of 30 police officers convicted for their
behaviour in the Operation as the magistrates in charge
of overseeing the Operation took up the cases.
With respect to the alleged threats against United
Nations personnel, my Government has commenced an
inquiry into the matter and would like to reassure the
Council that everything is in place for their safety so
they can work in peace.
Finally, my Government hopes that the United
Nations, in its assessment of the situation, will take into
account the good work being one by the Democratic
Republic of Congo to promote human rights.
I would like to express the thanks of my Government
to Mr. Kobler, the entire staff of MONUSCO and all
associated civilian and humanitarian personnel for
the tireless efforts they continue to make with a view
to finding lasting peace and security in my country. I
would be remiss if I did not express our gratitude to
Mr. Djinnit for his commitment and efforts towards the
14-58942

27/10/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

restoration of lasting peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and throughout the Great Lakes region.
To all members of the Security Council, I reiterate the
appreciation of my country for their profound devotion
to this noble cause, whose purpose is the restoration of
dignity to the Congolese people.

S/PV.7288

The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

14-5894213/13
