UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FIFTH

RECORDS
u,hlLIBRA
BY
YEAR

MEETING:

J\lp 1 CJ“,y7

17 JUNE 1980

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (SIAge?da/2232)

. ... ... .. .. .. ... .. .... .. . ... ... ... ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Lebanon(S/13994)...........................................,.....

1

Force in

SlPV.2232

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

,_

2232nd MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 17 June 1980, at 4 p.m.
President:

Mr. Ole ALGARD

(Norway).

which was drawn up in the course of consultations
among members of the Council. I should also like to
draw attention to document S/14002, which contains
the text of a letter dated 16 June from the representative of Italy addressed to the Secretary-General.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh,
China, France, German
Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, .Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

3. It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution which
is before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put
it to the vote now.

agenda (S/Agenda/2232)

of the agenda

A vote IVUS tuken by show qf hands.

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/13994)
The meeting

In fusow:
Bangladesh, France, Jamaica, Mexico,
Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United States of America, Zambia

ISUS called to order ut 4.30 p.m.
Aguinst:
Adoption

None

of the agenda
Abstuining: German Democratic
Soviet Socialist Republics

The ugendu wus adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/13994)

Republic,

Union of

The druft resolution wus adopted by 12 votes to
none, with 2 ubstentions (resolution 474 (I 980)).
One member
voting.

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received letters
from the representatives of Ireland, Israel, Lebanon
and the Netherlands, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives
to participate
in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

(Chinu)

4. The PRESIDENT:
General.

did not purticipute

in the

I now call on the Secretary-

5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have taken
careful note of the resolution just adopted by the Council and of its decision to extend the mandate of
UNIFIL
for a further period of six months, until
19 December 1980.
6.. As indicated in my report [S/13994], I am convinced that, despite all the difficulties encountered by
UNIFIL,
the Force is performing an indispensable
service to peace not only in Lebanon but also as
regards the Middle East situation as a whole. It
provides a vital mechanism for conflict control in an
extremely volatile situation which, without it, would
almost certainly escalate very quickly into a wider
conflagration.

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Tue’ni
(Labanon) took a place at the Council table und
Mr. Mrrlloy (Ireland), Mr. Blum (Lsruel) and Mr. Scheltemu (Netherlunds)
took the places reserved for them
ut the side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
The members of the Council
have before them the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL)
for the period from 11 December 1979 to
12 June 1980; the report is contained in document
S/13994. The Council also has before it the text of a
draft resolution,
circulated
as document
S/14001,

7. I shall of course continue to exert every possible
effort to ensure that UNIFIL
will implement
the
objectives set forth by the Council. To that end, it is
imperative that violence of the kind which occurred
1

last April be avoided and that attacks and harassment
directed against the Force cease. It is also imperative
that UNIFIL be permitted to function as an integrated
force and that a!! contingents enjoy full freedom of
movement without exception. I shall continue
my efforts to attain this end.

without a background of violence and tragedy; hence
the relatively simple and non-controversial resolution
just adopted, which has restored a consensus in this
Council that we feared was lost.
15. The political wisdom that you, Mr. President,
have personally displayed all through your presence
in the Council and more particularly in the Chair has
always been a precious contribution not only to the
spirit of consensus so important for the success of
UNIFIL, but also to the formulation of the specific
message that each resolution on UNIFIL must carry.
May I therefore, while congratulating you in the
customary manner on your assumption of the presidency of the Council, add a word of thanks on behalf
of Lebanon-the
Lebanon for which you have
developed a unique concern and love and where
soldiers from your country so gallantly defend the
cause of peace. May I add that the assumption of the
presidency of the Council during this debate by the
representative of a major troop-contributing country
should in itself make us a!! more eager to preserve
the credibility of this august body. We, for one, refuse
to consider the Council as a mere forum for rhetoric
-often of doubtful quality--or a theatre for a special
kind of humour, a very special kind of humour
indeed, in questionable taste. Indeed, those of us
who still believe in the international rule of law will
continue to look to the Council with trust and confidence as a point of encounter between practical
ideas and responsible commitments, a!! legally and
truthfully binding.

8. Following the serious incidents of April, the Council, in its resolution 467 (1980) commended UNIFIL
“for its great restraint in carrying out its duties” and
also called attention “to the provisions in [its]
mandate that would allow the Force to use its right to
self-defence”. As indicated in my report, I have
reviewed this question very carefully with the Force
Commander and I am examining new measures to
reinforce the defence capability of UNIFIL, in particular with a view to improving the security of its
personnel and to making the Force headquarters in
Naqoura less vulnerable. Measures are also being
considered to enable the contingents of UNIFIL to
react firmly and consistently to threats or actions
designed to interfere with the discharge of the duties of
the Force. I shall keep the troop-contributing countries and the Council fully informed in this regard.
9. In accordance with the wishes of the Council,
I shall also pursue my contacts with the parties concerned with a view to reactivating the 1949 Genera!
Armistice Agreement and the Israel-Lebanon Mixed
Armistice Commission (ILMAC) at the earliest
possible date.
10. May I emphasize once again that the basic condition for UNIFIL’s successis and will continue to be
a reasonable degree of co-operation from a!! the parties
concerned. I firmly believe that the successful implementation of UNIFIL’s mandate is in the best interests
of al! concerned. In that spirit, I appeal once again for
their co-operation.

16. That is the spirit in which we address ourselves
to the agenda before us, hoping, not without candour,
that others wi!I act’ likewise, for we are al! called
upon to deal here not with words but with human
lives, with the fate of a country, and the future of
international peace and security in the most sensitive
area of the world today.

11. In concluding, I should like to express my deep
appreciation to the Government of Lebanon for the
co-operation it has extended to UNIFIL. My gratitude
also goes to the troop-contributing countries for their
unswerving support in often difficult circumstances.
I should like also to reiterate my appreciation to the
Commander, the officers and the men of UNIFIL and
to their civilian colleagues, as well as the military
observers of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization assigned to the area, for the exemplary
manner in which they have carried out their tasks.

17. The Secretary-Genera!, in paragraph 71 of his
report, has stated unequivocally his “conviction that
UNIFIL is performing an indispensable service to
peace, not only in Lebanon but in the Middle East
as a whole”. Emphatically, yet so serenely, Mr. Waldheim states also:
“While continuing to strive to fulfil a!! the terms
of its mandate, UNIFIL provides a vital mechanism
for conflict control in an extremely volatile situation
which, without it, would almost certainly escalate
very quickly into a far wider conflagration. . . . if
the functioning of UNIFIL were to be seriously
eroded or if the Force were to be withdrawn, we
should very rapidly face in southern Lebanon”
-and I beg to emphasize this-“a resumption and
a widening of hostilities, with grave consequences
far beyond the borders of Lebanon.”

12. Finally, I wish to pay a special tribute to the
memory of those soldiers of UNIFIL who have given
their lives in the cause of peace.
13. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of Lebanon.
14. Mr. TUtiN1 (Lebanon): This is the first time the
Council has met to renew the mandate of UNIFIL
-now a regular and almost repetitive exercise-

18. A statement after the vote on a resolution can
at best claim to be an interpretation and a pledge.
2

frame. It must also be subject to the natural pattern
of consultation between the Secretary-Genera! and the
troop-contributing countries. And the Council may
want to be informed at an early date of developments
in that direction so as to be in a position to act in the
event of non-compliance by any of the parties concerned. New ways and means for implementation
would then have to be sought, in accordance with
appropriate provisions of the Charter.

Therefore, we beg to submit that the resolution
just adopted can be understood, and indeed should be
understood, only as a confirmation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report and of past resolutions, particularly
resolution 467 (1980), adopted two months ago in most
dramatic circumstances. Therefore I shall not abuse the
Council’s time by rephrasing what is contained in an
all-too-self-explanatory report or by calling again for
what is so clearly and forcefully called for in both
resolutions--467 (1980) and 474 (1980). Yet it appears
to us imperative that we should go on record with the
following observations.

22. Fourthly, the reactivation of the General
Armistice Agreement of 1949, by virtue of which
ILMAC must be reconvened, is not only a necessity
for the attainment of the objectives of the Council’s
resolutions; it must be viewed-and is indeed viewed
by my Government-as a major step towards the
achievement of the “just and comprehensive settlement” of the wider problem of the Middle East
called for by the Secretary-General in paragraph 71
of his report. Success in solving the Lebanese question
will become a test of the ability of the United Nations
to bring the peace process back into the framework of
the international Organization. It should also be a test
for the validity of the guarantees of security that the
United Nations will eventually be called upon to give.

19. First, a further renewal of the mandate, despite
the fact that “the fifth mandate of UNIFIL has come
to an end without significant progress being
achieved . . .‘* [ibid., put-u. 631, should not be an
inducement to accept the present srurlrs yrro as an
irreversible fait accompli.
Nor should we be led to
consider an incapacitated UNIFIL as a permanent
fixture of the Middle East politico-military landscape.
Israel must understand, once and for al!, that it should
withdraw totally and unconditionally from Lebanon;
that it must at once stop al! its direct and indirect
activities within our international borders; and that it
must enable UNIFIL to operate effectively and with
fu!l military credibility as the sole instrument capable
of putting an end to a!! hostile activities in southern
Lebanon, in accordance with the objectives of resolution 425 (1978).

23. I should like at this point to go beyond the
Secretary-General’s report and the resolution the
Council has just adopted into a topic which the Council will see is not totally unrelated to our agenda,
since the Secretary-General has reiterated in paragraph 71 of his report the commonly held view that
“it bears repeating that the very complex situation
in southern Lebanon is interrelated with the wider
problem of the Middle East, which still awaits a just
and comprehensive settlement.”

20. Secondly, enhancing the military capabilities of
UNIFIL, mustering diplomatic support and energizing
political action, as required, should be taken very
seriously by a!! those concerned; and so should the
establishment of immediate and total control by
UNIFIL over its entire area of operation, up to the
internationally recognized boundaries, as explicitly
called for by the troop contributors at their meeting
in Dublin on 2 May [see S/1392/] and, of course, by
the Security Council. Needless to say here, by their
meeting in Dublin, the troop-contributing countries
have stressed to a!! concerned that their interest, not to
say their involvement, in the implementation of the
mandate is commensurate with their military and
diplomatic commitment. Rarely has so much been
invested in a peace-keeping operation, which none the
less has been challenged with such arrogance, such
disregard for the most elementary rules of international
law, and such disrespect for the worth and dignity
of human lives.

24. When I spoke of “guarantees of security” a
moment ago, I was referring to the declaration
solemnly made at Venice on 13 June by the heads of
State and Government of the European Community.
With so many representatives of the Community
sitting on the Council, I hardly need to draw members’
attention, or that of those present in this chamber,
to the fact that no party thus invited to share in the
making of peace will trust United Nations guarantees
if the one country in the Middle East, my country,
which has never waged war should be allowed to be
occupied, raped and almost dismantled while the
international community accepts impotently the
arrogant, cynical and defiant challenge of the one
unpunishable, unharnessed Member State, Israel. I

21. Thirdly, the various steps outlined in the Secretary-General’s report and called for by both resolution 467 (1980) and the resolution the Council has just
adopted, as well as by the Dublin meeting, should in
our view be integrated into a comprehensive plan of
action to be negotiated, as previously called for,
between the Secretary-Genera! and the Government
of Lebanon; that new plan of action would replace
and absorb the previous plans of implementation. It
must be related, of course, to a relatively rigid time-

25. There was another declaration issued at Venice
last week which, alas, received no great publicity
until it was circulated this very morning as an official
document of the Council [S/14002] by my colleague,
the representative of Italy. Allow me .to express
Lebanon’s gratitude to the Nine for their solidarity,
their concern for peace and stability in my country
and their support for the total implementation of
UNIFIL’s mandate.
3

26. The Council may want to know that this declaration of the Nine was made in response to an appeal
by the President of the Republic of Lebanon, who, in
an instance of revolt unique in diplomatic annals,
said that he

31. I say all that now for those who, ignorant of the
lessons of history, are today bent on destroying Tyre
and Sidon and Beirut, and the whole of Lebanon in
the name of some obscure pux isrueku, a poor boy’s
version of the Roman dream. To this dream of empire
we have opposed in the past, and will oppose once
more, not the messageof war but the messageof peace
and confidence in our destiny.

“denounces publicly some manoeuvres of international politics, the indifference of certain countries and the duplicity of others concerning projects,
mostly of Israeli inspiration, tending to make
Lebanon bear, in a definitive manner, the weight of
a Palestinian presence on its territory”.

32. Once more we say to friends and foes alike,
with serenity and trust, Lebanon has survived, and
there will be peace in Lebanon before long; there will
be unity and stability and sovereignty. We shall neither
cede nor forget. And we are convinced that peace in
Lebanon will not, and indeed, should not, wait for
peace everywhere else or for the conclusion of everybody else’s wars.

27. The public, solemn and absolute rejection of
Palestinian implantation in Lebanon, as proclaimed
by President Sarkis, is indeed the gravest indictment
of Israel’s policy, both towards Lebanon and towards
the Palestinians-not to speak of the policy of those,
friends and foes alike, who might have found it
convenient to wage their wars in Lebanon, even if it
should be destroyed.

33. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Israel. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

28. This “sideshow*’
concept was recently
denounced in an article by United States Congressman Toby Moffett reflecting on a fact-finding mission
he had led into his ancestors’ homeland, Lebanon.
Writing in The Christian Science Monitor of 11 June,
Congressman Moffett said:

34. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The Council has renewed
once again the mandate of UNIFIL.
35. Israel’s positions with regard to some of the
more problematic issues which arise in this context
are well known. Likewise, the members of the Council
are also familiar with our positions on various points
contained in the resolution, adopted today. Our positions on all these questions remain consistent. They
have been set out in detail in several of the statements
which I have made in the Council, both at the time of
previous renewals of UNIFIL’s mandate and in the
frequent debates which have been held in the Council
between such renewals. I would refer members in
particular to my statements of 12 June and I9 December 1979 [2/47rh and 2180th meetings]. Hence;1 shall
confine myself today to some very brief observations.

“Peace in Lebanon should not be regarded as a
sideshow to ostensibly greater issues. The question
is whether there will be a Lebanon when the time
arrives to solve its problems.”
Congressman Moffett concludes by answering his own
question:
“Lebanon deserves to have its problems treated
with the immediacy they demand . . . Ironically
enough, once Lebanon is no longer considered
a sideshow, it can assume a pivotal role. The
sideshow could become the catalyst.”

36. The central problem confronting Lebanon has
been and remains the presence of alien forces throughout the length and breadth of its territory. As in the
north, so in the south, the presence of thousands ,of
PLO [Pulestine Liberution Orgunizutiun]
terrorists is
a primary cause of the tension and strife in that battletorn country. Their activities both within the area under
UNIFIL’s direct control and in the “Tyre pocket”
constitute a direct threat to three tangible targets: to
the Lebanese villagers in the south, to UNIFIL in
the implementation of its mandate and to the citizens
of Israel-particularly in the north of our country.
In this connection, I wish to refer to my letter of
yesterday’s date [S/13999].

29. The Council has often been treated to interpretations of ancient history. I should like to conciude,
therefore, by referring to my country’s past
experience in response to the anxiety of our friends-a!]
our friends-that we shall not overcome and survive
the “sideshow war”.
30. Long ago, in the year 146 B.C., a Roman senator
who left his indelible mark on ancient history was
Iobsessedwith Punic power to the point of haranguing
his fellow senators daily with the words: “Carthage
must be destroyed’*, for Carthage, though defeated,
was still a challenge to the pax rumunu. But when
Carthage was at last reduced to ashes and the
Phoenicians massacred and dispersed, Tyre and Sidon
and Beirut survived, and so indeed did the whole of
Lebanon, to witness the fall of the Roman Empire.
From the ruins of Carthage, Tunisia-now strong and
prosperous-was born.

37. There will be no long-term improvement in the
situation in Lebanon until the fundamental problem
facing Lebanon as a whole is tackled, that is to say,
there wilI be no real change for the better until ail the
alien elements remove themselves or have been
removed from Lebanese soil so that Lebanese independence, sovereignty and unity can be restored. Simi4

-.

:-

!aYly, there will be no change for the better until the
internal forces in Lebanon tearing that country apart,
day by day, stop their internecine strife, and there wit!
be no change for the better until Lebanon ceases to
serve as a base for hostile activities and acts of terror
against Israel.

42. The difficulties that UNIFIL has encountered
during the past six months have shown the degree to
which the co-operation required of a!! the parties
concerned has been tacking. The Council’s meeting of
April last and the Secretary-General’s report are
eloquent in this respect. Once again the de ficto
forces, supported by Israel, have defied UNIFIL.
Incidents such as that which involved the death--quite
unjustifiably--of two members of a contingent of the
Force on 18 April cannot be tolerated. Today the
da jir<*to forces are again impeding the freedom of
movement of UNIFIL, particularly along the coastal
road. They are obstructing the full deployment of the
Force in the enclave. They are responsible for
manoeuvres to cut off some of the units under the
command of Genera! Erskine from their headquarters,
in disregard of the cohesiveness and unity of the
Force as a whole. At! these actions represent a
constant threat to the security of UNIFIL and its
personnel.

38. For its part, the Government of Israel continues
to support the independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity of Lebanon within its-internationally
recognized boundaries. Israel wants peace in and with
Lebanon. Israel has no territorial claims on Lebanon.
Israel is prepared to open discussions with Lebanon
at any time and place with a view to improving the
relations between our two countries and also to
promoting peace between our countries and in the
region in genera!. To these ends, and given the prevailing reality in Lebanon today, Israel is prepared
to consider the possibility of using the good offIces
of the United Nations.

43. We note also that certain armed elements have
tried to introduce weapons and personnel into the
Force’s area of operation.

39. In concluding, I should like to take this opportunity of paying a tribute to the Commander of
UNIFIL, Major-Genera! Emmanuel Erskine, and his
staff, as wet! as to the soldiers of all ranks serving
with UNIFIL. They carry out their duties in difficult
and sometimes arduous circumstances. Israel also
wishes to express its appreciation to the countries
contributing contingents to UNIFIL. Beyond that, we
would like to take this opportunity of expressing our
condolences to the families of-the men who have made
the ultimate sacrifice in the cause of peace during the
period under review, and of wishing ti speedy and full
recovery to those of UNIFIL’s men who have been
injured in the same cause.

44. Such actions only increase the difficulties the
Force has to face in carrying out its mandate. They
are obstacles to what remains the objective: restoration
of the territorial integrity, unity and sovereignty of
Lebanon. We therefore share the Secretary-General’s
conclusion that it is absolutely essential that at! concerned co-operate fully with the Force in the
achievement of the objectives of its mandate. We
believe that it is essential for at! the parties to allow
the Force fully to carry out the tasks that have been
assigned to it, including control over the territory up to
the international boundary.

40. Mr. LEPRETTE (Franie) (inrrrpretcztion
from
Fien&): The Council has just renewed the mandate
of UNIFIL for six months. In joining in that decision
my delegation wished to stress the importance of the
mission of the Force in southern Lebanon, which the
nine countries of the European Community have just
recalled in Venice. We wish also to reaffirm the value
we attach to the attainment of the objectives set for
the Force in the mandate just given it by the Council
in its resolution 425 (1978). Essentially, there are
three objectives: to confirm the withdrawal of Israeli
forces; to restore international peace and security;
and to help the Lebanese Government ensure the
restoration of its effective authority in the area. The
troop-contributing countries formally recalled those
objectjves in Dublin in May.

45. It is indeed necessary that conditions be created
that would allow the Force to operate effectively and
its security and the security of its personnel to be fully
assured in accordance with the terms of the mandate
and the guiding principles laid down -by the Council
itself. It is in that context that we should consider
strengthening UNIFIL’s capacity, and it is in that
context that we should consider any plan prepared by
the Secretary-Genera! to reorganize its deployment.
46. I listened very carefully to the statement made
by Mr. TuCni, the representative of Lebanon. I should
like to say that we welcome the programme of action
announced by the authorities of his country. That
decision strengthens the confidence France has always
had in this friendly country.

41. In paragraph 63 0: his report the SecretaryGenera! notes that

47. In conclusion, I should like to pay a tribute to the
Secretary-Genera! for the .perseverance with which
he has acted with regard to UNIFIL over the last
few months. I should also like to express once again
the confidence the French authorities have in the
delicate and difficult task he has undertaken. He may
rest assure’ of our support.

“in spite of strenuous efforts at all levels, including
those of the Security Council itself, the fifth mandate
of UNIFIL has come to an end without significant
progress being achieved in implementing fully the
objectives of resolution 425 (1978)“.
5

48. Finally, we should like to express our gratitude
to UNIFIL’s men, who, under the leadership of their
officers and their Commander, Genera! Erskine, have
demonstrated exemplary courage and devotion in
carrying out their mission. A special tribute should be
paid to those who have laid down their lives for the
maintenance of peace in the area.

place indefensible restrictions on UNIFIL’s freedom
of movement, harass the Force and intimidate
Lebanese civilians. In a challenge to the integrity of
the Force, they have also attempted to discriminate
between the national contingents in UNIFIL on
spurious political grounds. We are confident that
UNIFIL will continue to resist such attempts, and that
the national contingents within UNIFIL will deal with
such challenges from any quarter in a unified, consistent and firm manner.

49. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): We
meet today to extend the mandate of UNIFIL for a
sixth time. We do so because ail of us who support
the work of the Organization in international peacekeeping are convinced that UNIFIL has made and continues to make an indispensable contribution to peace.
It is true, of course, that UNIFIL has been unable
to carry out fully the mandate entrusted to it by the
Council in resolution 425 (1978). This is a matter of
deep regret to my Government. We believe that a!!
parties should co-operate with UNIFIL in assisting the
Government of Lebanon to restore its legitimate
authority throughout southern Lebanon.

53. In this connection, we want to express the
admiration of our delegation for the skill and diligence
which Genera! Erskine and his staff have continuously
exhibited in the very trying circumstances confronting
the Force.
54. The views of the United States on resolution 467
(1980) are a matter of record and remain unchanged,
and our vote today should not be construed as an
endorsement of it. We were pleased to vote for the
present resolution; it condemns the acts of violence
which have prevented UNIFIL from implementing its
mandatein full. We support the resolution’s call on the
parties to co-operate with the Secretary-Genera! in
convening a meeting of ILMAC, and we stand ready to
assist in this process. We hope that al! Member
States will join us in fuhiiiing the obligation to support
UNIFIL.

50. At the same time, we must not allow our impatience at the problems faced by UNIFIL to obscure
its real achievements and essential role. For over
two years the Force has been a buffer between bitter
enemies. It has worked to prevent infiltration attempts
and to resist harassment and encroachment on its
area of operation. It has provided an added measure
of security to the long-suffering people of the area
and has prevented local clashes from escalating into a
regional confrontation. It has maintained an area of
operation within which Lebanese army forces have
been deployed, holding out continued hope to the
population of the restoration of the authority of the
Lebanese Government and an end to fighting and
violence. In the highly charged atmosphere of
southern Lebanon, those are signal achievements.

55. Mr. FLORIN

51. Let us not forget that these achievements
have been purchased at a very heavy cost. During this
most recent mandate, the long list of UNIFIL’s
casualties has grown still longer. Eight men have died
in the performance of their duties and 22 others have
been wounded. In a particularly repugnant crime,
two members of the Irish contingent were brutally
murdered. We extend our condolences to the families
of those who have given their lives in the cause of
peace.

(German Democratic Republic)
Russian): Resolution 467 (1980)
condemned the violation of Lebanese sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and in particular Israel’s military
intervention in Lebanon and its provision of military
assistance to the Haddad gang, which is seeking to
wrench. away the south’ of Lebanon. The report of the
Secretary-Genera! contains a number of further facts
testifying to continued acts of aggression by Israel
against Lebanon and new crimes by the Haddad gang.
Indeed, it is no secret that Israel is maintaining that
gang.
56. Members will reca!l the Council’s indignation at
the criminal attacks on UNIFIL in southern Lebanon.
Nothing has changed. The delegation of the German
Democratic Republic has repeatedly demanded that
serious measures be taken by the Council. Deveiopments have confirmed that that demand has been, and
remains, justified.

52. Those who interfere with UNIFIL in the impiementation of its mandate bear a heavy responsibility.
As the Secretary-General’s report makes clear,
attempts to infiltrate armed men into and through
UNIFIL’s area of operation continue, and have
even increased in recent months. Some Palestinian
and Lebanese elements continue to seek to launch
attacks on Israel from Lebanese soil, and ignore the
cease-fire. These elements would do well to reflect
on the grave consequences of such lawless behaviour.
At the same time, militia forces in the border area continue to use violence in indiscriminate ways. They

57. It is not difficult to answer the question why the
situation in that region is so serious and dangerous:
the main reasons are the aggressive policies pursued
by the ruling circles of Israel, their refusal to respect
the sovereignty of Lebanon and their desire to prevent
a comprehensive political solution of the Middle East
conflict. Nothing is being done to implement the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
Genera! Assembly. Indeed, everything is being done
to sabotage their implementation. In this, Israel enjoys
&he support of the imperialist circles of the United
States.

(interpretation

6

from

58. Once again, the delegation of the German
Democratic Republic advocates a just and lasting
political settlement of the Middle East conflict. Such a
settlement requires the withdrawal of Israeli troops
from a!! Arab territories occupied in 1967, the exercise
by the Arab people of Palestine of their right to
selfdetermination, including the creation of their own
independent State, and the exercise by all States in that
region of their rights to sovereignty and security.

obstruct the deployment of UNIFIL in the border
areas, they have made armed attacks on UNIFIL
personnel and property, and have interfered with
communications and so forth.
64. All those facts are fresh proof that Israel, sometimes openly and sometimes under cover of the actions
of the Haddad separatists, is continuing its traditional
policy of gross and scornful disregard for the Council’s
resolutions and is preventing UNIFIL from discharging
the duties entrusted to it by the Council.

59. We are firmly convinced that the resolution just
adopted has a number of weaknesses. It does not
provide for decisive measures which would end
the collusion between Israel and the Haddad gang.
The delegation of the German Democratic Republic
abstained in the vote on that resolution because our
reservations regarding the definition of UNIFIL’s
mandate, the composition and the financing of the
Force are still valid.

65. The Soviet delegation has noted that in view of
the provocations by Israel and the de facto forces it
maintains, the Secretary-Genera!, as he states in his
report, is considering measures to enable the contingents of UNIFIL to react firmly and consistently
to threats or actions designed to interfere with the
discharge of the duties of the Force. The Soviet delegation understands that if such measures are elaborated,
and if they could have a bearing on the nature or the
continuation of the effective functioning of the Force,
the Secretary-Genera! will place this question before
the Council for a decision, as provided in paragraph 4 (a) of his report regarding the establishment
of UNIFIL [S/12611 of 19 March 19781.

60. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpret&on from Russian): For the
umpteenth time in the last two years, the Council
has met to examine the question of the renewal of the
mandate of UNIFIL, which was established to secure
the complete withdrawal of Israeli troops from
Lebanese territory. But thus far UNIFIL has been
unable to carry out the tasks entrusted to it. Furthermore, in recent months the situation in the region
has become even more tense and explosive.

66. One cannot fail to note that in stepping up its
policy of provocation and aggression against Lebanon,
Israel, notwithstanding the widespread indignation of
the international community, has at the same time
been increasing its expansionist policy vis-&is the
occupied Arab territories, intensifying its acts of
repression against the indigenous population of those
territories and openly and defiantly continuing to
create settlements on Arab lands. This blatant disdain
manifested by the ruling circles of Isreal for the
numerous resolutions of the Security Council and the
Genera! Assembly can be expIained by the unswerving
support given to Israel by the present United States
administration. Thanks to that support, Israel has
managed to conclude separate agreements at Camp
David and to sign a treaty with Egypt, thus leaving
itself free to embark on a more aggressive and
expansionist policy against Lebanon and the indigenous poputation in the occupied Arab territories.

61. Throughout this period, Israel has not ceased its
gross armed provocations against Lebanon and the
Palestinian camps on Lebanese territory. The armed
forces of Israel have intervened on Lebanese territory
whenever they wished. In a two-month period,
UNIFIL noted 95 and 45 violations, in May and June
respectively, of the Lebanese borders by Israeli
troops, on the ground, in the air and on the sea.
Scarcely a week has passed when Israel has not
bombarded Lebanese towns and the Palestinian camps
situated in Lebanese territory.
62. Israeli troops have repeatedly infiltrated the
UNIFIL area of operation. The Secretary-General’s
report which is now before the Council notes that on
30 May Israeli troops infiltrated the Irish battalion
area, abducting two Lebanese civilians and that on
2 June a unit of the Israeli forces made an incursion
into the area of deployment of the Dutch battalion.

67. One must note with regret that the resolution
just adopted by the Council does not contain any
precise, clear-cut condemnation of Israel for its armed
provocation against Lebanon or for its support of the
separatist Haddad forces. We believe that the Council
should have drawn the most serious conclusions from
the fact that Israel is continuing its acts of aggression
against Lebanon, thus creating an explosive situation
in the region.

63. Israeli troops still hold a number of positions in
enclaves which are controlled by units of Haddad’s
separatists. In paragraph 65 of the Secretary-GeneraI’s
report we find the following statement: “In the period
under review, the most serious problems have been
with the de facto forces, that is to say, with the
Haddad separatists. Haddad’s forces, which are
dependent on Israel-and this is pointed out in the
Secretary-General’s report-have over recent months
mounted armed provocations which seriously complicate the situation in the region. In continuing to

68. The delegation of the Soviet Union abstained
in the vote on the basis of its policy of principle in
respect of the Force. The Soviet position remains
unchanged, on the mandate given to the Force by the
Council, the principles for the selection of national
contingents and the method of financing the Force.
7

I

I

69. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Ireland, whom I invite to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

da Jbr~o forces, which, as the Secretary-General
points out, are dependent on Israel.
74. In recent weeks there has not been an end to
military assistance to the &fur&o forces, as called for
in resolution 467 (1980). Indeed, we have seen several
incursions by units of the israeli Defence Forces into
UNIFIL’s area of operation, which have again
increased tension in the area. We have also noted
with concern the indications in the Secretary-General’s
report of an increase in attempts by armed elements
to infiltrate UNIFIL’s area of operation. It is unfortunate that UNIFIL’s attention to this and to other
aspects of its mandate has inevitably been diverted by
attacks on it by forces supported by those who
naturally attach particular importance to this aspect
of its duties.

70. Mr. MULLOY (Ireland): Mr. President, first of
all may I thank you, and through you the other members of the Council, for your courtesy in giving me
this opportunity to express my country’s views on the
subject of UNIFIL. May I also congratulate you, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council and
express the view that it is particularly fitting that this
debate on the extension of the mandate of UNIFIL
should be chaired by a representative of Norway,
as you not only bring characteristic wisdom to bear
on these proceedings, but also represent a country
with which mine feels particularly close ties of friendship and solidarity, not least in view of our common
participation in UNIFIL.

75. Following the upsurge in harassment and attacks
by the & j&to forces in April, which involved the
killing of one Fijian soldier and the fatal wounding of
an Irish soldier, and which culminated in the brutal
murder on 18 April of two Irish soldiers, the Council,
in its statement of 18 April, reaffirmed

71. When Ireland addressed the Council at this time
last year, we pointed out that it was not usual for the
Irish representative to seek to intervene in the debates
of the Council. Nevertheless, Ireland has felt impelled
to ask for the floor in five of the last six Council
meetings on UNIFIL. That is a measure of the concern
with which we, as a troop-contributor, have viewed
and continue to view the problems faced by the Force,
a concern that is reinforced by the latest report of the
Secretary-General, in paragraph 63 of which he
states that

“its intention to take such determined action as the
situation calls for to enable the Force to take immediate and total control of its entire area of operation
up to the internationally recognized boundaries”
[2217th meeting,

“the fifth mandate of UNIFIL has come to an end
without significant progress being achieved in implementing fully the objectives of resolution 425
(1978)“.

prrru. 151.

In its resolution 467 (1980), the Council reaffirmed its
determination to implement previous resolutions on
UNIFIL in the totality of the area of operation
assigned to UNIFIL, up to the internationally recognized boundaries.

72. I do not, at this stage, intend to rehearse the
mandate of the Force. Rather it is my intention to
focus on the particular problems which continue to
beset UNIFIL in attempting to implement its mandate.

76. Despite those clear indications of the Council’s
wishes, the de facto forces have, as the SecretaryGeneral points out in paragraph 65 of his report:

73. The root of the problems faced by UNIFIL is
well known and has been fully outlined by the Secretary-General in his report, from which I quote paragraph 64:

“not only prevented a further deployment of
UNIFIL in the enclave, but they have maintained
four positions previously established in the UNIFIL
area and have attempted to establish additional
encroachments”.

“When UNIFIL was established, it was widely
felt that the progressive achievement of those
objectives would be in the interest of all concerned
and would be conducive to the return of peace and
normality to southern Lebanon and the restoration
of full Lebanese sovereignty and authority in the
area. It was therefore assumed that UNIFIL would
have the co-operation of all concerned in fulfilling
its mandate. This assumption remains unrealized.
Not only has UNIFIL been denied the co-operation
required, but it has even on occasion been actively
opposed or attacked in trying to perform its duties.”

Furthermore, the Force continues to be denied that
freedom of movement which is necessary for it to
carry out its duties effectively. That denial, and in
particular the closure of roads on a selective basis
and the isolation of individual contingents from
UNIFIL headquarters, is clearly intolerable. We feel
sure that this aspect will be of particular concern to
the Council in ensuring that UNIFIL continues to
function as an integrated Force.
77. The troop-contributing countries have played
their part in diplomatic efforts to support UNIFIL.
After the tragic events of 18 April, Ireland suggested
a meeting at ministerial level of troop-contributingcountries which would, on the basis of the solidarity

What is equally well known is that the principal,
though by no means the only, source of such efforts
to frustrate and attack UNIFIL continues to be the
8

and commitment
of those countries, seek the conditions that would be adequate to enable UNIFIL
to
operate effectively and with full security for its personnel “within the terms of the mandate and guidelines
laid down by the Security Council”.
A communique
was issued following the meeting in Dublin [S/13921,
annex].
Since that time, troop-contributors
have
actively sought, at the diplomatic level, to support the
Force, and I feel sure that they will continue to do so.
Their action, however, can only be supportive, since
responsibility
for the Force rests with the Security
Council, to which we now look for appropriate action.
In this connection we agree whole-heartedly
with the
Secretary-General’s
statement in paragraph 69 of his
report that “the main road to full implementation
of
the UNIFIL
mandate lies in political and diplomatic
efforts”.

82. I would conclude by joining
the SecretaryGeneral in paying a tribute to the Force Commander,
the staff, the officers and the men who compose
UNIFIL
and who have performed their duties with
such steadfastness and restraint. I wish also to pay
a tribute to the memory of all those soldiers of
UNIFIL
who have died in the cause of peace. The
Secretary-General
has expressed the hope that future
developments will prove that their death was not in
vain. The Government and the people of Ireland most
fervently share that hope.
83. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Netherlands.
I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
84. Mr. SCHELTEMA
(Netherlands):
Mr. President, thank you for having allowed me to participate
in this debate. As the representative of one of the countries contributing troops to UNIFIL,
we feel the need
to take this opportunity
to express our deep concern
about the continuing undesirable situation in which
UNIFIL
finds itself.

78. Ireland fully supports the independence,
sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon and the
authority of its Government. My authorities are glad to
see the efforts of the Lebanese Government to increase
and make more effective the Lebanese presence, both
civilian and military, in UNIFIL’s
area of operation.
We are heartened, too, by the joint humanitarian efforts
in the area, in which UNIFIL
plays a full part, efforts
which are relieving, to some extent, the suffering of
the people of southern Lebanon.

85. As is stated in the Secretary-General’s
report,
UNIFIL
not only has been denied the co-operation
required for the fulfilment
of its mandate but has
also on occasion even been actively opposed or
attacked. This constitutes an unacceptable threat to
UNIFIL,
to the lives of the men serving with it and,
in particular, to the authority of the Security Council.
It is essential that United Nations peace-keeping
operations be respected by all parties concerned.

79. In the course of a debate on UNIFIL
in the Irish
Parliament
on 8 May last, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs made a number of points which I should like
to repeat here on behalf of my Government.

86. I note in this context that both Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization
have -restated their
acceptance of UNIFIL
and given their assurance of
co-operation
with the Force. Unfortunately,
those
assurances have not been carried out in practice.

80. Over the last two years of its existence, and
despite many difficulties,
UNIFIL
has made a significant contribution
towards the prevention
of an
outbreak of general hostilities
in the Middle East.
A withdrawal of the Force would have the most serious
consequences and might easily lead to a wider war,
and we do not want to see such a withdrawal. At the
same time, we are entitled to insist that if a peacekeeping force is to operate it must be given the necessary conditions to do so effectively. The most basic
condition is that the Force should operate with consent.
UNIFIL
must be allowed to carry out its mandate
in every respect and it must have freedom of movement
throughout the area assigned to it and in conditions of
adequate security for its personnel. As the representatives of the troop-contributing
countries stated in
their communique
following their meeting in Dublin,
unless rapid progress is made in creating these conditions, the continued viability of the Force may be
brought into question.

87. The de facto forces of Major Haddad continue
to obstruct UNIFIL
in an intolerable way; not only
have they prevented UNIFIL
from taking control of
its entire area of operation
but they have even
attempted to establish additional encroachments in the
UNIFIL
area. Israeli defence forces themselves have
carried out incursions into the UNIFIL
area.
88. The Netherlands
recognizes
the legitimate
concern of Israel for the safety of its population,
but
we note at the same time that harassment from the
south will divert UNIFIL’s
attention from dealing with
illegal infiltrations from the north.
89. At the same time, attempts by armed elements
to infiltrate personnel and weapons into the UNIFIL
area of operation are incompatible
with assurances
by the leadership of the PLO of co-operation with
UNIFIL.
Although UNIFIL
has made every effort to
prevent these infiltrations, as is shown in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, they necessarily create tensions in
the area. The conclusion can only be that all the
parties concerned, in their own interest, have to cease
their obstruction
of UNIFIL
in order to break the

81. Those remain the views of my Government.
I would endorse the appeals which have been made
to all concerned, particularly the Government of Israel,
for full co-operation to enable the Force to implement
its mandate and to continue to perform what the
Secretary-General
has described as an indispensable
service to peace not only in Lebanon but also in the
Middle East as a whole.
9

recall that the ministers and representatives of troopcontributing
countries meeting in Dublin on 2 May
called upon Israel to cease its support of the defucto
forces. They also called on all the parties to co-operate
fully with UNIFIL.
I should like to reiterate this call
here today.

vicious circle of actions and counteractions
and to
create the conditions in which the Force can carry
out its mandate unhampered.
90. I should like to repeat the call of the 11 troopcontributing
countries, following
their meeting in
Dublin on 2 May, urging all parties to co-operate
fully with UNIFIL.
This means that all attacks,
harassment and infiltrations
have to cease, that full
freedom of movement in the enclave must be granted
and that UNIFIL
must be allowed to expand its
area of operation up to the internationally
recognized
boundaries. Only thus can UNIFIL
fulfil its mandate
and can the security of its personnel be guaranteed;
only thus will the Force be able to contribute to the
gradual restoration
of Lebanese sovereignty
and
authority and of peace in the region.

99. For the continued functioning of UNIFIL,
it is
important
that further progress be made towards
the full implementation
of its mandate as set out
in resolution
425 (1978). The full deployment
of
UNIFIL
in its entire area of operation, up to the
internationally
recognized boundaries, is indispensable
for the proper functioning of the Force. It is also our
firm conviction that that will increase the security of
all the parties involved.
100. The Council, in its resolution 467 (1980), called
for a meeting of the Israel-Lebanon
Mixed Armistice
Commission.
We commend the Secretary-General
for
the steps he has taken to that end, and we should
like to endorse the call in the resolution just adopted
on the parties concerned to extend to him their full
co-operation in this respect.

91. The
Netherlands
supports
the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to convene a meeting of the IsraelLebanon Mixed Armistice Commission as one of the
possible avenues to help improve the situation in
southern Lebanon.
92. My Government
holds the view that UNIFIL
performs an essential peace-keeping task and that its
withdrawal would create a grave risk of a new explosion in the area. However, some basic requirements,
including
the safety of its personnel, have to be
fulfilled.

101. We would also welcome whatever further steps
the Lebanese Government might take to increase its
military and civilian presence in the area.
102. Although no significant progress has been made
towards the implementation
of the objectives of resolution 425 (1978), the Secretary-General
recommends
the extension of UNIFIL’s
mandate for another six
months. The Norwegian Government
supports this
recommendation
because we share his view that
UNIFIL
performs an indispensable service to peace
not only in Lebanon but also in the Middle East as a
whole. We agree with him when he states that the
withdrawal of UNIFIL
would lead to a resumption
and widening of hostilities with grave consequences
far beyond the borders of Lebanon.

93. Now that the Council has renewed the mandate,
I am in a position to state that my Government
is
prepared to continue its contribution to UNIFIL
for a
new period of six months.
94. Finally, I would commend the officers and men
for their courage, firmness and restraint in the fulfilment of their most difficult task; and, if I may, I wish,
to express my respect for and extend my compliments
to the Commander of the Force, who is present today
at this meeting of the Council.

103. In this situation we see no alternative to the
continued presence of UNIFIL,
in spite of its difIiculties. Norway therefore voted in favour of the
extension of the mandate for another period of six
months and is ready to continue to participate in the
Force. In this connection, I should, however, like to
reiterate our concern about UNIFIL’s
financial situation. It places a heavy burden on the troop-contributing
countries over and above the extreme hardships
endured by their contingents.
We urge all Govemments to assume their share in the financing so as to
enable UNIFIL
to continue to play its vital role in
maintaining peace in the area.

95. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now make .a statement
in my capacity as the representative of NORWAY.
96. Only two months ago the Council held an extensive debate on the situation in southern Lebanon,
during which I had the opportunity
to present the
views of the Norwegian Government [22/5th meeting].
On this occasion I should like to limit myself to
some brief remarks in connection with the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the activities of UNIFIL
during
the past six months.
97. The report notes the regrettable fact that UNIFIL
is not yet receiving the full co-operation of the parties
concerned.
We have even experienced
again the’
Force being actively opposed or attacked when it is
trying to perform its duties. That is clearly unacceptable.

104. In conclusion, I should like to pay a tribute to
the Commander of UNIFIL,
Major-General
Erskine,
and his staff and to the officers and men of UNIFIL,
who carry out their duties in extremely difficult and
dangerous situations.

98. The most serious problems continue to be with
the defaclo forces. In this connection I should like to
Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

The meeting
00300

rose at 5.50 p.m.
8361462-September

1986-2,OSp
