S/PV.7121

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7121st meeting

Wednesday, 26 February 2014, 10.40 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kazragienė . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Lithuania)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Shearman
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on the restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2014/105)

14-24630 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1424630*

S/PV.7121

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on the
restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2014/105)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau and
Mozambique to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. José
Ramos-Horta, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, to participate
in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. RamosHorta, who is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Bissau.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent
Representative of Brazil, to participate in this
meeting in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/105, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the restoration of constitutional
order in Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ramos-Horta.
Mr. Ramos-Horta: Speaking here from Bissau,
I would like to let the Council know that with me is
my very loyal team — the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
family, who sustain the United Nations presence
here. To my right is Mr. Gana Fofang, Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Resident
Representative; to my left is my chief of staff; and,
following the order from the left, are our head of

2/12

26/02/2014

administration, Guadalupe Sousa, head of the Human
Rights Section, Antero Lopes, head of security sector
reform and rule-of-law assistance, Martinho Chachiua,
head of the Political Affairs Section, Linda de Souza,
also from Political Affairs, Ruddy Flores, from Political
Affairs, Musafiri Prosper, from the Strategic Planning
Unit, and Raluca Eddon, from the Peacebuilding
Support Office. Other staff who do not fit at the table
are sitting behind us in the room. We all extend our
warmest greetings to you, Madam President, and to
members of the Security Council.
We wish to express our utmost satisfaction
with and appreciation for the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/19) issued by the Council as a result of
our interaction in November 2013. The report of the
Secretary-General before the Council (S/2014/105)
covers developments in Guinea-Bissau since my last
briefing, on 26 November 2013 (see S/PV.7070). Now
I would like to highlight some developments since the
report was drafted.
On the political front, after much delay the largest
party, the African Party for the Independence of Guinea
and Cape Verde (PAIGC), held its national congress, from
2 to 11 February. Mr. Domingos Simões Pereira, former
Minister of Public Works and Infrastructure under
former President Koumba Yalá and former Executive
Secretary of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, was elected leader with a majority of over
60 per cent of the votes. The candidate with the second
highest number of votes, Braima Camará, President of
the Chamber of Commerce of Guinea-Bissau, obtained
37 per cent of the votes.
Although the contest was bitterly fought, the
defeated candidates graciously conceded. For his part,
Mr. Simões Pereira called on his rivals to join him
in promoting reconciliation and unity in the party.
Mr. Simões Pereira’s election offers real hope for a new
generation of leaders to emerge and foster the required
changes for the country. His election has generated
a very positive mood across the nation. He faces a
challenge to unite the party.
Nevertheless, there are still pending issues between
Mr. Pereira, supported by his constituencies in the
party, and the candidate with the second highest number
of votes, Mr. Camará, including on the composition
of the Central Committee and the Political Bureau.
Negotiations between Mr. Pereira and Mr. Camará are
ongoing. I continue to engage all in active dialogue,

14-24630

26/02/2014

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

providing ideas and advice when asked. I am confident
that they will reach the necessary compromises to
enable stability and governance.
While Mr. Pereira is expected to lead PAIGC in the
legislative elections, now scheduled for 13 April through
a recently issued presidential decree, discussions are
still ongoing within the party on whom to support for
the presidential elections.
The divisions in the second largest party, the Party
for Social Renewal (PRS), have continued and led to
the emergence of four presidential candidates among
the senior members of the party. While the historic PRS
leader and founder, former President Koumba Yalá,
publicly declared that he would abandon active politics
and decided to endorse Mr. Nuno Na Bian, Director
of Civil Aviation in the country, for the presidential
elections, the party itself nominated Mr. Abel Incada, a
known businessman and Vice-President of the Chamber
of Commerce, as its official presidential candidate.
Opposing the party’s decision, two senior members
declared themselves independent candidates as well.
The mushrooming of independent candidates is
symptomatic of the fragmented nature of politics in
the country, further compounded by the crisis since the
coup on 12 April 2012. So far, there are 12 candidates,
eight independent and four from the political parties,
still excluding PAIGC, all running for the presidency.
A presidential decree, issued yesterday, shortens the
legal timelines to allow for the election on 13 April
and provides the date of 5 March as the deadline for
candidates to submit applications to the Supreme Court
to run in the presidential and parliamentary elections.
The Supreme Court says that it needs about
12 days to properly scrutinize the list of candidates.
Some 40 political parties are expected to contest the
parliamentary elections. However, on the basis of the
existing electronic data system, donated and set up
by Timorese electoral and information technology
specialists, the Supreme Court may be able to scrutinize
the list of candidates in about five days.
As I have mentioned, following a consultation
process with stakeholders, in particular the national
political actors, as well as international partners,
Transitional President Nhamadjo formally announced,
on 21 February, that the legislative and presidential
elections would finally be held on 13 April. That
adjustment was justified in order to enable the
conclusion of the pioneering information technology-

S/PV.7121

based voters’ registration process throughout the
country, while political will was also being secured. If
all runs smoothly, the electoral process could therefore
be concluded before discussions on the renewal of
the mandate of UNIOGBIS are held by the Security
Council in May.
The Government declared the end of the voter
registration process on 10 February. The 15-day period
for the exhibition and correction of the provisional
voter lists started on 18 February and is ongoing. It
is expected that the final voters list will be ready by
the end of next week. The provisional figures indicate
that more than 770,000 voters have been registered.
That is at least 95 per cent of the estimated potential
of the voting population of 810,961. That is indeed a
surprising, impressive record.
The National Electoral Commission, with technical
support from an international expert team hired
through UNDP, has been gearing up to ensure that all
logistics are in place to conduct elections operations.
The first batch of election materials was delivered on
12 February. A civic education outreach campaign will
also be conducted. I would like to commend all donors
to the electoral process, especially Timor-Leste, the
Economic Community of African States (ECOWAS)
and Nigeria, and those who have contributed to the
UNDP-managed basket fund in support of the activities
run by the National Electoral Commission, notably the
European Union, for their generosity.
The voter registration has been an undeniable
success. Timor-Leste, Nigeria and ECOWAS must be
commended for their support and provision of critical
equipment for that essential step, enabling the electoral
process and the restoration of constitutional order.
Timor-Leste allocated $6 million and deployed more
than 20 Timorese election advisers and information
technology specialists, all working round the clock in
a very challenging environment. So far, ECOWAS has
disbursed $5.6 million. Nigeria has provided well over
$2 million in support of the activities and needs of the
technical electoral support office.
A national plan for electoral security is being
implemented, operationally supported by UNIOGBIS
and the Economic Community of West African States
Mission in Bissau, with the establishment of national
joint command structures to be led by the police.
The military are to assume a reserved role. In that
framework, a successful training of 60 national and

14-246303/12

S/PV.7121

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

international senior police and military officers was
conducted on 14 February, at the National Defence
Institute, supported by UNIOGBIS. Furthermore,
about 1,500 national police and military are expected
to be trained in the next few weeks, in a partnership
between UNIOGBIS and Brazil. UNIOGBIS will also
gradually strengthen its presence in the regions during
the elections.
While we are mindful that intra-party issues are
still being worked out, which is to be expected in such
kind of scenarios, the technical conditions for elections
are in place and no further delays should be considered.
Elections are to finally be held no later than 13 April
and no further excuses should be accepted at all. The
Council’s express support in that regard would be
highly appreciated.
Each day that passes affects the economy and
the livelihoods of the people. The mission of the
International Monetary Fund to Bissau earlier this
month noted that the economy was still strongly
affected by the economic and political consequences
of the April 2012 coup and had not recovered. The
economy is likely to have grown by only 0.3 per cent
in 2013. Civil servants are currently owed at least three
months’ salary, and in many families they are the single
source of income. The humanitarian situation has
deteriorated, despite direct support to the population by
international partners through United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations.
I urge all stakeholders to play their part in ensuring
a meaningful election in a climate of peace and
security. Citizens must be able to fully exercise all their
rights, including the right to freedom of expression
and assembly. At the same time, all political parties
and their supporters must play their part in ensuring a
climate of peace and security. The media must engage
in fair, equitable and unbiased reporting.
The defence forces and security institutions must
act within the limits of their roles, as defined in the
Constitution and specific laws, and refrain from any
interference and intimidation. They should also ensure
the security of State institutions, including the ones
involved in the electoral process, as well as the security
of all candidates.
While mindful of the record of rule of might in the
country and the series of incidents reported, I have no
concrete reason thus far to state that the defence forces
and security institutions will interfere with the process

4/12

26/02/2014

as the elections approach. We will continue to be
vigilant, while seeking the Council’s express support
in that regard.
Similarly, I believe that the political parties and
candidates, as well as their supporters, will show the
utmost discipline and fully respect the verdict of the
people and the elections’ results to be announced by
the Supreme Court which, as the Council knows is
the final arbiter in the event of electoral complaints
and also declares the final results. I recommend that
the Security Council consider a robust and prompt
response, including targeted sanctions, to any attempt
to undermine the electoral process and post-electoral
stability.
It is with regret that I note the inability of the
authorities to follow up the investigations into human
rights abuses and serious crimes, such as the beating
of the Minister of Transport and Communication on
5 November 2013. It is also a matter of concern that
no conclusive judicial action has been taken on either
the violation of the integrity of the Nigerian Embassy,
on 8 October, or with regard to the case of the abusive
onboarding of alleged Syrian citizens who ended up
traveling on fake Turkish service passports to Portugal,
despite an inquiry that has been completed.
While I commend international partners for their
generous contributions, which have made the prospect
of elections and the return to constitutional order
possible, I would urge them to look beyond the horizon
to the post-electoral transition. The newly elected
Government will face enormous challenges, and it is
paramount that international partners stand ready to
resume engagement with the country from day one
following the installation of the new, democratically
elected authorities. That specifically means providing
emergency assistance and support to critical
reforms, prior to a pledging conference, which will
comprehensively address the overall State-building and
development needs of the country.
Fast-tracking reforms in the defence and security
sectors, including the urgent modernization of the
armed forces, thus fostering civilian oversight, is
paramount for stability and democratic governance in
Guinea-Bissau. The demobilization and reintegration
strategies need to be supported immediately after the
elections, along with community-oriented internal
security reforms and support to the independence
of the judiciary in order to fight impunity, as well as

14-24630

26/02/2014

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

combating all forms of transnational organized crime
and drug trafficking.
Decades of neglect and instability in GuineaBissau have made its institutions ineffective, corroded
by corruption and porous to military might. In the
post-election period there is a need to start rebuilding
the State institutions. A programmatic response is the
Government’s efficacy amelioration programme. My
staff and I have provided our national and international
partners with an executive summary of what I believe
the international community role should be in assisting
Guinea-Bissau on the path of reform, modernization
and sustainable development, following the elections.
The
temporary
co-location
of
qualified
international advisers with co-executive powers in the
critical structures of decision-making within the civil
service is essential for enduring stability, democratic
governance and the development of the country, as it
will allow for the confidence of international partners
to be gained.
While the reform and modernization of the armed
forces and security institutions should remain a key
priority for the democratically elected authorities
following the general elections, it will also be important
to rebuild the other State institutions, notably the
judiciary and public administration in general.
I hope that multilateral and regional bodies, such
as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund,
the African Development Bank, the European Union,
United Nations agencies and regional and bilateral
partners, will seriously consider the draft strategy now
being made available, and promptly begin consultations
so as to agree on how best to assist Guinea-Bissau and
its legitimate authorities in moving forward with no
further ado.
I would propose that a presidential statement
reinforcing those key considerations would help our
work in the field throughout the ongoing electoral
process and beyond.
Finally, I would like to offer some words of gratitude
to the staff of the United Nations, both at Headquarters
and in the field, and the other international partners
working with us in Guinea-Bissau, such as the
Economic Community of West African States, the
African Union, the European Union and the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries, who have always
shown great professionalism and dedication.

S/PV.7121

Madam President, you and all other Council
members, as well as the Secretary-General, are always
in my prayers. I beg the Almighty and Merciful to
continue to bestow on them all endless wisdom as they
try to bring peace to our troubled world. May our God
bless us all.
The President: I thank Mr. Ramos-Horta for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Patriota.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you for convening
this meeting, Madam President, and for the invitation
to brief the Security Council in my capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. José
Ramos-Horta, for his briefing and his outstanding
leadership at this very crucial moment of GuineaBissau’s history.
As has been mentioned, I accepted the invitation
from the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to visit the country late last month. I take this
opportunity to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, all personnel of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea Bissau and
the Peacebuilding Support Office for their support to
the visit. I also thank Assistant Secretary-General Judy
Cheng-Hopkins for joining me, in a demonstration of
her ongoing commitment.
During my four-day visit to Bissau, I spoke with a
wide spectrum of interlocutors, including transitional
authorities, political actors, civil servants, civil society
organizations and international partners. In each of
those meetings, I stressed that free and transparent
elections and a return to constitutional order were
essential for the full resumption of much-needed
international cooperation.
I found a country in serious economic distress,
in spite of its human and material resources and
potential. The consequences of the 2012 coup hit the
poorest and most vulnerable the hardest, and do not
seem to have affected its perpetrators in significant
ways. It seems that an urgent reflection on the part of
the international community is needed to avoid such
twisted consequences.
In contacts with international partners I was able to
identify a scenario of improved regional and subregional
coordination. A positive regional context is a key factor

14-246305/12

S/PV.7121

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

for stability in Guinea-Bissau. I will continue to work
for such positive trends to gain even more traction.
In meetings with various transitional authorities,
including in the military, I could observe the very
complex realities related to the modernization of the
security and defence sectors. While there seems to be
a national consensus on the urgency of, and even the
main modalities for, the modernization of the security
sector, simplistic notions about the role of the military
in politics, with little consideration of civil-military
relations and the conduct of political elites, are of
limited practical assistance.
A more comprehensive approach is necessary.
Meaningful modernization entails an adequate
understanding of the underlying historical and
sociological factors contributing to political instability
since independence, and also since the conflict of 1998.
It will require sustained support to political dialogue,
State reform and the modernization of key State
structures, from the police and the judiciary to public
administration and services.
Any effective process will have to ensure that no
social group or stakeholder be — nor perceive itself as
being — relegated to second-class citizenship, and that
the various contributions to the process of institutional
progress be recognized in a plural and democratic
national environment with equal opportunity for all.
International coordination among key actors
supporting security sector reform in Guinea-Bissau
will remain important. The Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) is positioned to play
a central role, including through the strengthened
presence of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau.
The international community should be ready to rally
behind the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral’s lead and support efforts decisively and
swiftly.
I was impressed by the willingness of key regional
and international partners in Bissau, such as ECOWAS
and the European Union, to heed that call. Following
the elections, my own country, Brazil, will reassess the
prospects for resumed cooperation in that field.
International crime and drug-trafficking remain
major concerns among international interlocutors,
in spite of assessments pointing to a relative decline.
The issue of irregular fishing and logging licenses
was raised by national interlocutors as an emerging

6/12

26/02/2014

challenge. Institutional constraints, the political
situation and the lack of law-enforcement resources
remain significant obstacles. A focus on increasing
transparent revenue-collection and strengthening local
capacities to promote social and economic development
stands a good chance of garnering support.
I am all the more convinced that impunity in
Guinea-Bissau is a result of persistent political
instability, weak institutions and unresolved hurdles
in civil-military relations. An integrated approach
capable of reinforcing national ownership of a renewed
commitment to democracy and a more inclusive society
will yield the best results.
While in Bissau, I could testify to Timor-Leste’s
invaluable contribution in support of the voterregistration process. The importance of the registration
process transcends the upcoming elections. It enables the
exercise of civil and political rights, but can also serve
planning and policy-making purposes. I commend the
people of Guinea-Bissau for the enthusiasm with which
they participated in the registration process, which
allowed for a historical expansion of the electorate
throughout the country. The next elections therefore
have the potential to be the most significant step for the
consolidation of democracy in Guinea-Bissau’s history.
In the light of the extension of voter registration, the
resulting rescheduling of elections does not necessarily
imply a lack of commitment. The technical quality of
elections, for which the registration process is key, is
just as important.
I welcome the election of a new leader of
Guinea-Bissau’s major party, the African Party for
the Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde. The
nomination of candidates by various parties and
the success of the registration process in difficult
conditions can help to generate positive dynamics
for the restoration of democracy, in spite of the many
challenges ahead.
I fully concur with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General’s call on all political actors to
overcome their political divides, move to the next phase
and march peacefully and decisively to a new chapter
in the country’s political life without further delay — a
new chapter that is possible and in which I believe the
PBC can play a constructive strategic role.
On the economic front, the impact of political
instability on the economy is devastating. Public

14-24630

26/02/2014

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

finances are in a very poor state. The withdrawal of
international assistance has had a direct impact on
public services and economic activity.
Food insecurity in fertile Guinea-Bissau is a
glaring contradiction. Dependency on the cashew nut
was pointed out as a major challenge. As stated in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/105), nearly half
of the population relies on cashew nut sales for their
primary income. Alternatives aimed at diversifying
the economy range from processing cashew nuts,
stimulating the production of other crops, including
rice, cassava and beans, and promoting fishery, to
investments in the mining and tourism sectors. The
logistics services sector can play an important role,
with the planned construction of a deep-water port in
Buba, where natural conditions are favourable.
In the absence of legitimate authorities, I was
not able to discuss strategic, long-term peacebuilding
priorities with national decision makers. Nevertheless,
I would like to present some conclusions that may
help provide a strategy for our collective engagement
with Guinea-Bissau and measure progress in the
peacebuilding agenda, including with a view to
engaging with legitimate authorities in future.
First, Guinea-Bissau’s international partners,
especially those in the region, have a decisive role
to play in fostering stability. For that contribution to
materialize in the most effective way, strong political
coordination is central. That is one clear area for the
immediate engagement of the PBC.
Secondly, I wish to highlight the vision of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ramos-Horta
of intensive international support to a State-rebuilding
programme following the elections. The Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the PBC can play an important role in
supporting the Special Representative’s vision.
Thirdly, I would like to propose for further
discussion three achievable, modest, medium-term
strategic objectives in the institutional, socioeconomic
and security areas, which can guide the PBC in
its resumed engagement and also contribute to the
Council’s subsequent deliberations.
On the institutional track, one objective is the
completion of a full democratic cycle with a constitutional
transfer of power to elected officials. Apart from the
strong international political engagement, in which
the PBC finds a natural place, that can be supported

S/PV.7121

by technical cooperation in public administration,
aligned with the Special Representative’s proposals,
and support to political dialogue, including through
social communication. Let me highlight, in that
regard, the importance of sustained engagement by
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
including in making technical expertise available.
The Security Council plays a key role in that regard
by helping ensure that electoral results are respected
and continuing to monitor closely the post-electoral
political developments.
On the social and economic track, one objective
is to make significant strides on social and economic
indicators, with a focus on food security and rural
development. The World Food Programme should be
able to envisage its departure from Guinea-Bissau.
Responsible economic diversification is key. The
economic empowerment of women, who are responsible
for more than 80 per cent of the workforce in cashew nut
harvesting, is an essential dimension. Moreover, I was
impressed by women’s organizations in Guinea-Bissau
and the way they bring together different ethnicities,
religious denominations and political affiliations under
the common objective of economic empowerment.
They are obviously an important driving force for
peacebuilding efforts.
On the security sector track, an objective is to
provide a platform for coordination and strategizing on
the international support to the modernization of the
security sector. The Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the PBC can help bring key actors together, deepen the
understanding of the political and social dynamics in
play and assess the need for comprehensive mechanisms
of support to the reintegration of retired military
personnel, along with political civil-military dialogue
and reconciliation.
Once again, and especially after visiting the
country, let me stress that, in contrast with the current
crisis, Guinea-Bissau has clear potential as a stable
and prosperous nation. With modest resources invested
in national capacities, a great deal can be achieved.
I was struck by the conversations I had with deeply
committed, highly educated officials, dynamic civil
society organizations and wise cultural and religious
leaders. A pluralistic, peaceful and vibrant society is
ready to fully emerge from decades of poverty and
instability and deserves our active solidarity.
The President: I thank Ambassador Patriota for
his briefing.

14-246307/12

S/PV.7121

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

I now give the floor to the representative of GuineaBissau.
Mr. Da Gama (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on behalf of my country, on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and assure you of my country’s full
cooperation and support. I would also like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General José
Ramos-Horta for his detailed briefing and encourage
him to continue his efforts to enable the country to
return to constitutional order and thus deal with the
major challenges before us in terms of my country’s
stabilization and development. Those are goals to
which the people of Guinea-Bissau aspire. I also
welcome the statements by Ambassador Antonio de
Aguiar Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil
and President of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, and the statement to
be made by Ambassador António Gumende, Permanent
Representative of Mozambique and representative
of the Executive Secretariat of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP). I would like to
pay tribute to the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) through Ambassador Youssoufou
Bamba, Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire and
current Chairman of ECOWAS, for his tireless support
to my country throughout this transition process.
I welcome the appointment of Mr. Carlos Moura
of Brazil as Special Representative of the CPLP for
Guinea-Bissau, and we are very pleased that the
coordination between international organizations, in
particular ECOWAS and the CPLP, is being increasingly
strengthened on the ground.
Since the last coup in Guinea-Bissau, on 12 April
2012, we have been fully aware that the path that will
lead us to the restoration of constitutional order will not
only be long, but also entail huge sacrifices from the
people of Guinea-Bissau, especially the most vulnerable
segments of society, namely, young people and women.
That is due to the fact that our country depends heavily
on the help of its partners, and our major partners
have suspended or reduced their cooperation with our
country.
Today, at the end of the long journey that plunged
the country into significant political, economic and
social crisis, we are driven by our strong belief that this
is the final phase of the transition period. That period

8/12

26/02/2014

will end, of course, with the realization of the most
important recommendation of resolution 2048 (2012),
which is the restoration of constitutional order.
After consultations with all the political parties
and other national actors, the President decreed that
presidential and legislative elections would be held
on 13 April 2014, thus confirming the postponement
of the elections, which were originally scheduled for
16 March 2014.
This new development in no way reflects a lack
of political will on the part of the authorities of the
country, but rather is motivated by objective conditions
that were not met within the desired time frame. For
example, in order be able to identify the largest number
of voters possible, and given the logistical difficulties
encountered during that process, the electoral census
lasted a little over two months instead of 21 days as
originally planned, thus missing certain legal deadlines
stipulated in Guinea-Bissau’s electoral code.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that almost 95 per
cent of voters were counted by the census, including the
country’s diaspora, who, for the first time, will be able
to participate in the upcoming election of their leaders.
We should note that the electoral registry has never
before included such an impressive number of voters.
In that respect, I would like to thank all our partners
who, despite the sometimes emergency circumstances in
which they were called to intervene, have, through their
contributions, enabled this process to be successful.
We hope to be able to count on their support during
the post-election period. In that connection, I must
highlight the examples of solidarity and cooperation
received from the Federal Republic of Nigeria, TimorLeste, ECOWAS, the African Union and the European
Union, among others. We believe that, at the end of this
transition process, our cooperative relations with our
traditional partners, including Angola, Portugal, Brazil
and others, will be further strengthened, thus allowing
for a full resumption of our friendly relations based on
solidarity.
The elections to be held next April will be a first
step in the major challenge that our country faces in the
coming years.
Along with the urgent need for the reform and
modernization of our defence and security forces,
which, incidentally, remains at the top of our
priorities, Guinea-Bissau needs close support from the

14-24630

26/02/2014

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

international community so as to undertake a massive
reform of the public administration and establish the
essential conditions for the promotion of justice in order
to combat impunity, which unfortunately still prevails
in our society.
The country’s social stability will largely depend,
among other things, on the future that we provide for
young people and women. In spite of their vulnerability,
those two groups represent potentially profitable
sectors in the economy if we create for them a climate
conducive to their professional development.
The issue of drug trafficking remains another
challenge to overcome. My country remains committed
to continuing its efforts to eradicate that scourge.
However, given the great fragility of our security
and justice institutions, among others, as well as the
transnational dimension of the phenomenon, regional
and international cooperation must be strengthened.
Guinea-Bissau is open to all types of cooperation in
that field so as to be able to combat that evil.
In that context, we fully support the recommendations
of the Secretary-General in its latest report on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau (S/2014/105), according
to which the post-election phase should merit special
support from the international community in order
to build a lasting foundation for our development and
stability.
In conclusion, allow me once again to reiterate
my country’s deep gratitude to the members of the
Council and our partners, who have always stood by us
throughout this difficult transition stage.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mozambique.
Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): I would like to
begin by extending my warm congratulations to you,
Madam President, on the accession of your country to
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February, and to thank you for inviting me to participate
and deliver this statement on behalf the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP) in this briefing
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, a member of our
Community.
The Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
welcomes the comprehensive report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2014/105) on the current status of the
process leading to the full restoration of constitutional
order in that country and the valuable and insightful

S/PV.7121

information provided by His Excellency Mr. Antonio
Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil and Chair
of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, gathered during his recent visit to Bissau,
as well as the statement by the Permanent Representative
of Côte d’Ivoire on behalf of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS).
The briefings provided on the latest developments
in the country, which the CPLP has been following with
keen interest, convey a mixed picture of encouraging
progress coupled with the persistence of areas of
concern, to which all stakeholders should continue to
pay particular attention.
The successful conclusion of the voter registration
process and the adoption of a national electoral security
plan for 2014 — arrangements aimed at ensuring the
holding of credible, inclusive, peaceful, free and fair
legislative and presidential elections — constitute a
positive development, of which we should take note.
We welcome the preparations by all political
parties to participate in the elections, which can be
seen as a demonstration of a renewed commitment of
those national political actors to the irreversibility of
the process of restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau.
We recognize that such positive developments
are in no small measure thanks to the support of the
international community for the people of GuineaBissau in their endeavours to find a lasting solution
to the political crisis precipitated by the coup d’état of
April 2012.
We would like to commend the tireless efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. José Ramos-Horta, who has done a remarkable job
in rebuilding the trust and encouraging sobriety among
all stakeholders by managing with zeal, patience and
dexterity the numerous and intricate issues that arise
in a stabilization process of that nature in a balanced
fashion.
Although under the prevailing circumstances one
might suppose that a delay in the elections may be
reasonable, we must note that we are facing the third
successive postponement. That is particularly worrying
in a country where the people have been exposed and
subjected to all types of suffering and traumas since
the onset of the current political crisis two years ago.
The international community must continue to impress

14-246309/12

S/PV.7121

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

upon the current authorities the urgency of holding free,
fair and inclusive elections on the new date of 13 April.
Similarly, the recurrent reports of episodes of
intimidation, the violation of human rights, the lack
of concrete actions to fight impunity and restrictions
on the right to freedom of expression and assembly,
which create a persisting climate of insecurity, are a
cause of concern. Those aspects were plainly visible
in the beating of the Minister of Transportation and
Communications last November or the serious incident
of the forced boarding of passengers with forged
documentation on a Bissau-Lisbon Air Portugal flight
in December.
The economic and humanitarian situation has
deteriorated substantially, posing a threat to the
stabilization process on the eve of the elections. The
strikes that are taking place over the non-payment of
salaries in various economic and social sectors amply
demonstrate the underlying seriousness of the situation.
A lasting solution to such problems, among others,
requires the continued strong commitment of national
stakeholders to the cause of the political stabilization
and greater involvement of the international community
in supporting the future democratically elected
authorities. We must mobilize our efforts to provide to
those authorities, if they so require and in cooperation
with other regional and international organizations,
the security conditions to allow them to implement the
necessary reforms in the country that will once and
for all pull Guinea-Bissau out of the vicious cycle of
recurrent instability.
As part of the long-standing commitment to
the Bissau-Guinean people, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking countries in January appointed
Ambassador Carlos Moura as its Special Representative
to Guinea-Bissau. Ambassador Moura has the
responsibility to monitor developments and to cooperate
with all stakeholders, whenever necessary, until the
completion of the electoral process. His deployment
represents a concrete, albeit modest, contribution by
the CPLP to the efforts of the international community
and conveys our sense of permanent solidarity with the
people of Guinea-Bissau.
Let me conclude by once again calling upon the
international community to continue supporting
the electoral process in Guinea-Bissau and to begin
preparations to support the future legitimate authorities
immediately after their election in the medium- to long-

10/12

26/02/2014

term perspective. The holding of a free, fair, inclusive
and credible election, the implementation of its results
and the submission of the military to the civilian
authorities are the conditions required for the return to
constitutional order, in line with the relevant resolutions
adopted by this body, in collaboration with the African
Union and other international stakeholders.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the 15 States members
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). I welcome the excellent report by the
Secretary-General on the situation in Guinea-Bissau,
contained in document S/2014/105, dated 14 February
2014.
First of all, as this is the first time that my
delegation takes the floor in the month of February,
allow me, Madam President, to convey my delegation’s
warm congratulations on Lithuania’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this moth.
I would like to thank His Excellency Prime
Minister José Ramos-Horta, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his excellent briefing
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau and, above all, for
his leadership in managing the crisis in that country. I
should likewise like to thank all those who spoke before
me — Ambassador Patriota, Ambassador Da Gama and
Ambassador Gumende, on behalf of the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries. The Economic
Community of West African States shares their view
that, since the holding of the Council’s previous
meeting on Guinea-Bissau (see S/PV.7070), the political
situation in the country has continued to be marked
by the uncertainty generated by the reluctance on the
part of the leadership of the Transitional Government
to carry out general elections to mark the end of the
transition, in line with the decision taken by the
ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government.
The Transitional Government has justified its
inability to meet the transition calendar for a number
of reasons. They include a lack of funds to compile
electoral and voter registration lists and the issue of
district boundaries, which they claim impeded the
holding of the elections under optimal conditions by
the set date of 24 November 2013. That environment
has been aggravated by the interaction among political

14-24630

26/02/2014

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

actors that led to the breakdown of consensus on the
timing of the transition.
Nevertheless, ECOWAS States members, working
in close cooperation with the West African Economic
and Monetary Union and other members of the
international community, were able to secure the
necessary funding for the proper conduct of elections.
The process of fundraising was concluded in December
2013, which required the extension of the transition
period by the National People’s Assembly, following
extensive consultations among the main political
actors. That extension was subsequently endorsed by
the transitional authorities and communicated to the
Chairman of the ECOWAS Conference of Heads of
State and Government in December 2013. It is for that
reason that the date of 16 March 2014 that has been set
for the holding of the elections does not seem realistic.
I should point out that this is the second time that the
deadline for a return to constitutional order has been
moved.
General elections are now being proposed for
13 April 2014. In that regard, it should be recalled that
voter registration was completed on 8 February, and
the voters’ list will be available on 4 March. However,
according to the Constitution, the elections should take
place two months after the publication of the voter
list. In addition, two key domestic issues continue
unresolved, and they should be addressed urgently in
order to avoid derailing the electoral process.
First, according to news reports and sources close
to committed members of the African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde (PAIGC), the
former Prime Minister has returned to Bissau. Such
rumors fuel the palpable unease among the population,
certain political circles and the military level, which
suggests that his safety cannot be guaranteed.
Secondly, we note that the PAIGC neither held
its congress nor appointed a presidential candidate
before the end of the period set by the National
Electoral Commission. Moreover, some members of
the Transitional Government have indicated interest in
standing as presidential candidates.
Given those circumstances, and because of
the slow pace of the efforts under way to hold the
elections, it is clear that more time is needed for the
transitional authorities to conduct truly credible and
transparent elections. In any event, I would suggest that
ECOWAS provide technical assistance to the National

S/PV.7121

Electoral Commission and the directorate-general
for technical support to the electoral process office,
within the Ministry of Administration of GuineaBissau. In that regard, an ECOWAS technical team
has provided assistance in organizing meetings with
key stakeholders, setting up a timetable, revising
the budget for the elections, supervising registration
activities and training regional staff of the Electoral
Commission. In addition, the team has contributed
to greater coordination, collaboration and synergy
between the National Commission and the directorate,
including organizing technical coordination meetings
to exchange ideas on improving the electoral process
in the country.
I would like to point out that ECOWAS also
provides assistance to Guinea-Bissau in the context
of reform of the security and defence sectors. The
ECOWAS team on that front, made up of a coordinator
and six other experts, was deployed in Guinea-Bissau
at the end of December 2013. The team has both shortand long-term objectives that are aimed at modernizing
the defence and security sectors by improving the legal
framework and through capacity-building with regard
to human and material resources.
With regard to the status of defence and securitysector reform, a completion rate of 18 per cent with
respect to the rehabilitation of selected barracks has
been achieved. Discussions are continuing on the
implementation of a pension scheme and a stipend
for veterans and retirees. Training needs have been
identified, with training having been provided at
ECOWAS training centres of excellence on the basis of
the needs of the restructured armed forces of GuineaBissau.
I would also like to point out that ECOWAS is
committed to supporting Guinea-Bissau to ensure
security for the upcoming elections. In that regard, the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) held
coordination meetings on the issue of security with the
Chairman and Commissioners of the National Electoral
Commission, alongside other security agencies.
In addition, in cooperation with local authorities
and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau, ECOMIB is supporting local
authorities to ensure the security of election materials
and escort election materials from the central warehouse
to the various regions and sectors, in collaboration with
the National Electoral Commission, the United Nations

14-2463011/12

S/PV.7121

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Development Programme and local security agencies.
ECOMIB is also helping to generate mobile emergency
teams to intervene in polling stations where individuals
or groups of individuals attempt to interfere with the
proper conduct of elections. It is also helping to ensure
the safety of election observers from ECOWAS, the
African Union, the European Union, the United Nations
and other agencies that request it, without prejudice to
the responsibility of the authorities of Guinea-Bissau.
ECOMIB is working to deploy sectoral mobile teams
to report in real time — every 30 minutes — on the
situation on the ground at their respective locations so
as to provide alerts on any incident that could disturb
public order or threaten the success of the elections. It is
also helping to identify and arrest individuals or groups

12/12

26/02/2014

who plan or attempt to disrupt the elections, so as to
transfer such individuals to the nearest police station or
National Guard office.
I want to conclude by inviting the international
community to join their efforts with those of ECOWAS
in order to help Guinea-Bissau to hold, in the best of
conditions, free, fair, transparent and credible elections
so as to enable the country to finally experience
stability and lasting peace.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

14-24630
