58

2383 (XXIIl).

General A11embl7-Twenty-third SeHion

Question of Southern Rhodeeia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodcsia,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Decemher 1960, ali its previous resolutions and those of the
Security Council concerning the question of Southern
Rhodesia,
Recalling further that the Security Council determined, in its resolutions 232 (1966) of 16 December
1966 and 253 ( 1968) of 29 May 1968, that the situation in Southern Rhodesia constituted a threat to international peace and security,
Deeply concerned over the dangerous situation in
Southern Rhodesia, which has been further aggravated
by the executions and acts of suppression carr.ied
out by the illegal racist régime against the African
people and by the presence of South African forces in
the Territory,
Deeply concerned at the serious threat constituted
by the South A frican armed forces in Southern Rhodesia. to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of independent African States in the area,
Bearing in mind the primary responsibility of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
as the administering Power, to put an end to the
illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia and to transfer
effective power, based on free elections by universal
adult suffrage and on majority rule, to the people of
Zimbabwe,
N oting that the sanctions applied by t~e Security
Council have not so far produced the des1red results,
l. Reafferms the inalienable right of the people of
Zimbabwe to freedom and independence and the legitimacy of their struggle to attain that right in confo~mity with the provisions of General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV);
2. Affirms the responsibility of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, for the continuing deterioration of
the situation, and its conviction that the only effective
way of quelling the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia
is through the use of force by the administering Power;
3. Conde-mns the failure and the refusal of the Government of the United Kingdom, as the administering
Power, to take effective measures to bring down the
illegal racist minority régime in Southern Rhodesia
and to transfer power, based on free elections by
universal adult suffrage and on majority rule, to the
people of Zimbabwe;
4. Afferms its conviction that the sanctions so far
adopted will not put an end to the illegal racist minority
régime unless they are comprehensive, mandatory,
strictly supervised by force and complied with, in particular by South Africa and Portugal ;
5. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom to use force in arder to put an immediate end to
the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia and, in this
regard, notes with appreciation the offers of Zambia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to make
their territories and air space ·avai!able for this purpose;
6. Considers that any independence without majority rule in Southern Rhodesia is contrary to the provisions of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)

and calls upon the United Kingdom to entcr immediately into consultations with the representatives of
po!itical parties favouring majority rule;
7. Condemns the policies of the Governrnents of
South Africa and Portugal and all other Governments
which continue to have political, econom.ic, financia!
and other relations with Southern Rhodesia and which
render direct or indirect economic, military and other
assistance to the illegal racist minority régime, thus
enabling it to sustain itself;
8. Calls upon ali States to bring to an end the
activities of financia!, economic and other interests
operated by their nationals in Southern Rhodesia;
9. Draws the aJtention of the Security Counoil to
the urgent necessity of applying the following measures
envisaged under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations:
(a) The scope of the sanctions should be widened
further to include ali the measures laid down in Article 41 of t·e Charter with respect to the illegal racist
régime in Southern Rhodesia ;
· ( b) Sanctions should be imposed on South Africa
and Portugal, the Governments of which have blatantly
refused to carry out the mandatory decisions of the
Security Council;
10. Condemns the illegal intervention of South
African forces in Southern Rhodesia and calls upon
the United Kingdom, as the administering Power, to
ensure the immediate expulsion of ali South African
armed forces, including the police, from Southern Rhodesia and to prevent ali armed assistance to the racist
minority régime ;
11. Condemns in the strongest terms the detention,
imprisonment and assassination of African nationalists
in Southern Rhodesia ;
12. Calls upon the administering Power to ensure
the immediate release of ali African nationalists who
are in prison and in detention and to prevent further
assassination of African nationalists in Southern Rhodesia;
13. Calls upon the United Kingdom, in view of the
armed conflict prevailini in the Territory and the inhuman treatment of prisoners, to ensure the application to that situation of the Geneva Convention relative
to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of 12 August
1949 ;1
14. Urges ali States, as a matter of urgency, to
render ali moral ancl máterial assistance to the national
liberation movements of Zimbabwe, either directly or
through the Organization of African Unity;
15. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to keep the situation in the Territory
under rhiew, and invites the Secretary-General .to
report to the Special Committee on the extent of the
implementation by Member States of the resolutions
of the United Nations concerning the Territory;
16. Calls upon the administering Power to report
to the Special Committee on its actions in the implementation of the present resolution.
1710th plenary meeting,
7 November 1968.
1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (19S0), No. 972.
