United Nations

S/PV.6474

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6474th meeting
Wednesday, 26 January 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Barbalić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bosnia and Herzegovina)

Members:

Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Berger
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Assaf
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan (S/2010/681)
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2011/22)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-21690 (E)

*1121690*

S/PV.6474

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
(S/2010/681)
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2011/22)
The President: Under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure I invite Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari, Joint African Union-United Nations Special
Representative for Darfur, who is joining today’s
meeting via video teleconference from El Fasher; and
Mr. Atul Khare, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/681, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan; and document
S/2011/22, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Khare.
Mr. Khare: Allow me to begin by referring to the
political process for Darfur. Despite the incidents of
violence in Darfur in recent months, there has been
some progress in the ongoing negotiations in Doha.
In November, joint negotiating committees from
the Liberation and Justice Movement and the
Government concluded their work in the broad areas of
power-sharing, justice and reconciliation, compensation,
the return and resettlement of refugees and internally
displaced persons, and security arrangements. This work
has demonstrated that the parties have significant areas
of common ground. However, important points of
disagreement remain, particularly related to the powers
of a regional authority to implement the peace
agreement in Darfur and a vice-presidency post for
Darfur. The mediation has made a series of proposals to
address these issues and is currently planning work
throughout February with all parties in Doha to achieve
consensus on the terms of peace.

2

The 16 December decision of the Justice and
Equality Movement to return to Doha and resume
negotiations on a ceasefire with the Government was
also a positive development. The mediation has
stressed that the basis for a comprehensive and
inclusive peace agreement remains a cessation of
hostilities on the ground. In this regard, it has
consistently urged all parties to the conflict to cease
fighting and join the talks in Doha. While Abdul Wahid
has not yet joined the talks, he continues consultations
with his movement on the possibility of coming to
Doha. Recently, he has indicated that he may send a
delegation in the near future.
On 6 November, the African Union-United
Nations Sudan Consultative Forum agreed to begin
planning for a Darfur political process, to take place
within Darfur. The Darfur political process would be
based on the outcomes of the Doha process and work
to build support within Darfurian communities for the
key principles arising from the Doha negotiations. It
has been agreed that the Darfur political process will
be led by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the African Union
(AU) High-level Implementation Panel, with the
support of interested stakeholders.
The credibility of the Darfur political process will
depend on the steps the Government of the Sudan must
take to create a conducive, enabling environment. Key
aspects of an enabling environment include the
protection of the civil and political rights of
participants in an atmosphere where they can present
their views without fear of retribution; freedom of
speech and assembly to permit open consultations;
freedom of movement for participants and UNAMID;
and proportional and equitable participation among
Darfuri interests.
At a 16 December meeting with Joint Special
Representative Ibrahim Gambari, AU High-Level
Implementation Panel Chairman Thabo Mbeki and the
Presidential Adviser of the Government of the Sudan,
Mr. Ghazi Salaheddin, it was agreed that a joint
UNAMID-Government of the Sudan technical task
force would be established. The task force would
monitor the conditions for an enabling environment,
which must be established as a prerequisite to the
Darfur political process and to develop modalities for
implementing that process when it is initiated. The
importance of an enabling environment was again
discussed on 12 January at a meeting with Joint Special

11-21690

S/PV.6474

Representative Gambari, Adviser Salaheddin
United States Special Envoy Scott Gration.

and

We understand that various stakeholders in the
Darfur peace process have expressed differing views
regarding the timing and content of the Darfur political
process, as well as its possible relationship to the Doha
talks. The Secretary-General is currently reviewing
these issues with a view to establishing a clear vision
for the way forward.
The unprecedented international attention and
cohesion regarding the Sudan’s landmark referendum
also represents an opportunity to generate renewed
focus on Darfur. The situation in Darfur, as part of a
broader set of centre-periphery dynamics that affect
populations throughout the country, should be
considered within the national framework of the Sudan
and the many challenges facing the country as a whole.
I will now turn to the Secretary-General’s report
on the Sudan (S/2010/681) and the ongoing referendum
for Southern Sudan. Since the last briefing to the
Security Council on 18 January (see S/PV.6468), all
ballots cast in the Southern Sudan referendum have
been counted and are in the process of being verified
and approved. Preliminary results are scheduled to be
announced on 2 February. Barring any legal appeals,
the final results will be declared on 7 February and, in
the case of appeals, a week later on 14 February. Early
indications of results from the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission point to an overwhelming
vote in favour of secession.
As the Council is aware, the referendum in Abyei
did not take place pending the outcome of negotiations
on the disputed area’s status between the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). I am pleased
to report that, since the Council was last briefed, there
have been no major incidents of violence reported in
Abyei. The agreements reached by community leaders
on 13 January and between the Ministers of Interior of
the Government of the Sudan and the Government of
Southern Sudan on 17 January, relating to migration
and security in the area, have largely held and are
being gradually implemented.
The agreed deployment of two additional
battalions of joint integrated units to provide security
in the area is expected to be completed by tomorrow,
27 January. Nevertheless, with seasonal migrations
scheduled to resume shortly, tensions on the ground
between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities

11-21690

remain high. The United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) continues its efforts to deter a return to
violence through the increased deployment and patrols
of its troops, but in the absence of a permanent
settlement of the status of Abyei, the resumption of
violence remains an ever-present threat. In this respect,
we are encouraged that President Al-Bashir and First
Vice-President Kiir are scheduled to meet again
tomorrow, 27 January, to resume discussions on Abyei,
with the support of the AU High-Level Implementation
Panel chaired by President Mbeki.
UNMIS and the United Nations country team
have also redoubled their efforts to engage with the
authorities in Abyei and Southern Kordofan to ensure
the safety and well-being of Southern returnees caught
in the violence of the past weeks. On 22 January, the
movement of convoys in and around the Abyei area
resumed with protection from local authorities, and no
incidents of violence were reported.
The many challenges to stability in the North and
South require a commitment by the authorities to
inclusive political participation. In this context, the
Government of Southern Sudan continues to make
progress on its road map for political accommodation,
reaching out to other political parties and forces,
including those that rebelled against the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement after the April
elections. On 22 January, Vice-President Salva Kiir
announced the formation of a constitutional review
committee, as called for during the all-party conference
of October 2010.
While President Al-Bashir’s meeting on
22 January with the National Unionist Party, the largest
opposition party in the North, to discuss future political
arrangements is a step in the right direction, we are
concerned by reports from Khartoum of the arrest of
opposition leaders and other activists. The Government
of the Sudan will, I hope, continue on the path of
democratic transformation in the spirit of the CPA.
The ongoing popular consultation processes in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states continue to
make steady, albeit slow progress. It is crucial that
these processes, mandated by the CPA, proceed in a
transparent way and address the complex political and
security issues, as well as popular grievances, in these
states. Public hearings commenced in Blue Nile state
on 14 January and continue in a relatively positive
atmosphere. A new timetable for elections in Southern

3

S/PV.6474

Kordofan state has been announced, with registration
set to begin on 24 January. It is hoped that both
processes can be completed before the end of the CPA
interim period. UNMIS will continue to monitor
progress and provide assistance where appropriate.
While the referendum passed without major
incident, the parties must refocus their efforts on
concluding negotiations over post-CPA arrangements.
They continue to meet at all levels and have committed
themselves to reconvening the negotiation process
early next month. We are confident that the parties,
through the mediation efforts of President Mbeki, will
make swift progress in the period ahead. We also
believe that stability in the North and the South will be
mutually reinforcing and expect the international
community to recognize the courage and sacrifice of
both leaderships as we enter the final days of the CPA’s
interim period.
In order to support the efforts of both UNMIS
and UNAMID and take forward the United Nations key
priorities, the Secretary-General will attend the African
Union Summit in Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 January,
where, alongside African Union Chairman Jean Ping,
he will participate in a high-level meeting on regional
and international support for the Sudan. We anticipate
that this will be an opportunity to harness the
unprecedented international attention and goodwill
towards Sudan and assist the parties in meeting the
many challenges facing the country today.
The President: I thank Mr. Khare for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gambari.
Mr. Gambari: I would like to express my
appreciation for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the latest developments in Darfur. I also
take this opportunity to welcome the new members of
the Security Council — Colombia, Germany, India,
Portugal and South Africa — and to pledge the same
cooperation of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) with them as
we extend to the other members of the Council.
As Under-Secretary-General Le Roy highlighted
during his briefing to the Council on 6 January, we are
deeply concerned at the renewed violence that took
place in December in Northern and Southern Darfur as
a result of the deteriorated relations between the
Government and Sudan Liberation Army-Minni
Minawi (SLA-MM). Since then, UNAMID and the

4

humanitarian community have worked vigourously to
address the humanitarian and protection consequences
of these clashes, which have included the displacement
of an estimated 43,000 people, 15,000 of whom have
gathered around UNAMID team sites in Shangil
Tobaya, Khor Abeche and Shaeria.
While camps for internally displaced persons
(IDPs), such as Zam Zam and Dar al-Salam, have
registered some new arrivals as a result of this conflict,
the bulk of new displacement is expected to be
temporary. In that regard, UNAMID forces have
maintained a robust presence and have increased
patrolling in the villages affected by the recent fighting
so as to create a security environment that would allow
for the early and safe return of recently displaced
people.
Unfortunately, in what seems to be a continuation
of the events of December, violence between the
Government of the Sudan and SLA-MM re-erupted as
recently as 24 January in the village of Thabit, located
along the road between El Fasher and Shangil Tobaya.
UNAMID has also received reports of an operation on
the same day by the Sudanese Armed Forces on the
village of Abu Zerega, in the same area. On 25 January,
fighting continued in the general area between El Fasher
and Shangil Tobaya. Reports received indicate that
elements of the Sudan Liberation Movement led by
Abdul Wahid al-Nur (SLM-AW) and the Liberation and
Justice Movement had joined the SLA-MM in those
clashes. The UNAMID team site in Shangil Tobaya
reported sounds of artillery fire. The Government
blocked the main road between El Fasher and Shangil
Tobaya to all traffic.
Accordingly, UNAMID and the humanitarian
community have not yet been able to access the area;
but we will persist in our efforts to be able to verify the
situation, and in particular the impacts of the ongoing
clashes on the civilian population. As of this afternoon
here in Darfur, fighting in the area has subsided, but
tensions persist and a resumption of violence between
the belligerent parties is possible.
While I am pleased to report to the Council that
the UNAMID staff member who was held hostage for
91 days was released unharmed on 5 January, I am
most saddened by the fact that, since then, we have
suffered yet another hostage-taking incident in Darfur.
On 13 January, three Bulgarian air crew members
working for a contractor of the United Nations

11-21690

S/PV.6474

Humanitarian Air Services (UNHAS) were abducted by
unidentified armed elements upon landing in Um
Shalaya, West Darfur. The consequent decision by
UNHAS to suspend flights to unsecured landing sites
in West Darfur is likely to impact negatively on access
to deep-field locations. As a mitigating measure,
UNAMID will provide security at helicopter landing
sites at our team sites in order to minimize the
disruption to humanitarian operations.
Meanwhile, I am pleased to report to the Council
that the Mission is taking further steps to improve the
situation of access in Darfur. In a meeting with
UNAMID military and police leaders on 4 January, I
issued firm instructions that henceforth we would
adopt a more robust posture and no longer create the
impression of seeking permission for movement within
our area of responsibility. I reinforced that message in
my meeting in Khartoum on 6 January with
Presidential Adviser Ghazi Salaheddin, who holds the
Darfur portfolio and who reconfirmed to me the
Government’s policy of allowing UNAMID freedom of
movement throughout Darfur. Just two days ago, I
repeated the same message to the Walis of South
Darfur and West Darfur.
Since then, UNAMID supply and logistics
convoys to all team sites, as well as humanitarian
convoys to Khor Abeche, Shaeria and Shangil Tobaya,
have faced no impediments. On other occasions, we
were able to push our way through due to the robust
posture and persistent negotiations by the patrol
commanders, as exemplified on 23 January when a
UNAMID formed police unit patrol team and an
integrated UNAMID-United Nations country team
were dispatched to the Zam Zam IDP camp, close to El
Fasher, to verify the situation during and after a
cordon-and-search operation by the Government inside
the camp. They were initially stopped outside of Zam
Zam by military personnel of the Government of the
Sudan, but shortly thereafter were allowed to proceed.
We insisted on proceeding.
However, I also have to report that in other
instances we have not yet been fully successful. For
example, as of today, humanitarian agencies have not
secured access to Dar al-Salam, in North Darfur, which
is another location of recent fighting. As recently as
23 January, Government military personnel denied
access to a UNAMID verification patrol that was about
to enter Dar al-Salam. This issue has been raised again

11-21690

with Government authorities, and we are awaiting their
response.
I have been informed that the Council has
expressed interest in the issue of access to Jebel Marra.
I would like to address this issue and give the Council
an overview of the situation there. Jebel Marra is a
mountainous region at the midpoint between three
Darfur states, namely, North, South and West Darfur.
Significant portions of Jebel Marra have been cut off
from humanitarian and UNAMID access since
February 2010 — slightly less than a year ago — due
in part to fighting, primarily between the Sudanese
Armed Forces and forces of the Sudan Liberation
Movement led by Abdul Wahid al-Nur. On repeated
occasions
throughout
2010,
UNAMID
and
humanitarian agencies attempted to gain access to
points in Jebel Marra in order to assess reports of
fighting and, principally, to deliver aid to affected
communities. On nearly all occasions, those attempts
were prevented by SLA-AW and Government forces.
However, more recently, UNAMID and some
agencies have gained access to certain areas within
Jebel Marra. For example, on 13 November, UNAMID
conducted two patrols to the eastern and western parts
of Jebel Marra, including to Guldo and Golo, on the
western side, and Tarny, Gosdor and Turty, on the
eastern side. On 11 December, another verification
patrol visited Guldo and Golo and assessed the
situation as generally calm.
Planned patrols to Eastern Jebel Marra from
Sector South were delayed due to the outbreak of
fighting between Sudanese Armed Forces and SLA-MM
in Khor Abeche. However, on 13 January, a long-range
patrol from Sector South reached Deribat through a
route controlled by the Government. More of these
patrols are planned in the near future so as to further
expand access in the area.
Meanwhile, Eastern Jebel Marra remains a focus
of UNAMID and country team efforts to open space
and allow for the delivery of emergency relief supplies.
On 23 December, a joint UNAMID-UNICEF child
demobilization mission visited the area of Golombei.
On 11 January, a joint UNAMID-UNICEF-World
Health Organization mission reached Kaguro, in the
Jebel Si area, delivering vaccines and medical supplies
for about 3,000 children as part of an accelerated
routine immunization campaign. The UNAMID team
site in Sortony, North Darfur, also provides assistance

5

S/PV.6474

to UNICEF in its efforts to open additional water bore
holes in the eastern parts of Jebel Marra.
UNAMID therefore continues to work jointly
with United Nations agencies to further expand access
to eastern Jebel Marra. Discussions are ongoing to
identify additional locations for a possible permanent
presence by UNAMID and humanitarian actors. The
Mission is also continuing to streamline procedures to
speed up flight clearances.
While UNAMID will continue to patrol into Jebel
Marra, it is important to underscore the need to balance
our efforts with regard to Jebel Marra with the ongoing
protection requirements following the fighting in Khor
Abeche, Shangil Tobaya and Shaeria, as well as the
required preparedness to react to potential hotspots
along the border with Southern Sudan and elsewhere in
Darfur. No doubt, Jebel Marra is an important area in
Darfur that will remain a priority for UNAMID efforts.
But I want to remind members of the Council that there
are challenges throughout Darfur that all require our
presence and full support.
In that regard, the current report (S/2011/22) on
UNAMID details the overall protection-of-civilians
strategy for the Mission. UNAMID’s protection strategy
identifies objectives and tasks to engage with and assist
the Government to carry out its responsibilities in
accordance with its international obligations.
Some of the key priorities of that strategy are for
the Mission to not only maintain a robust and integrated
presence in the areas of potential hostilities in order to
deter violence — and deterrence is key — but also
provide direct protection, secure humanitarian space,
and monitor and provide accurate and verified reporting
based on engagement with all sides. Furthermore, in an
effort to continuously improve our operational
preparedness, we have reviewed our initial response to
the fighting in Khor Abeche on 10 and 11 December
2010 and will incorporate lessons learned into our
operational procedures in the future.

6

As I have stated on previous occasions, including
in remarks to this Council, it is my belief that in order
to achieve lasting stabilization in Darfur, we must seize
all opportunities to build on positive trends in order to
allow displaced populations to regain a sense of
normality in their lives and move beyond aid
dependency. I have always said that we have to refrain
from regarding as normal the abnormal situation of
having more than 1.8 million people in IDP camps. In
that regard, I recognize the improved dialogue and
collaboration between central and state-level
authorities, humanitarian workers and UNAMID
through the reactivation of collaborative mechanisms,
such as the High-level Committee on Darfur and statelevel committees.
If any efforts in that regard are to be fruitful,
however, the fighting in Darfur must stop, and stop
immediately. The renewed clashes over the past two
days have very likely caused new displacements and
suffering of the civilian population, which has suffered
too much already. The full extent of the impact will
become clear in the coming days.
I have engaged the Government and SLA-MM,
calling for restraint and an immediate cessation of
hostilities. I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate that call and to urge those members of the
Council who have influence to exercise it so that we
can bring about a cessation of hostilities sooner rather
than later.
I am sorry that I have spoken for a bit longer than
I had planned, but it has been a while since I have
spoken to Council members directly on behalf of
UNAMID.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. I should now like to invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

11-21690
