United Nations

A/RES/57/26

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 February 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 159

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/57/566)]

57/26.

Prevention and peaceful settlement of disputes

The General Assembly,
Recalling the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling also Chapter VI of the Charter, in particular Article 33, and
underlining the obligation of Member States to seek a solution to their disputes by
peaceful means of their own choice,
Recalling further the principles in the United Nations Millennium Declaration 1
and the declaration of the Security Council on Ensuring an Effective Role of the
Security Council in the Maintenance of International Peace and Security,
particularly in Africa, 2 adopted during the Millennium Summit,
Recalling the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of International
Disputes, 3 the Declaration on the Prevention and Removal of Disputes and
Situations Which May Threaten International Peace and Security and on the Role of
the United Nations in this Field,4 the Declaration on Fact-finding by the United Nations
in the Field of the Maintenance of International Peace and Security,5 the Declaration on
the Enhancement of Cooperation between the United Nations and Regional
Arrangements or Agencies in the Maintenance of International Peace and Security,6 and
the United Nations Model Rules for the Conciliation of Disputes between States,7
elaborated by the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on
the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization and adopted unanimously by the
General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the work done by the Special Committee to
encourage States to focus on the need to prevent and to settle peacefully their

_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
Security Council resolution 1318 (2000), annex.
3
Resolution 37/10, annex.
4
Resolution 43/51, annex.
5
Resolution 46/59, annex.
6
Resolution 49/57, annex.
7
Resolution 50/50, annex.
2

02 53947

A/RES/57/26

disputes, which are likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security,
Emphasizing the importance of early warning to prevent disputes, and
emphasizing also the need to promote the peaceful settlement of disputes,
Recalling the various procedures and methods available to States for the
prevention and the peaceful settlement of their disputes, including those provided
for in Article 33 of the Charter, as well as monitoring, fact-finding missions,
goodwill missions, special envoys, observers and good offices,
Recalling in particular its relevant declarations and resolutions concerning
dispute prevention, in which, inter alia, it called upon the Secretary-General to make
full use of the information-gathering capabilities of the Secretariat and emphasized
the need to strengthen the capacity of the United Nations in the field of preventive
diplomacy,
Recalling its relevant resolutions and decisions concerning dispute settlement,
including resolution 2329 (XXII) of 18 December 1967, in which it requested the
Secretary-General to prepare a register of experts whose services States parties to a
dispute might use for fact-finding in relation to the dispute, decision 44/415 of
4 December 1989, the annex to which contains a draft document on resort to a
commission of good offices, mediation or conciliation within the United Nations,
and resolution 50/50 of 11 December 1995, the annex to which contains the United
Nations Model Rules for the Conciliation of Disputes between States,
Noting with satisfaction that, pursuant to the recommendation contained in its
resolution 47/120 A of 18 December 1992, the Secretary-General established a list of
eminent and qualified experts for his use in fact-finding and other missions, and that this
list has recently been updated,
Recalling that certain multilateral treaties provide for the creation of lists of
conciliators and arbitrators for use by States in the settlement of their disputes,
Reaffirming the important role played by judicial mechanisms, in particular the
International Court of Justice and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea,
in the settlement of disputes between States,
1.
Urges States to make the most effective use of existing procedures and
methods for the prevention and the peaceful settlement of their disputes, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
2.
Reaffirms the duty of all States, in accordance with the principles of the
Charter, to use peaceful means to settle any dispute to which they are parties and the
continuance of which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security, and encourages States to settle their disputes as early as possible;
3.
Draws the attention of States to the important roles played by the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the Secretary-General in providing
early warning and in working for the prevention of disputes and situations which
might threaten international peace and security;
4.
Takes note of the paper prepared by the Secretariat entitled “Mechanisms
established by the General Assembly in the context of dispute prevention and
settlement”; 8
_______________
8

2

A/AC.182/2000/INF/2.

A/RES/57/26

5.
Urges the continued enhancement of the concrete steps taken by the
Secretariat to build and improve the capacity of the United Nations to respond
effectively and efficiently in matters relating to dispute prevention, including
through the strengthening of cooperative mechanisms for information-sharing,
planning and the development of preventive measures; the development of a
comprehensive plan for a revived early-warning and prevention system for the
United Nations; training intended to support such enhanced capabilities in these
areas; and cooperation with regional organizations;
6.
Encourages States to nominate suitably qualified persons who are willing
to provide fact-finding services, for inclusion in the register set up by the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to paragraph 4 of its resolution 2329 (XXII);
7.
Encourages eligible States also to nominate suitably qualified persons to
have their names included in the lists of conciliators and arbitrators provided for
under certain treaties, including the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 9 and
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea; 10
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to take such steps as he deems necessary
from time to time to encourage States to designate suitably qualified persons for
inclusion in the various lists referred to above which he has the responsibility to
maintain;
9.
Reminds States that have not yet done so that they may at any time make
a declaration under Article 36, paragraph 2, of the Statute of the International Court
of Justice with regard to its compulsory jurisdiction in relation to any other State
accepting the same obligation, and encourages them to consider doing so.
52nd plenary meeting
19 November 2002

_______________
9

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1155, No. 18232.
See The Law of the Sea: Official Texts of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
10 December 1982 and of the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 with Index and Excerpts from the Final Act of the
Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.V.10).
10

3
