S/PV.9146

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9146th meeting

Wednesday, 5 October 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-61501 (E)
*2261501*

S/PV.9146

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

resume dialogue with the key parties concerned with a
view to achieving sustainable peace and the complete
and verifiable denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Japan and the
Republic of Korea to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Khaled
Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for the Middle
East, Asia and the Pacific in the Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Khiari.
Mr. Khiari: According to various Government
sources, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
launched a ballistic missile at approximately 7.23
a.m. local time on 4 October. The missile, which has
not been publicly acknowledged by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, was reportedly launched
from the northern province of Jagang, covered a range
of 4,500 kilometres and reached an apogee of around
970 kilometres. It marks the first time the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has launched a ballistic
missile over Japanese territory since 15 September 2017.
The Secretary-General strongly condemns the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s launching
of a long-range ballistic missile. This was a reckless
act and a clear violation of relevant Security Council
resolutions. The launch risks triggering a significant
escalation of tensions in the region and beyond. It is of
serious concern that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has again disregarded any consideration for
international flight or maritime safety.
The Secretary-General calls on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to immediately cease any
further destabilizing acts and to comply fully with
its international obligations under relevant Security
Council resolutions. The Secretary-General urges the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to take steps to
2/16

05/10/2022

There have been other troubling developments
since we previously briefed the Council, on 11 May
(see S/PV.9030). In addition to the launch yesterday,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea launched
systems with the apparent characteristics of shortrange ballistic missiles on 25 September, 28 September,
29 September and 1 October.
On 12 September, the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) reported
that there were indications that the Punggye-ri nuclear
test site remained active and prepared to support a
nuclear test. The IAEA added that it continued to
observe construction activities at the Yongbyon nuclear
facilities as well as indications that the 5-megawatt
nuclear reactor was operating.
The Secretary-General is deeply concerned
by the adoption, on 8 September, of the law on the
“Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s Policy on the
Nuclear Forces” by the Supreme People’s Assembly.
Increasing the role and significance of nuclear weapons
in security doctrines is contrary to decades of efforts
by the international community to reduce and eliminate
nuclear risks.
While some States continue to rely on nuclear
weapons in their security policies, nuclear weapons pose
an existential threat to humankind. Their continued
existence heightens the risk of unintended escalation
or miscalculation. We must strengthen our efforts to
eliminate nuclear weapons.
The Secretary-General urges the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to reset the course to
dialogue and build on previous diplomatic efforts. He
reaffirms his commitment to working with all parties
for sustainable peace and the complete and verifiable
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. He welcomes
and encourages the regular contact and cooperation
among the key parties and commends them for their
willingness to engage in dialogue with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea without preconditions.
The Secretary-General, at the same time and
separately, remains concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The United Nations system, in coordination with
international and humanitarian partners, is ready to
22-61501

05/10/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

send staff and assistance to help the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea Government address medical and
humanitarian needs, including those related to the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
To allow for a timely and effective response, we
reiterate our call for the unimpeded entry of international
staff and humanitarian supplies. We also acknowledge
the work of Member States towards resolving the
banking channel for humanitarian operations.
Let me conclude by reiterating that the unity of
the Security Council in this matter is essential to ease
tensions, overcome the diplomatic impasse and avoid a
negative action reaction cycle.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Khiari
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari
for his briefing, and I welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representatives of Japan and the Republic
of Korea to our meeting today.
In just nine days, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has launched eight ballistic missiles, all clear
violations of multiple Security Council resolutions.
Earlier this week, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea launched a dangerous and destabilizing reported
long-range ballistic missile over Japan. Pyongyang
clearly feels emboldened. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has launched 39 ballistic missiles
this year alone, which far surpasses its previous
record of 25. And multiple Member States and the
International Atomic Energy Agency have reported
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
reconstituting its nuclear testing site in preparation
for a seventh nuclear test. Kim Jong Un has called
for — in his words — the highest rapidity in advancing
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s weapons
of mass destruction (WMD) programme. And he
appears to be getting his way.
Since the beginning of this year, 12 Council members
have joined us in condemning those unlawful actions
and in voting to impose real costs on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea — real costs that would
impede its WMD and ballistic-missile pursuits. I thank
those colleagues who remain committed to upholding
the global non-proliferation regime. But as we all know,

S/PV.9146

the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has enjoyed
blanket protection from two members of the Security
Council. Those two members have gone out of their
way to justify the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s repeated provocations and block every attempt
to update the sanctions regime. In short, two permanent
members of the Security Council have enabled Kim
Jong Un. And before those two Council members repeat
their myth that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s provocations are somehow a consequence of
hostile United States policies and actions, let us review
the facts.
On 25 September, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea launched two ballistic missiles in violation
of multiple Security Council resolutions. The United
States, its allies and the Security Council did nothing
to provoke that unacceptable behaviour. Following
those launches, the United States, its allies and the
Council continued to be vigilant, but did not raise the
issue immediately. And over the next eight days, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continued its
self-initiated escalations. So there is no question that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s hostile
launch of unlawful weapons has been unprovoked. We
will not tolerate any country blaming our defensive
actions to respond to the threats of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea as somehow the inherent
cause of those threats.
Despite a lack of engagement from the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the United States remains
committed to dialogue and diplomacy. The United
States, however, will not stand by as the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea directly threatens the
United States, its allies and the entire world. None of
us should. Despite the recent divisions, I believe it is
still within our power to come together — just as we
did in recent years — when we unanimously responded
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
provocation. And we just heard from our briefer about
the importance of us remaining unified. We can and
must return to a time when we spoke with a united
voice against the malign behaviour of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and when we stood together
in support of the global non-proliferation regime. That
means fully implementing the existing resolutions on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. It means
undertaking sanctions maintenance efforts. And it
means pursuing a resolution to address the sanctions

22-615013/16

S/PV.9146

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

05/10/2022

evasion activities of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea going forward.

mandate to send a strong message to the regime of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.

The truth is that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is testing capabilities that can threaten every
single Member State. That threatens all of our individual
and collective security, full stop. And by serving on
the Security Council, we have all taken on the weighty
responsibility of protecting and defending international
peace and security. So let us do our jobs. Let us honour
that commitment.

The regime of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea must have understood by now that it will not
be rewarded for its reckless behaviour. The sanctions
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must be
fully implemented, and every breach of them represents
an increased threat to regional and international
peace and an opportunity for the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to strengthen its weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) and ballistic-missile programme.

Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I too thank Assistant
Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing, and we also
welcome the representatives of Japan and the Republic
of Korea to this meeting.
Albania strongly condemns the long-range
ballistic-missile launch by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea that overflew Japan on 3 October, as
well as its seven other ballistic-missile launches since
25 September. That is unacceptable. The last time we
saw the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea engage
in such behaviour was in 2017, and at the time the
Council came together, united and took action to hold
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea accountable.
This is once again a moment for the Security Council
to act responsibly and accordingly to respond to
the immediate threats coming from the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea that are threatening the
stability of the Korean peninsula and the wider region.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must
immediately cease those provocative and dangerous
actions. With the recent launches it has not only violated
all the relevant Security Council resolutions but has
also further undermined the international rules-based
order. The Security Council must therefore stand up
and speak with one voice in denouncing the behaviour
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, but also
in holding the Kim Jong Un regime accountable for
directly threatening the Japanese people and the whole
Korean peninsula. It makes no sense for the members of
the Security Council to avoid angering the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. At this point, nobody can
complain that the people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea are suffering the consequences of a
severe sanctions regime. The only thing responsible for
the suffering of the people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is the attitude of their own regime.
We must use all the tools and the power provided by our
4/16

Let me conclude by reiterating our call to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to abandon its
provocations and end its WMD, ballistic-missile and
nuclear programmes. A return to meaningful dialogue
and diplomacy is the way forward, and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea should understand that it is
the only way forward, and the right one.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
France firmly condemns North Korea’s launch of
an intermediate-range ballistic missile on 4 October.
For the first time in five years, a North Korean missile
flew over Japanese territory. That is an unacceptable
provocation, and I want to assure the Japanese
authorities of France’s full solidarity. That new
escalation is taking place at a time when a series of
short-range ballistic missiles have also been launched
in the past few days. Every one of those launches is
a violation of resolutions adopted unanimously by the
Security Council. They represent a threat to regional
stability and international security, and the SecretaryGeneral has firmly condemned this irresponsible act.
The increase in ballistic tests since the beginning
of the year is unprecedented. We are witnessing a clear
development of ballistic capabilities, with the declared
intention of developing a tactical nuclear programme.
North Korea, which is unrelentingly pursuing its
enrichment activities, is using increasingly aggressive
nuclear rhetoric, as evidenced by the adoption of a new
nuclear position at the beginning of September. On the
ground, at Yongbyon and Punggye-ri, we note further
preparations for a seventh nuclear test.
It would be irresponsible to reward violations of
the resolutions by easing sanctions. Rather, pressure
on Pyongyang must be maintained and increased
in certain areas. Let us recall that North Korea
22-61501

05/10/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

continues to circumvent the sanctions, in particular
through its cyberattacks, which enable it to directly
finance its programmes. At the same time, we must
resume dialogue, the goal of which is well known: the
complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantling of
nuclear, ballistic and other weapons of mass destruction
programmes. All actors in the region must be involved.
North Korea must return to the negotiating table in
good faith.
I will conclude by underscoring France’s concern
about the humanitarian situation in North Korea. We
regret that the North Korean regime continues to develop
and fund its proliferation programmes at the expense of
its own people. The Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006) grants requests for humanitarian
exemptions that are submitted to it as soon as possible.
The situation is serious. The Council must act. It must
unanimously condemn the new provocation. That is
why we support the draft press statement proposed by
the United States.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Khiari for his very useful briefing.
Ireland condemns the eight missile launches by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea over the past
two weeks. We remain deeply concerned that, for 15
months, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
conducted missile launches of unprecedented intensity
and diversity. The most recent launch, on 4 October,
overflying Japan, demonstrated the dangerous and
reckless path the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is following, with serious potential risks to
maritime and air traffic and its neighbours.
At the same time, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has also continued its illegal nuclear
activities at Yongbyon and preparations towards a
possible nuclear test. Those actions are clear violations
of Security Council resolutions and a flagrant challenge
to the decisions and authority of the Council. They have
been accompanied by threats against neighbours and a
stated aim to develop tactical nuclear weapons that are
calculated to escalate tensions and confrontation in the
region and beyond.
Over that period, the Council has been forced
to remain silent. That has included the veto by two
of its members of a draft resolution (S/2022/431) in
May. The Council must live up to its responsibilities.
Equally, we must continue to ensure that Security
Council resolutions, including sanctions, are fully and

S/PV.9146

effectively enforced. Let us be clear: it is the actions of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea alone that
have raised tensions. It is for the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to act to ease the situation. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must meet its
obligations under Security Council resolutions. It must
abandon its ballistic missile and nuclear programmes in
a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
cannot, and will not, be accepted as a nuclear-weapon
State. It must return to compliance with the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards, and
adhere to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should
accept that dialogue and diplomacy are the only path to
peace, stability and security on the Korean peninsula.
We urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
consider its responsibilities to its own people and the
international community and to engage meaningfully
and without preconditions with the United States and
South Korean offers of talks.
At the same time, the Council must meet its
obligations, uphold its own resolutions and respond
in a unified and determined way to the actions of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Ms. Juul (Norway): First, let me thank Assistant
Secretary-General Khaled Khiari for his briefing. We
also welcome the participation of the representatives of
Japan and the Republic of Korea at this meeting.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
performed a record number of ballistic missile tests
since the beginning of this year. Norway is deeply
disturbed by the continued development by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of its nuclear
and ballistic programmes and the dangers that military
activity poses to peace and stability in the region and
beyond. Norway condemns in the strongest terms the
launch of four ballistic missiles in late September and
the launch conducted yesterday, 4 October, of a possible
intermediate-range ballistic missile over mainland
Japan. That would be the first test of such a missile
since 2017. We agree with the Secretary-General, who
called that launch a reckless act and a violation of
Security Council resolutions.
Colleagues in the Security Council have argued that
we should not take any actions to provoke the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea or escalate the situation

22-615015/16

S/PV.9146

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

further. Yet the Council’s silence and inability to act
has done just that. The recent launches raise tensions
and make diplomatic efforts even more difficult. The
missile launches represent a very serious threat to civil
aviation and maritime safety in the region. We urge the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to comply fully with its international obligations,
abandon its nuclear and ballistic programmes in a
complete, verifiable and irreversible manner and
recommit to meaningful negotiations towards that end.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must rejoin
the international non-proliferation regime.
We call on the Council to show unity in the face of
the escalation by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. If the Council continues to remain silent, that
will undermine its credibility and authority. Council
members in contact with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea should also urge Pyongyang to
accept the unconditional offers of dialogue that have
been extended by the United States and the Republic
of Korea.
Norway remains worried about the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and calls on the country’s Government to
cooperate with the international community to enable
humanitarian assistance, including assistance related
to the coronavirus disease. Members of the Council
have continued to show that they take the humanitarian
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
very seriously, as evidenced by provisions in the
vetoed draft resolution (S/2022/431), which would have
broadened the humanitarian exemption mechanisms
considerably. The Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006) also continues to place priority
on approving requests for humanitarian exemptions.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that the full
implementation of sanctions measures by all Member
States is crucial. It is high time that the Council spoke
with a unified voice on this issue, and we support the
draft press statement proposed by the United States.
We must continue to affirm that the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must comply
fully with its international obligations under the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Only through
dialogue and diplomacy will we find a lasting solution
to bring about peace on the Korean peninsula.
6/16

05/10/2022

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his
informative briefing.
As we have heard, at around 7.30 a.m. on Tuesday
morning, as commuters in northern Japan were making
their way to work, evacuation alerts sent people rushing
to shelters. Public transport came to a halt as a ballistic
missile, launched without warning by North Korea,
flew overhead. The threat to international peace and
security presented by North Korea’s reckless and illegal
ballistic missile tests could not be clearer. North Korea’s
latest launch of an intermediate-range ballistic missile
violates multiple Security Council resolutions. We stand
in solidarity with the people of Japan and of States in
the region threatened by that unacceptable behaviour.
This latest test is a serious escalation, but the
broader trend is just as concerning. This year alone,
North Korea has launched 39 ballistic missiles, seven of
them in the past 10 days. We urge Council members to
meet those violations with a firm and united response.
North Korea has been emboldened by the Council’s
inaction and the use of the veto by two Council members.
Diplomacy is the only route to sustained peace on
the peninsula, but it is right that the Council should
continue to take appropriate, targeted measures to slow
the pace of proliferation. We therefore again call on
all Member States to implement the existing Security
Council resolutions on North Korea in full. They are
an essential part of the efforts to counter the continued
development of North Korea’s prohibited programmes.
Let me also be clear that Council sanctions are
not targeted at the North Korean people. We fully
support the delivery of humanitarian support to the
most vulnerable and therefore call on North Korea to
permit an independent assessment of the humanitarian
situation and allow aid to flow freely into the country.
We call on North Korea to refrain from further
provocations, engage meaningfully with the United
States’ offer of dialogue and take concrete steps
towards denuclearization in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his briefing
on the latest developments in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
We have noted with concern the reports of ballisticmissile launches over the past week by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. They follow the country’s
22-61501

05/10/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.9146

launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile in March,
which was discussed in the Security Council (see
S/PV.9004), as well as other subsequent launches. The
launches constitute a violation of the resolutions of the
Security Council relating to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. They affect peace and security in
the region and beyond. We call accordingly for the full
implementation of the relevant Council resolutions
related to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.

urge it to exercise restraint and prioritize diplomacy and
dialogue. We stress our condemnation of any missile
tests, any efforts to possess nuclear weapons and any
actions that undermine non-proliferation efforts. In
that regard, we are concerned about the reports that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea may be ready
to conduct a nuclear test and about the law adopted by
its Parliament last month on the right to possess nuclear
weapons and permit their pre-emptive use.

India would also like to reiterate the importance
of addressing the proliferation of nuclear and missile
technologies related to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in our region. Those linkages have
an adverse impact on peace and security in the region,
including in India. We therefore reiterate our continued
support for denuclearization aimed at achieving peace
and security in the Korean peninsula.

Secondly, we affirm the importance of ensuring
that all countries are in full compliance with the global
disarmament and non-proliferation regime, especially
at this critical juncture for that regime. Undoubtedly,
the escalatory pattern of behaviour exhibited by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, specifically
through its development of a nuclear-weapon and
ballistic-missile programme, will negatively affect the
global disarmament and non-proliferation architecture.
And we agree with the assessment that the regime
feels emboldened by the inaction of the Council in
that regard.

The Council is well aware that the global South
has already been disproportionately affected by the
prevailing geopolitical situation and related challenges.
It is therefore important to continue to make every
effort to maintain peace and security. Ensuring
peace and security on the Korean peninsula is in our
collective interest, and going forward we will continue
to support dialogue and diplomacy as the way to resolve
the issues there.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Mr. Khaled Khiari for his valuable briefing and
welcome the participation of the representatives of the
Republic of Korea and of Japan in today’s meeting.
The United Arab Emirates joins Secretary-General
Guterres in expressing its strong condemnation of
the launch on 4 October by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea of an intermediate-range ballistic
missile, which was the first such missile to fly over
Japanese territory in five years. That dangerous
escalation flagrantly threatened civilian lives,
international aviation and maritime safety, and we offer
our full support to Japan and its people. The recent
ballistic-missile launch is part of the continued reckless
and irresponsible behaviour by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, which resumed its missile tests in
September of last year, in a clear violation of several
Security Council resolutions. In the context of today’s
meeting, I would like to emphasize the following points.
First, we renew our call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to respect international laws, norms
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, and we

Thirdly, the Security Council must intensify its
efforts to maintain peace and security on the Korean
peninsula and to preserve the global non-proliferation
regime. That necessarily includes preventing the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea from engaging
in the illicit smuggling of weapons and components
via the black market. In doing so, the Council must
consider utilizing all measures at its disposal, including
sanctions. We are ready to work with other Council
members to address the concerns arising from such
measures taken by the Council. At the same time, we
once again call on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to resume dialogue with relevant parties,
prioritize diplomatic solutions and abandon its nuclear
weapons in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner in order to bring peace and security to the
Korean peninsula.
Fourthly, while decision-makers in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea continue to harness the
country’s limited resources for the development of
nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles, the United
Arab Emirates remains concerned about the continued
deterioration in the humanitarian conditions of the
North Korean people, the majority of whom suffer from
poverty. We once again urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to cooperate with the international
community and the United Nations to alleviate the
current humanitarian situation by facilitating the entry

22-615017/16

S/PV.9146

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

of humanitarian aid and by allowing relief organizations
and the United Nations Resident Coordinator to carry
out their vital activities in the country.
Finally, the United Arab Emirates stresses the
importance of the Security Council speaking with
a united voice in order to carry out its responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security
and slowing any further escalation of this dangerous
nuclear rhetoric. The warning signs are flashing red for
the Council and a response is needed.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I would like to begin by
thanking Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari
for his briefing of the Security Council.
Ghana continues to be concerned about the
escalating tensions on the Korean peninsula and the
wider North-East Asia region. Those renewed tensions
have been occasioned by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s repeated missile launches over
the past week, particularly its launch on 4 October of
an intermediate-range ballistic missile that flew over
Japan. The present missile launch — the first to follow
such a trajectory since 2017 and the first weapon of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to reach
such a distance — represents a clear escalation of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s actions
against its neighbours and against international peace.
It is particularly concerning that the launch was carried
out in breach of several Security Council resolutions,
without regard for aviation or maritime safety and
without any warning, for that matter. Ghana is gravely
concerned about and firmly deplores this current launch
and others before it.
Since the beginning of this year, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has significantly increased
the frequency, types and delivery systems of the missiles
it has launched. Reports that it has made preparations
at its Punggye-ri nuclear test site, possibly for a seventh
nuclear test, coupled with its claim to have advanced
its development of tactical nuclear weapons, as well
as its threat to use nuclear weapons if its national
interests are threatened, are extremely worrisome and
run contrary to its obligations under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The Council
must therefore make a unified call on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to take immediate, urgent
and concrete steps to bring itself into compliance with
its international obligations.
8/16

05/10/2022

At a time of such global fragility, the world can ill
afford to have multiple crises. In that regard, we urge
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to refrain
from further missile test launches and to take the urgent
and necessary steps to ease tensions in the region.
We also reiterate our call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to adhere to the relevant Security
Council resolutions and resume constructive and
credible dialogue with the relevant parties in a manner
that recognizes regional and global security concerns.
We hope that the Council and other relevant parties
will be able to act in a manner that preserves the peace,
while at the same time ensuring that the humanitarian
needs of the people of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea are addressed.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari
for his briefing and welcome the delegations of Japan
and the Republic of Korea to today’s Council meeting.
We note with concern the information confirming
that, on 4 October, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea launched an intermediate-range ballistic missile
that flew over the territory of Japan before falling into
the Pacific Ocean. We join the Secretary-General’s
firm condemnation of that launch.
Such a serious situation has not arisen since
2017, although in recent months the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea had already stepped up the
pace of launches and use of new technologies. This
demonstrates the Council’s inability to prevent the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea from continuing
to strengthen and develop its ballistic programme, to
the detriment of the disarmament and non-proliferation
architecture. We consider the continuing missile
launches in contravention of Security Council
resolutions to be a serious matter.
Mexico opposes all actions that seek to violate
multilateral agreements on the non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons and that put regional and international
security at risk. The launch in question jeopardizes
maritime and aviation security in the area. Recent
statements and legislation by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea on its nuclear posture run counter to
the goals of a nuclear-weapon-free world.
The Council must live up to its responsibility and
speak with one voice in the face of any action that
contravenes international peace and security, and the
22-61501

05/10/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

case of the Korean peninsula is not and cannot be an
exception. Of course, we reiterate that disputes must
be resolved through dialogue, and we therefore call on
those actors with the greatest influence in the region
to spare no effort to ensure a timely return to the
negotiating table. Remaining silent in the face of the
escalating tensions we are experiencing will not help to
bring about the solutions that are so urgently needed.
We therefore support the draft press statement that has
been circulated among the members of the Council.
My country reiterates its call for the exercise of
maximum restraint and to refrain from any actions
that could result in further confrontation. We insist
on the need for a dialogue with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, leading to the complete,
verifiable and irreversible denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khaled Khiari for the briefing and welcome
the participation of the Permanent Representatives of
Japan and the Republic of Korea in this meeting.
Kenya once again expresses its profound concern
over the steadily escalating situation in the Korean
peninsula. This year alone, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has carried out 39 test launches
of ballistic missiles in blatant violation of multiple
Security Council resolutions. Eight of those launches,
as we have heard today, have been carried out in the
past 10 days, the latest of which flew over Japan for the
first time since 2017.
In addition, there have been unsettling reports,
attributed to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s State media, of the country’s determination
to develop its nuclear weapons in the shortest time
possible. Those relentless and uncalled-for provocative
actions are now driving the region into an unnecessary
arms race and represent a grave threat to international
peace and security. Indeed, given the obtaining
situation, any miscalculation could plunge the Korean
peninsula into unspeakable turmoil, and the resulting
global socioeconomic and security repercussions would
be catastrophic, particularly for the global South.
Consequently, Kenya reiterates its call for the
halting of any further provocative acts in the Korean
peninsula, in compliance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We further reiterate that
unconditional and genuine dialogue that considers
the concerns of all parties in the region is the only

S/PV.9146

viable path out of the fragile situation. In that regard,
Kenya urges the international community, particularly
States with influence on both sides, to help restart
diplomatic negotiations.
It is disturbing that the provocations are happening
against a backdrop of a deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We encourage the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to prioritize the needs of its people over costly
military ventures. Meanwhile, all other concerned
parties should spare a thought for the humanitarian
plight of the citizens of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. They should endeavour to ensure
that any actions they take do not unnecessarily worsen
the suffering of the innocent population.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): At the outset, I
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled
Khiari for his briefing. I welcome the delegations of
Japan and the Republic of Korea to this meeting.
Brazil condemns in the strongest terms the latest
launch of an intermediate-range ballistic missile by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. This year, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has launched 39
ballistic missiles, all of which violate relevant Security
Council resolutions. Even in that context, however, the
most recent launch stands out. It is the first launch in five
years to have overflown the territory of a neighbouring
country, as it crossed over the northern part of Japan.
Missile tests over populated areas involve specific
and additional risks that we cannot accept. A missile
overflight might easily be construed by early warning
systems as a real attack, potentially precipitating a
dangerous and unpredictable crisis. Furthermore,
there is a real risk of missile malfunction, as a small
change in missile trajectory could be lethal. Even
debris generated by an overflying missile might cause
harm and disruption to the lives and livelihoods of
the population.
There are, today, around 200,00 Brazilians living
in Japan, which is our fifth largest community abroad.
Any missile risk to Japan is also a risk to the Brazilian
community in that country. The latest test, for example,
put at direct risk the hundreds of Brazilians who
currently reside in Hokkaido and adjacent areas.
Brazil is also concerned with the repercussions of
such tests on civil aviation. We deeply regret that the
launch and previous launches that have taken place

22-615019/16

S/PV.9146

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

since the beginning of 2022 were not preceded by early
warnings through the issuance of notices to airmen.
This poses a significant threat to civilian aircraft
operating in the area.
The concrete threats to the Brazilian community
help illustrate our clear and direct stake in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea file and in the
peace and security of North-East Asia more broadly.
Our number one priority must be reducing tensions
and establishing a dialogue that can lead to greater
predictability and stability in the region.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must
fully adhere to and implement all relevant Security
Council resolutions and abstain from any further
ballistic-missile tests that run counter to the decisions
of the Council. We especially urge, as an urgent first
step, the return to the moratorium declared in 2018
on intermediate- and long-range tests, which pose the
greatest threat to the civilian population of neighbouring
countries when tested over populated areas, in addition
to their threats to international peace and security.
At the same time, we call on the Security Council
to seriously explore alternative avenues to reducing
tensions on the peninsula and breaking the current
deadlock. After 39 ballistic-missile launches this
year, it is clear that sanctions alone are not sufficient
to curb the threat caused by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. While multilateral sanctions may
be part of a comprehensive response, they alone cannot
address the peace and security issues of the peninsula.
Lasting stability must involve structured dialogue,
confidence-building and genuine engagement. Without
these, there can be no chance of assuring long-term
peace for our populations in the region and beyond.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Khaled Khiari
for his briefing.
Russia objects to any military activity that threatens
the security of the Korean peninsula and the countries
in North-East Asia. We note with regret that in recent
months the situation on the Korean peninsula has shown
a tendency to worsen. In August, the United States and
its allies in the region resumed a large-scale militarytraining activity, and at the end of September, for the
first time in five years, exercises were held in the Sea
of Japan by the United States, the Republic of Korea
and Japan, with the participation of a nuclear-missile
carrier, with a view to training to hit targets of critical
10/16

05/10/2022

importance in the Democratic People’s Republic. The
leaders of these countries are talking irresponsibly
about deploying American means of deterrence,
including nuclear means, on the Korean peninsula and
in the region.
We regret that this factual information was not
reflected in the briefing provided by the United
Nations representative.
It is obvious that the missile launches by Pyongyang
are a consequence of a short-sighted, confrontational
military activity conducted by the United States of
America surrounding this country, which hurts its own
partners in the region and also worsens the situation
in North-East Asia as a whole. Furthermore, the
situation on the Korean peninsula cannot be considered
separately from complicated processes that are
currently taking place in this part of the world, and we
can but note Washington’s persistent pushing forward
of their unilateral security doctrine in the Asia-Pacific
region, which only creates new risks for the countries
in the region and is trying to divide them according
to the principle of “if you are not with us, you are
against us”. Part of such activity includes creating new
military blocs, such as, for example, the United States,
the United Kingdom and Australia, in the so-called
AUKUS, and this gives rise to doubts about the good
intentions of these States, in particular for Pyongyang,
which is not conducive to dialogue.
In the Security Council, we often hear from its
Member States that preventive diplomacy cannot be
replaced, that there are no military solutions to conflicts,
and that, when trying to settle explosive situations,
priority needs to be given to political and diplomatic
means. These are very important words — they are the
very essence of the United Nations Charter — but when
it comes to our Western colleagues, these methods
are emphasized only where they have an opportunity
to interfere into others’ internal affairs. But when we
talk about the regions where their geopolitical interests
are truly at stake, then condemnation, pressure and
sabre-rattling come to the fore.
In the eyes of the United States and other Western
countries, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
was long ago excluded from the so-called civilized
world. Pyongyang, out of all the dishes on the menu,
is only offered one, namely, sanctions. Since 2006,
on initiatives of the United States, a large number of
restrictive measures have been imposed on Pyongyang,
22-61501

05/10/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

each stronger than its predecessor, but over the course
of the years, it has become very clear that the sanctions
paradigm cannot ensure security in the region, nor can
it bring us closer to the settling of the issues of missile
and nuclear proliferation.
We deeply regret that our Western colleagues
have consistently ignored the numerous appeals by
Pyongyang to the United States to stop its hostile
activity, which could open an opportunity for dialogue.
But these appears were not taken seriously, and the
accommodating steps undertaken by Pyongyang in
2018 and 2019 and the positive signals that the North
Koreans sent at that time were also not heeded. It is
because of the United States position that the Council
could not find within itself the ability to react to
them appropriately and help with the process of
easing tensions.
We have stated it many times and are repeating it
now: introducing new sanctions against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is a dead end. It is a measure
that, as we just stated, is bringing us zero results when
it comes to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We are convinced that United Nations and Security
Council mechanisms need to be used to support the
inter-Korean dialogue and multilateral negotiations
rather than to become an impediment to them. It is
only then that we will be able to talk about effectively
resolving outstanding issues in the region, including
the nuclear issue, and do it on the basis of mutually
acceptable agreements. A further increase in sanctions
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
going beyond being just a measure to counter the banned
missile and nuclear programmes; it is threatening
the citizens of North Korea with unacceptable
socioeconomic and humanitarian upheavals.
In conclusion, I would like yet again to underscore
that the task before us today is to make sure that all
parties show restraint and demonstrate that they
are, in practice, ready to resume dialogue within the
framework of earlier agreements and commitments
undertaken. We still have on the table the political and
humanitarian initiatives put forward by Russia and
China, which could incentivize the sides to increase
their negotiating efforts.
The absence of moving forward on the political
track and the refusal of some members, in particular
Western members, to make even a single step towards
a balanced and comprehensive solution in the Security

S/PV.9146

Council is the main sign showing that the Security
Council in unable to act. Such a stance, together with the
increase by the United States and its allies of measures
of military nature, risks creating further tensions on
the peninsula, and this can lead to unpredictable and
very dangerous consequences for the whole of NorthEast Asia.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I listened to the briefing by Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari.
We have taken note of the recent launches by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We have also
noted the multiple joint military exercises held by the
United States and other countries recently in the region.
A brief examination will show that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s launch activities took
place either before or after those military exercises and
did not take place in isolation.
Given the critical state of ongoing tensions on
the Korean peninsula, all parties should focus on the
overarching goal of peace and stability on the peninsula,
remain calm, exercise restraint and caution and refrain
from taking any action that may exacerbate tensions or
lead to a miscalculation, so as to prevent the continuous
escalation of the situation.
The Korean peninsula issue is complex. The crux of
the matter is the confrontation between the United States
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The
year 2018 witnessed a significant positive development
in the situation on the peninsula. The United States
regrettably failed to respond to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s positive measures in
accordance with the principle of action for action. The
denuclearization measures taken by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea went unacknowledged,
and the country’s legitimate and reasonable concerns
have not been addressed. As a result, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea-United States dialogue has
reached an impasse, and mistrust has become even
more entrenched.
At the same time, the United States has recently been
bolstering its military alliance in the Asia-Pacific region
and intensifying the risk of military confrontation. On
the nuclear issue, the United States pursues double
standards and is engaged in political manoeuvring,
poisoning the regional security environment.

22-6150111/16

S/PV.9146

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Against that backdrop, the heightened tensions on
the peninsula should not be a surprise. History shows
that dialogue and consultation are the only way to
resolve the Korean peninsula issue. When the dialogue
went well, relative stability prevailed on the peninsula,
and when there was an impasse or backtracking,
tensions invariably escalated.
We call on the United States to take concrete
measures, demonstrate its sincerity and effectively
address the legitimate and reasonable concerns of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea so as to
create conditions for the resumption of dialogue. The
Security Council should play a constructive role on
the Korean peninsula issue instead of relying solely on
strong rhetoric or pressure. The Council’s discussions
and deliberations should contribute to a détente rather
than fuelling escalation. They should promote the
resumption of dialogue instead of widening differences
and should forge unity instead of creating divisions.
China and Russia put forward a draft resolution on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in order to
ease the humanitarian situation on the ground, create a
climate conducive to mutual trust among all parties and
the resumption of dialogue and inject impetus into the
political settlement of the Korean peninsula issue. The
draft text is still on the table, and we hope that Council
members will actively consider it.
As a close neighbour of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, China closely follows the situation
on the peninsula. As always, China remains committed
to maintaining peace and stability, achieving
denuclearization on the peninsula and resolving issues
through dialogue and consultation. The Global Security
Initiative, proposed by China, provides important
guidance about the settlement of this issue. We once
again call on all the parties concerned to deal with
and resolve the Korean peninsula issue based on the
indivisibility of security, follow the dual-track approach
and the principle of phased and coordinated actions,
remain committed to dialogue and consultation, meet
each other halfway and resolve the reasonable concerns
of all sides in a balanced manner so as to jointly
promote the political settlement of the peninsula issue.
In that regard, China remains committed to playing a
constructive role.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.
12/16

05/10/2022

I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari for his
briefing. I welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representatives of Korea and Japan in this meeting.
On Monday, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea launched a ballistic missile of an unprecedented
range, causing alarm and great concern to neighbouring
countries, including Japan, which witnessed the missile
overfly its airspace.
That latest missile launch, which is added to a
gradually increasing list since the beginning of the
year, calls the international community’s attention to
the scale of the threat to the security of the Korean
peninsula and requires an urgent and concerted
response from the Security Council, commensurate
with the stakes.
Firmly committed to the non-proliferation regime
and to peace on the Korean peninsula, Gabon condemns
such ballistic-missile launches. The diplomatic
approach of firing missiles and showing force cannot be
the solution. It is neither constructive nor sustainable. It
fuels tensions and rekindles the anxiety and concern of
the people. It is a response to many threats and dangers,
including the nuclear threat, which heightens fear.
My country calls for unconditional dialogue with a
view to reaching a solution that ensures peace and the
elimination of the nuclear threat on the Korean peninsula.
Gabon is opposed to the use of nuclear weapons and
any threat to use them. Our view is that such weapons
should not be developed or produced because of their
unacceptable potential for destruction. It is clear that
the development of new nuclear capabilities by States
of the region will only increase the regional and global
security threat.
We cannot say it enough: the solution to the crisis
on the Korean peninsula can be found only through
dialogue and consultation. My country rejects any
rhetoric that trivializes the nuclear threat, which does
not augur well for peace and collective security.
We continue to call on the countries of the region
and all the parties to commit to seeking a solution by
engaging in diplomatic negotiations and to resume
talks based on the commitments already made, with a
view to achieving a negotiated solution, which is the
only viable option for security on the Korean peninsula.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
22-61501

05/10/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): I would like to
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this urgent meeting of the Security Council. I am
grateful for having been invited to take part in this
important meeting. I also thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his briefing.
Over the past nine days, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea launched eight ballistic missiles,
including the recent launch on 4 October of an
intermediate-range ballistic missile, which travelled
around 4,500 kilometres over Japan towards the Pacific.
I need not remind Council members of the fact that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea launched a
total of 39 ballistic missiles this year alone, and more
than 130 over the past 10 years. Indeed, at the present
juncture, we are living with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s dangerous missile provocations on
a near-daily basis.
The Republic of Korea condemns in the strongest
terms the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
continued ballistic-missile launches, which clearly
constitute flagrant violations of multiple Security
Council resolutions. Such provocative actions by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea not only
threaten the peace and stability of the Korean peninsula
and beyond, but also profoundly undermine the very
foundation of the global non-proliferation regime.
At the same time, these launches once again
demonstrate Pyongyang’s complete disregard of its
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations
as a Member State. Moreover, this dangerous cycle of
provocation illustrates that, despite its dire humanitarian
situation, the North Korean regime is still preoccupied
with its political survival and the development of its
programmes on weapons of mass destruction. That
represents a shameful diversion of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s scarce resources to build
up its nuclear arsenal, at the expense of the well-being
and livelihoods of its own people. We also note that
the human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is not improving at all.
Today’s global security and economic environment
has become increasingly fragile and uncertain,
particularly as a result of the Russian Federation’s
aggression on Ukraine. Against that troubling
backdrop, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is

S/PV.9146

taking advantage of the distraction of the international
community and further accelerating the development of
its nuclear and missile programmes.
Recently, on 8 September, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea promulgated its new law on a nuclear
weapons policy, which set the threshold for using
nuclear weapons far lower than any other country. The
policy even allows pre-emptive strikes or the use of
nuclear weapons on a dangerously arbitrary basis. My
delegation reiterates that any attempt by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to justify its possession or
the potential use of nuclear weapons will simply not
be recognized by the international community under
any circumstance.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
must be held accountable for its continued breach of its
international obligations. In that light, it is with great
regret that the Security Council — for the first time
in responding to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s nuclear and ballistic missile provocations since
2006 — failed to adopt a draft resolution (S/2022/431)
in May, owing to the opposition by two permanent
members (see S/PV.9048). Some have argued that the
Security Council should show restraint so as not to
further irritate the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. On the contrary, we have palpably witnessed
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea loudly
responding to the Security Council’s silence in the
form of more frequent ballistic missile launches
and the promulgation of its new law on the use of
nuclear weapons.
Moreover, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea now stands on the verge of its seventh nuclear
test, which will critically undermine the credibility
of the international non-proliferation regime. In
that connection, my delegation would like to recall
the Security Council’s raison d’être — the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Security Council must take
decisive measures to send a unified and clear message
to Pyongyang that its escalatory behaviour must come
to an end. In the meantime, the existing Security
Council sanctions measures must be fully and faithfully
implemented by all Members of the United Nations,
especially by Security Council members. That may
be the only way to effectively pressure Pyongyang to
reconsider its behaviour and return to diplomacy.

22-6150113/16

S/PV.9146

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The Republic of Korea would like to reiterate
that the door for dialogue remains open despite the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s repeated
provocations and threats, and calls on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to respond positively
to our new Government’s “Audacious Initiative”
for sincere and substantive negotiation towards the
denuclearization of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. In addition, our open hand of unconditional
humanitarian assistance to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is still extended.
We strongly urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to cease all of its provocations, fulfil its
obligations under relevant Security Council resolutions
and engage in meaningful dialogue on denuclearization.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I also thank Mr. Khaled
Khiari for his briefing.
When the Security Council met on this issue in
May (see S/PV.9048), we all saw the vetoes cast that
blocked the Council from taking action. And what
happened after that? North Korea conducted launches
the very next month, in June. And now let me ask a
question: how many ballistic missiles were launched
just since 25 September? We all know the answer:
eight ballistic missiles, over five separate launches,
in just 10 days. All of those launches violate relevant
resolutions adopted by the Council, which is entrusted
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. They mark a clear
escalation. They pose a grave and imminent threat to
the peace and security of not just Japan, but also the
region and beyond. In short, they challenge the very
authority of the Council.
Among those launches, the latest was especially
significant. It flew over Japan and impacted in the
Pacific Ocean for the first time since 2017. I assume we
can all imagine how terrifying it must be to see a missile
flying overhead. That is absolutely unacceptable, and
Japan condemns it in the strongest possible terms.
Those most recent launches must not be viewed in
isolation. They are part of North Korea’s long-pursued
and reinvigorated nuclear and missile programmes. In
September, we also learned about a further unacceptable
development regarding North Korea’s nuclear policy.
And there have been continued and widespread reports
14/16

05/10/2022

of ongoing activities at a nuclear test site in North
Korea. We must not allow the current situation to
become a new normal.
The Council will recall that it unanimously adopted
resolution 2321 (2016) in 2016. That resolution needs to
be respected. The Council should be mindful that it is
being tested and that its credibility is at stake. Silence
is not an option. North Korea has violated multiple
Council resolutions, and the Council should act and
produce an outcome that restores its credibility and
fulfils its responsibilities. The Council also needs to
send a clear and unequivocal message to North Korea
and to the international community that North Korea’s
ongoing nuclear and missile activities constitute a
grave threat to international peace and security and that
there is no excuse for their actions. Japan will spare no
effort to cooperate with Council members and all other
Member States to that end. We need to do our jobs.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the United States has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I felt I had to take the floor again. As we
expected, instead of putting the blame where the
blame lies — on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea — Russia and China want to blame others for
their actions
First, the United States and the Republic of Korea
carry out defensive military exercises responsibly and
consistent with international law. Those exercises
improve readiness that is critical to deterrence and
responding to regional threats. Ballistic missile
launches by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
are unlawful. They are reckless. And they endanger
neighbours in the region. There is no equivalency
between those two activities.
Secondly, also as expected — and we have said this
repeatedly in this Chamber — the enhanced trilateral
security partnership known as AUKUS does not
violate the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). We take our NPT obligations very
seriously, and I know that the United Kingdom and
Australia do so as well. It is worrisome that Russia
and China insist on distracting us from discussions
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s clear
attempts to undermine the global non-proliferation
regime with false claims. Those countries’ attempts to
22-61501

05/10/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

defend Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should
not go unnoticed.
Finally, the draft resolution that China and Russia
have proposed is predicated on their assessment that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is showing
goodwill through a moratorium — and I say, what
moratorium? The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has shown repeatedly this year that such a
moratorium does not exist. This is a clear effort by
China and Russia to reward the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea for its bad actions and cannot be
taken seriously by the Council.
In the light of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s escalating provocations and its returning to
testing long-range systems, the purported basis for the
draft resolution has no validity here. We need to turn
quickly to strengthening the sanctions regime under
resolution 1718 (2006), not considering sanctions relief.
We have heard all members of the Council, except
Russia and China, condemn the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s actions today.
Finally, on the humanitarian question, it is clear
and has been repeatedly stated that the only barrier
to sending humanitarian assistance to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea itself — their own self-imposed
border closures, not international sanctions, as our
colleagues have alleged.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of China has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I did
not intend to speak a lot on this occasion, since we will
hold closed consultations following this open briefing.
But now that the representative of the United States has
made a second statement, I believe I have to speak in
response. I will mention three points.
First, the recent launches by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea are not issues that should
be viewed in isolation. We have always believed that
we must view the current situation on the peninsula
in a comprehensive way. The recent missile launches
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are
closely related to the series of joint military exercises
in the region. Some people say that the launches by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea took place
because in May (see S/PV.9030) the Security Council

S/PV.9146

did not adopt a draft resolution (S/2022/431) — that
is, they are a result of the Council’s inaction. That
argument is totally erroneous and misleading. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s sense of
insecurity is increasing. Why? There are reasons.
Recently, the United States and other countries have
frequently conducted military exercises and carried
out cooperation on nuclear submarines with certain
countries. It has claimed that it will deploy so-called
strategic assets in the region. Such rhetoric and actions
are in fact heightening the confrontation and creating
risks and tensions. A sound political and security
environment is indispensable for a solution to the issues
on the peninsula. We hope that the countries concerned
will bear in mind the overarching goal of regional peace
and security and create a sound environment for peace
and stability on the peninsula.
Secondly, just now, the representative of the
United States and other representatives stressed in
their statements that the Council’s resolutions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must be fully
implemented. China agrees, and that has been our
consistent view. At the same time, I must point out that
those resolutions also include provisions to alleviate the
humanitarian situation on the peninsula and promote
the political process, along with other provisions. The
implementation of the Council’s resolutions should
address all the provisions fairly, rather than focusing
solely on sanctions. Experience has shown that
sanctions cannot solve everything. Lopsided emphasis
on sanctions at the expense of political efforts and
relentless pressure will not help ease the situation. They
are not the right approach.
Thirdly, I would like to stress that dialogue and
consultation are the only way to solve the Korean
peninsula issue. We urge the parties concerned to
demonstrate sincerity and take actions to create
conditions to resume dialogue. We also call upon
the countries concerned to meet each other halfway,
address the legitimate and reasonable concerns of all
the parties in a balanced manner and promote a political
solution of the issue. China is ready to make further
contributions in that regard.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Let me respond to the remarks of the

22-6150115/16

S/PV.9146

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

05/10/2022

representative of the United States and make the
following points.

them that. We have already heard them called that in
other parts of the globe.

Unlike the United States, Russia does border on
North Korea and is very much concerned over the
dangerous developments around the Korean peninsula.
That means that we have no choice but to consider the
entire situation in a holistic and responsible manner.

But to us it is obvious that, as long as regional
alliances build up military power, as long as they follow
a provocative course in military affairs, Pyongyang
will respond. The risks of reciprocal action will only
continue to grow. We are convinced that the only way
to resolve the issue concerning the Korean peninsula
is to engage in a dialogue and search for political
solutions that take into account the legitimate concerns
of all sides, including security concerns.

I disagree with her conclusions that we want to
shift responsibility or distort the facts. That was not
the purpose of our statement. We just drew attention
to the erroneous and dangerous policy of the United
States and its allies, which clearly is not working. Of
course, one can say that military drills where nuclear
missile carriers train to target critical facilities on the
territory of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
are purely defence-oriented exercises. One can say that
alliances involving nuclear submarines are friendly and
peaceful — purely defensive alliances. She can call

16/16

The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

22-61501
