24

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

view of some, do not completely fulfil the provisions of
General Assembly resolution 38/9 of 10 November 1983
which specifically demanded that Israel withdraw forth­
with its threat to attack and destroy nuclear facilities in
Iraq and in other countries;
3. Further considers that any threat to attack and
destroy nuclear facilities in Iraq and in other countries
constitutes a violation of the Charter of the United
Nations;
4. Demands that Israel undertake forthwith not to
carry out, in disregard of the safeguards system of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, any attack on
nuclear facilities in Iraq, or on similar facilities in other
countries, devoted to peaceful purposes;
5. Requests the Security Council to consider the neces­
sary measures to ensure Israel's compliance with Security
Council resolution 487 (1981) and to deter Israel from
repeating its attack on nuclear facilities;
6. Reaffirms its call for the continuation of the consid­
eration, at the international level, of legal measures to pro­
hibit armed attacks against nuclear facilities, as a contribu­
tion to promoting and ensuring the safe development of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its fortieth session on the question of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 487 (1981)
and on the consequences of Israel's non-compliance with
that resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled" Armed Israeli aggression
against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave conse­
quences for the established international system concern­
ing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-prolifera­
tion of nuclear weapons and international peace and
security".
65th plenary meeting
16 November 1984

39/29. Declaration on the Critical Economic Situa­
tion in Africa
The General Assembly,
Alarmed by the critical economic situation currently
prevailing in Africa,
Commending the efforts of the Secretary-General in sen­
sitizing the international community to the plight of
Africa,
Noting the increased concern of the international com­
munity for the worsening plight of African countries
affected by the crisis,
Having considered the critical economic situation in
Africa, the note by the Secretary-General 39 and his report
on the subject,40
Taking note of the Declaration on the Critical Economic
Situation in Africa and the resolutions adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its twentieth ordinary
session, held at Addis Ababa from 12 to 15 November
1984,41
Taking note also of the statement of the Committee for
Development Planning, at the conclusion of its twenty­
first session, held at Geneva from 19 to 21 November
1984, on the critical economic situation in Africa, 42
39 A/39/627.
40 A/39/594.
41 See A/40/87. annex.

Convinced of the need for concerted action by the inter­
national community to assist the efforts of the African
Governments by providing immediate emergency relief,
and medium-term and long-term development aid,
I. Adopts the Declaration on the Critical Economic
Situation in Africa set forth in the annex to the present res­
olution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take all appropri­
ate measures for the full and speedy implementation of the
objectives contained in the Declaration;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to bring the
Declaration to the attention of all States, and intergovern­
mental and non-governmental organizations;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue
to monitor the situation, to assess the needs and the
responses thereto, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session through the Economic and
Social Council.
83rd plenary meeting
3 December 1984
ANNEX
Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa
1. We the States Members of the United Nations express our deep con­
cern at the profound economic and social crisis that Africa is experiencing.
Over the last few years the situation has assumed alarming proportions.
seriously jeopardizing not only the development process but, more omi­
nously, the very survival of millions of people.
2. We are alarmed by the spectre of widespread famine hanging over
many African countries. Over one hundred and fifty million people are far­
mg hunger and malnutrition. Prolonged unprecedented drought, accelerat­
ing desertification and other natural disasters have compounded an already
serious situation, dislocating normal life all over the continent. Alarming
shortages in food and water supplies and the depletion of livestock have led
to the displacement of millions of people within and across borders.
3. All these factors are further straining fragile economies crippled by
deep-rooted structural deficiencies, that is to say. weak physical and social
infrastructures, lack of trained human resources and dependence on the
export of a few primary commodities.
4. Africa, despite its enormous potential, remains the least developed
of all continents, lagging far behind by every economic indicator. Eco­
nomic performance of many African countries is characterized by declining
per capita incomes and stagnant or negative rates of growth. Furthermore.
food production has not kept pace with population growth. According to
all projections. prospects for recovery, growth and development remain
very dim unless the efforts currently under way in African countries are
fully supported by the international community.
5. Furthermore. the international economic environment continues to
affect developing countries adversely and, particularly, it had a devastating
impact on the already fragile African economies. This is manifested in
deteriorating terms of trade. sharp declines in export earnings, the heavy
burden of external debt and stagnating resource flows to African countries.
6. We are aware that African countries recognize they have the primary
responsibility for their development and for addressing the present crisis.
They have therefore undertaken and continue to undertake painful adjust­
ment measures at very high social and political costs. While recognizing
the determined efforts of African countries and the support provided by the
international community. much more needs to be done as the situation
remains very grave
7. We recognize that, in dealing with the present crisis, African regional
and subregional efforts towards economic co-operation and integration as
well as enhanced economic and technical co-operation among developing
countries play an imponant role in the achievement of national and collec­
tive self-reliance and sustained development in Africa.
8. We are aware that the maintenance of peace and secunty and the
strengthening of international co-operation are important for meeting the
challenge of development
41 See 0/jic,a/ Records o(the Ecommuc and Sona/ ( ·mmnl. /985. Sup{Jf,,_
ment flio 'i (El I 98:\ 29).

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

9. We fully recognize that emergency relief aid on a massive scale is
urgently needed in the following areas: additional food aid and other emer­
gency supplies, together with the technical and financial assistance neces­
sary for their transportation, storage and distribution to the affected popu­
lations; improvement of water supplies: improvement of health and
nutrition, particularly for vulnerable groups, including refugees and dis­
placed persons; safeguarding national nuclei of herds of livestock; estab­
lishment of income-generating projects and promotion of new and renewa­
ble energy projects, particularly in rural areas. In addition to the assistance
already provided by the international community, further urgent assistance
from bilateral and multilateral donors and non-governmental organiza­
tions is required to meet the above and other identified emergency needs in
a comprehensive manner, as well as to strengthen the emergency preven­
tion and preparedness capacities of African countries.
I 0. Of particular importance is the need to undertake urgent action to
speed up and support the recovery and rehabilitation process in African
countries, especially of the agricultural and industrial sectors as well as for
physical and social infrastructures. Assistance for increasing the import
capacity for vital imports, through adequate balance-of-payments support
and other relevant measures, would help to establish a sound basis for the
resumption and acceleration of sustained economic and social develop­
ment in Africa.
11. We agree that in confronting the challenge of development,
national policies and measures, such as those outlined in the Lagos Plan of
Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic
Development of Africa, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity43 and the Special Mem­
orandum on Africa's Economic and Social Crisis adopted by the Confer­
ence of Ministers of the Economic Commission for Africa, 44 provide a
framework for national and subregional action and international support.
12. We recognize that, in view of the high priority attached by African
countries to food and agriculture, the first urgent task is the early attain­
ment of national and collective self-reliance in food production. In this
connection, as highlighted in the Harare Declaration on the food crisis in
Africa adopted on 25 July 1984 by the thirteenth FAO Regional Confer­
ence for Africa, national food strategies and integrated rural development
plans play an important role, especially in the achievement of food secur­
ity. Moreover, we recognize the important role of women in rural develop­
ment, particularly in food production, a role for which greater support is
needed. Also important are the provision of appropriate incentives, credit.
improvement of storage and transport, reduction of food losses, in particu­
lar post-harvest losses, achievement of a better balance between agricul­
tural export commodities and food production, diversification of agricul­
tural production and utilization of irrigation potential, particularly in the
drought-prone areas.
13. Urgent action is needed at the international level to support
national and regional efforts to implement the Regional Plan of Action to
Combat the Effects of Drought in Africa45 and the Plan of Action to Com­
bat Desertification.46
14. Increased resources for rapid implementation of the Industrial
Development Decade for Africa and the Transport and Communications
Decade in Africa are required. Furthermore, efforts at national, subregional
and regional levels to develop the necessary and much needed skilled man­
power, and to build technological capacities, require increased interna­
tional support.
15. We fully acknowledge that, in the light of the worsening economic
situation in Africa, the interrelationship between the debt problem, conces­
sional flows and export earnings and their direct impact on recovery,
growth and development assume even greater significance. It is vital, there­
fore, to take urgent and mutually-reinforcing measures in those areas, tak­
ing into account the Special Memorandum on Africa's Economic and
Social Crisis,44 the Addis Ababa Declaration on Africa's External Indebt­
edness adopted by the African Ministers of Finance47 and the World Bank
Special Programme for Sub-Saharan Africa, in order to complement and
support domestic adjustment efforts in African countries.
16. Africa is experiencing a very serious debt problem, repayment and

servicing of which is taking a very high percentage of already reduced

export earnings. The problem is further exacerbated by factors such as
deteriorating terms of trade, decline in concessional flows in real terms and
increased use of short-term commercial credit. Without an increase in net

43 A/S-11/14, annex I.
44 E/ I 984/ l lO, annex.
45 See E/ I 984/ I09, annex.
46 Report of the Uniled Nations Conference on Deserti/icauon. Nairobi, 29
August-9 September 1977 (A/CONF.74/36). chap I
47 E/1984/110/Add. l .

25

capital inflows and urgent debt relief measures, prospects for rt'COVl'T) and
development in Africa will be undermined.
17. Bilateral and multilateral creditors should take concerted measures
to ease the debt burden of African countries. For official and officially-guar­
anteed debt. total or partial conversion of official development assistance
debts into grants, longer maturities and grace periods. lower or rnnces­
sional interest rates and extended multi-year rescheduling are among the
measures to be dealt with urgently within the framework of close consulla­
t10n with each of the debtor countries concerned, as well as any other mea­
sures to be agreed upon. It is essential to ensure the full and urgent 1mpk­
mentation of Trade and Development Board resolution 165 (S-IX) of 11
March I 978.4 8 Multilateral financial institutions should expedite resource
disbursement. Reduction in international interest rates would furthn alk­
viate the debt burden. Moreover. the full co-operation of commernal
banks is indispensable. The capacity of African countries to manage their
debt should be improved through the provision of technical assistance,
particularly by international agencies.
18. We recognize that African countries. in view of their heav) depen­
dence on concessional financial flows and their limited access to altcrnat1H'
sources of external finance, require a substantial and sustained increase ,n
the volume of these flows through bilateral donors and multilateral chan­
nels for development finance and technical co-operation. The international
community. in particular the developed countries and the multilateral
financial institutions, should endeavour to provide the additional linannal
resources to maintain and increase a net transfer of resources to African
countries. The World Bank is strongly urged to explore with donors possi­
ble approaches, including a special facility, in mobilizing the resources
required to implement the Bank's Special Programme for Sub-Saharan
Africa.
I 9. The full and speedy implementation of the Substantial New Pro­
gramme of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries.49 par­
ticularly with regard to the official development assistance level. would
greatly augment resource flows to many African countries. Supplementary
funding for the International Development Association and the early com­
pletion of the replenishment of the International Fund for Agricultural
Development would ensure at least the maintenance of the real ,alue of
resources channelled to Africa.
20. The heavy dependence of African countries on the export of a few
primary commodities renders them particularly vulnerable to the sharp
price fluctuations that result in drastic shortfalls in export earnings. Urgent
action is therefore needed to stabilize commodity prices on long-term
trends and to improve and increase the use of compensatory financing
arrangements for export earnings shortfalls, such as the Compensatory
Financing Facility of the International Monetary Fund. Improved market
access for African primary and processed products, efforts of African coun­
tries to diversify production, and the early and effective operation of the
Common Fund for Commodities require intensified international action.
21. The modalities and quality of official development assistance flows
in terms of a greater grant element, untied resources and simplified proce­
dures for aid delivery should be improved through, inter a/ia, speedier dis­
bursements and greater reliance on more flexible forms of assistance. such
as non-project programme and sector aid, including local and recurrent
costs.
22. We acknowledge that there is room for further improvement in the
co-ordination of assistance and the efficient and effective use of resources.
Co-ordination of multilateral as well as bilateral assistance is primarily the
responsibility of recipient Governments and, in this connection, effectiv,·
national co-ordinating mechanisms can play an important role. The
United Nations system should extend technical assistance in this field to
Governments, upon request, and should pursue its own efforts to enhance
co-ordination at the programme and operational levels, in conformity with
relevant General Assembly resolutions.
23. We are convinced that in addressing the critical needs of African
countries there are many areas where the United Nations could play an
important role both in mobilizing the necessary resources and in carrying
out specific activities. In this respect, existing resources allocated for
programmes in Africa should, in consultation with African Governments.
be refocused to address identified priority areas. There is need for further
improvement in the efficiency and programme delivery of United Nations
activities in Africa. Furthermore, additional voluntary contrihutions
48 Offic,a/ Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session, S1111pl<'·
ment No. 15 (A/33/15 and Corr.I), vol. I, part two, annex I.
49 Report ()f the United Nations Co11ference on the Least Developed ( ·mm­
tries. Paris. 1-14 Septemher 1981 (United Nations publication. Sale, No
E.82 1.8). part one, sect. A.

26
------------ --- -

General Assembly-- Thirty-ninth Session

-------

should be mobilized to ensure the implementation of proJects and
programmes in priority areas.
24. We urge all organs. organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system to give greater attention to Africa and to continue to mobih,c
resources for assisting African countries m dealing with the current crisis
and its longer-term ramifications.
25. We further urge bilateral and multilateral donors, as well as non­
governmental orgamzations, to take all necessary measures to support the
efforts of the African countries aimed at alleviating the critical economic
situation in Africa.
26. We request the Secretary-General to continue his commendable
efforts in alerting and sensitizing the international community to the phght
of African countries, in mobilizing additional assistance to Africa, as well
as in co-ordinating the activities of the United Nations system in Africa
and in monitoring the situation, and to present periodic reports thereon.
27. We are convinced that unless urgent action is taken the rapid!s
deteriorating situation in Africa may well lead to disaster. We are therefore
fully committed to supporting the efforts of African countries to meet the
dual challenge of survival and development by taking concerted and urgent
measures commensurate with the needs outlined in the present Declara­
tion.

39/47. Co-operation between the United Nations
and the Asian-African Legal Consultative
Committee
The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 36/38 of 1 8 November 1 98 1 .

3 7/8 of 29 October 1 98 2 and 38/37 of 5 December 1 983,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the
Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee, 50
Having heard the statement of the Secretary-General of
the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee 5 1 on the
continuing close and effective co-operation between the
two organizations,
1 . Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General;
2. Notes with satisfaction the progress achieved
towards strengthening the existing co-operation between
the United Nations and the Asian-African Legal Consulta­
tive Committee;
3. Commends the Asian-African Legal Consultative
Committee for orienting its programme to strengthen its
supportive role to the work of the United Nations in wider
areas, as called for by the General Assembly in its resolu­
tion 36/38;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
steps to promote co-operation between the United Nations
and the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee in
the field of progressive development and codification of
international law and other areas of common i nterest;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session a report on co­
operation between the United Nations and the Asian-Afri­
can Legal Consultative Committee;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Co-operation between
the United Nations and the Asian-African Legal Consulta­
tive Committee".

93rd plenary meeting
JO December I 984
50 A/39/565.
51 Official Records of the (icn,•ra/ -lssemhli-. Thirt_1 ·- ninth Se.,sion, l'/enw 1
Meetings, 93rd meeting, paras. 88- 1 01.

39/48. Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
fhc General Asscmblr.
Recalling its resolutions 1 5 1 4 (XV) of 1 4 December

1 960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Inde­
pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and 262 1
(XXV) of 1 2 October 1 970, containing the programme of
action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its previous resolutions, in particular res­
olutions 3 1 6 1 (XXVIII) of 1 4 December 1 973, 329 1
(XXIX) of 1 3 December 1 974, 3 1 /4 of 2 1 October 1 976,
32/7 of I November 1 977, 34/69 of 6 December 1 979, 35/
43 of 28 November 1 980, 36/ 1 0 5 of 1 0 December 1 98 1 ,
3 7 1 6 5 of 3 December 1 98 2 and 3 8/ 1 3 of 2 1 Novem ber
1 983, in which it, inter alia, affirmed the unity and territo­
rial integrity of the Comoros,
Recalling, in particular, its resolution 3 38 5 (XXX) of 1 2
November 1 97 5 on the admission of the Comoros to
membership in the United Nations, in which it reaffirmed
the necessity of respecting the unity and territorial integ­
rity of the Comoro Archipelago, composed of the islands
of Anjouan, Grande-Comore, Mayotte, and Moheli.
Recalling further that, in accordance with the agree­
ments between the Comoros and France, signed on 1 5
June 1 97 3 , concerning the accession of the Comoros to
independence, the results of the referendum of 22 Decem­
ber 1 974 were to be considered on a global basis and not
island by island,
Convinced that a just and lasting solution to the question
of Mayotte is to be found in respect for the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago,
Convinced further that a speedy solution of the problem
is essential for the preservation of the peace and security
which prevail in the region,
Bearing in mind the wish expressed by the President of
the French Republic to seek actively a just solution to that
problem,
Taking note of the repeated wish of the Government of
the Comoros to initiate as soon as possible a frank and
serious dialogue with the French Government with a view
to accelerating the return of the Comorian island of
Mayotte to the I slamic Federal Republic of the Comoros,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 52
Bearing in mind the decisions of the Organization of
African U nity, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference concerning
this question,
I . Reqffirms the sovereignty of the Islamic Federal
Republic of the Comoros over the island of Mayotte;
2. Invites the Government of France to honour the
commitments entered into prior to the referendum on the
self-determination of the Comoro Archipelago of 22
December I 974 concerning respect for the unity and terri­
torial integrity of the Comoros;
3. Calls for the translation into practice of the wish
expressed by the President of the French Republic to seek
actively a just solution to the question of Mayotte;
4. Urges the Government of France to open the negoti­
ations with the Government of the Comoros with a view
to ensuring the effective and prompt return of the island of
Mayotte to the Comoros;
5. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to follow developments concerning this question,
in conjunction with the Secretary-General of the Organiza.,2 A; 39/ 5 1 8.
