Resolutions adopted on the reporls of 1he Fourth' Co1nminee

Strongly deploring the increasing collaboration whi9h
certain States, particularly South Africa, in violation of
Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations and
of the relevant decisions of the United Nations, maintain with the illegal racist minority régime, thereby
seriously impeding the effective application of t~ sanctions and other measures taken so far against the illegal
régime,
Seriously concerned at the continued importation of
chrome and nickel into the United States of America
from Southern Rhodesia, in violation of the relevant
decisions of the Security Council and in disregard of
the related resolutions of the General Assembly,
Deeply disturbed at recent reports of widespread violations of United Nations sanctions, including the operation of Southern Rhodesian aircraft for intemational
passenger and cargo traffic and the participation of
"Southern Rhodesian" teams in various sporting events,
as well as the continued functioning of information and
airlines offices of the illegal régime outside Southem
Rhodesia and the resultant influx of foreign tourists
iota the Territory,
Considering that developments in the area call in
particular for positive, concerted intemational action
with a view to imposing maximum isolation on the
illegal régime,
Reaffirming its conviction that the sanctions will not
put an end to the illegal racist minority régime unless
they are comprehensive, mandatory and effectively
supervised, enforced and complied with by all States,
in particular by South Africa,
1. Strongly condemns the policies of the Governments, particularly the Govemment of South Africa,
which, in violation of the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations and in open contravention of their specific obligations under Article 25 of the Charter of the
United Nations, continue to collaborate with the illegal
racist minority régime, and calls upon those Governments to cease forthwith all such collaboration;
2. C ondemns all violations of the mandatory sanctions imposed by the Security Council, as well as the
continued failure of certain Member States to enforce
those sanctions strictly, as being contrary to the obligations assumed by them under Article 25 of the Charter;
3. Condemns the continued importation of chrome
and nickel from Southem Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) into
the United States of America, and calls upon the Government of the United States to repeal speedily all
legislation permitting such importation;
4. Calls upan all Governments which so far have
not done so:
(a) To take stringent enforcement measures to ensure strict compliance by all individuals, associations
and bodies corporate under their jurisdiction with the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council and to prohibit any form of collaboration by them with the illegal
régime;
( b) To take effective steps to prevent or discourage
the emigration to Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) of
any individuals or groups of individuals under their
jurisdiction;
(e) To discontinue any actjon which might confer
a semblance of legitimacy on the illegal régime, ínter
alia, by forbidding the operation and activities of Air
Rhodesia, the Rhodesia N ational Tourist Board and
the Rhodesian lnformation Oflice, or any other activities which contravene the aims and purposes of the
sanctions;

103

(d) To invalidate passports and other documents
for travel to the Territory;
5. Reiterates its conviction that the scope of the
sanctions against the illegal régime must be widened to
include all the measures envisaged under Article 41
of the Charter and requests the Security Council to
consider taking the necessary measures in that regard
as a matter of urgency;
6. Requests the SpeciaJ Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to follow the implementation of the present
resolution and invites the Security Council Committee
established in pursuance of resolution 25 3 (1968)
concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia to continue to co-operate in the related work of the Special
Committee.
2414th p/enary meeting
21 November 1975

3398 (XXX). Activities of foreign economic and
other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Deelaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in Southern Rhodesia and
Namibia and in ali other Territories under
colonial domination and efforts to eliminate
colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the ítem entitled "Activities of
foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
in Southern Rhodesia and Namibia and in all other
Territories under colonial domination and efforts to
eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa",
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peo~les relating to this question, 4
T aki11;g into c~nsideration the parts of the report of
the Umted Nations Council for Namibia relating to
this question, 3
Recailing its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 containing the programme of action for the full impl~mentation of the Declaration, as well as all other resolutions of the United Nations relating to the ítem,
. Reaffirming the solemn obligation of the administermg Powers under the Charter of the United Nations to
promote the political, economic, social and educational
advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories under
their administration and to protect the human and
natural resources of those Territories against abuses,
]!.eaf!irming that . any econo~ic or other activity
wh1ch 1mpedes the 1mplementat1on of the Declaration
and obstructs efforts aimed at the elimination of colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern
Africa and other colonial Territories violates the politi4 Ihid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/
Rev.1), chap. V.
5 Jbid., Supplement No. 24 (A/10024).

104

General Aasembly-Thirtieth Session

cal, economic and social rights and interests of the
peoples of the Territories and is therefore incompatible
with the purposes and principies of the Charter,
Condemning the intensified activities of those foreign
economic, financia! and other interests which continue
to exploit the, natural and human resources of the colonial Territories and to accumulate and repatriate huge
. profits to the detriment of the interests of the inhabi/J~ts, particularly in southern Africa, the!ebr imped~g
the realization by the peoples of the Terntones of _their
legitimate aspirations for self-determination and mdependence,
, Strangly candemning the support which South Africa
and the illegal racist minority régime in S_outhern Rh_odesia continue to receive from those fore1gn econom1c,
financia! and other interests which are collaborating with
them in their exploitation of the natural and huma!!
resources of and in the further entrenchment of their
illegal and ;acialist domination over, the inteT?ational
Territory of Namibia and the Non-Self-Govemmg_ Territory of Southem Rhodesia (Zimbabwe), respectively,
Conscious of the continued need to mobilize public
opinion against the involvement of foreign _economic,
financia! and other interests in the exploitabon of the
natural and human resources of colonial Territories,
particularly in Africa,
1. Reaffums the inalienable right of the peoples of
dependent Territories to self-determination and independence and to the enjoyment of the natural resources
of their Territories, as well as their right to dispose of
those resources in their best interests;
2. Reiterates that any administering P?wer whic_h
deprives the colonial peoples of the exerc1se of their
legitimate rights over their natural resources or subordinates the rights and interests of those peoples to
foreign economic and financia! interests violates the
solemn obligations it has assumed under the Charter
of the United Nations;
3. Reaffirms that, by their depletive exploitation of
natural resources, the continued accumulation and repatriation of huge profits and the use of those profits
for the enrichment of foreign settlers and the entrenchment of colonial domination over the Territories, the
activities of foreign economic, financia! and other interests operating at present in the colonial Territories of
southem Africa constitute a major obstacle to political
independence and to the enjoyment of the natural resources of those Territories by the indigenous inhabitants;
4. Candemns the policies of the colonial Powers
and other States which continue to support or collaborate with those foreign economic and other interests
engaged in exploiting the natural and human resources
of the Territories, thus violating the political, economic
and social rights and interests of the i_ndigenous p~oples
and obstructing the full and speedy 1mplementat1on of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples in respect of those
Territories;
5. Calls upan the colonial Powers, as well as th~se
Govemments which have not yet done so, to take leg1slative administrative or other measures in respect of
their 'nationals and the bodies corporate under their
jurisdiction who o~ and operate. enterp~ises in col~nial Territories, parttcularly m Afnca, wh1ch are detr1mental to the interests of the inhabitants of those
Territories, in order to put an end to such enterprises

and to prevent new investments that run counter to the
interests of the inhabitants;
6. Requests all States to take effective measures to
end the supply of funds and other forms of assistance,
including military supplies and · equipment, to those
régimes which use such assistance to repress the peoples
of the colonial Territories and their national liberation
movements;
7. Calls upon ali States to discontinue all economic,
financia! or trade relations with South Africa concerning
Namibia and to refrain from entering into economic,
financia! or other relations with South Africa, acting on
behalf of or concerning Namibia, which may lend support to its continued illegal occupation of that Territory;
8. Calls upan the administering Powers to abolish
every discriminatory and unjust wage system wh~ch
prevails in the Territories under their administrat1on
and to apply in each Territory a uniform system of
wages to ali the inhabitants without any discrimination;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
give the widest possible publicity to the adverse etfects
of the activities of foreign economic and other interests
in ali colonial Territories, as well as to the decisions
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and of the General Assembly on this question, and
requests all Govemments to assist the Secretary-General
in that regard;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session.
2414th plenary meeting
21 November 1975
3399 (X.XX). Question of Namibia

The General Assembly,
Having cansidered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia6 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of- Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 7
Having heard the statements of the representative of
the South West Africa People's Organization, who participated in an observer capacity in the consideration
of the item by the Fourth Committee, 8
Having also heard the statements of the petitioners,9
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2145 (XXI)
of 27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967
and subsequent' resolutions of both the General Assembly and the Security Council relating to the question
6 /bid.

Supp/ement No. 23 (A/10023/Rev.l), chaps. 1-VI
and X.
B Jbid., Thirtietlz Session, Fourth Committee, 2151st and
2155th meetings.
9 /bid., 2145th, 2146th, 2156th and 2165th meetings.
1 [bid.,
