172

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

current negotiations on the replenishment of the Intemational Fund for Agricultural Development to enable it to
maintain its effective contribution to agricultural and food
development, as well as the early consideration and completion of the eighth replenishment of the Intemational
Development Association at an adequate level;
6. Expresses its deep concern about the shortfall of
resources of the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities and the impact on its ability to carry out its
planned programmes, and urges ali countries to continue
and increase their support for the Fund;
7. Requests the Director-General for Development and
Intemational Economic Co-operation to report on the
results of the efforts to increase collaboration between the
Department of Technical Co-operation for Development
and the United Nations Development Programme;
8. Requests the Economic and Social Council, in discharging its responsibilities as defined in the annex to General Assembly resolution 32/197, to assist the Assembly in
establishing overall strategies, policies and priorities for
the system as a whole in respect of operational activities,
and to formulate suggestions and recommendations at the
time ofits consideration ofthe 1986 comprehensive policy
review;
9. Invites the goveming bodies of the organizations of
the United Nations system, where possible, to provide the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session
of 1986 and the General Assembly at its forty-first session
at the time of the 1986 comprehensive policy review of
operational activities, their views on the system-wide policy issues affecting operational activities identified by the
Assembly in its resolution 38/ l 71 and in the present resolution, and also invites the organizations of the United
Nations system to co-operate with the Director-General
for Development and Intemational Economic Co-operation in the preparation of his report for that review.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/212.

International Volunteer Day for Economic
and Social Development

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme on the United
Nations Volunteers programme, 128 and the relevant decision of the Goveming Council, 129
Considering that volunteer service, including that of the
United Nations Volunteers, is making an important contribution to socio-economic development activities,
Recognizing the desirability of stimulating the work of
ali volunteers both in the field and in organizations multilateral, bilateral or national, non-govemmental or
govemment-supported - and of giving encouragement to
those volunteers, many of whom engage in volunteer service at considerable personal sacrifice,
l. Invites Govemments to observe annually, on 5
December, an Intemational Volunteer Day for Economic
and Social Development, and urges them to take measures
to heighten awareness of the important contribution of
volunteer service, thereby stimulating more people in all
walks of life to offer their services as volunteers, both at
home and abroad;
2. Invites a/so specialized agencies, other organizations
of the United Nations system and non-govemmental
128 DP/1985144, chap. 11.
129 Ojfina/ Records ofrhe Econom1c and Social Counc1/, /985, Supp/emen1
No. I I (E/1985/32 and Corr. l ), annex l. decision 85/23.

organizations that provide, are affiliated with or benefit
from volunteer service to undertake and promote activities to stimulate greater awareness of the contribution to
their work made by volunteers;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to promote world-wide publicity on the important role ofvolunteer service.
120th p/enary meeting
17 December /985

40/213. Role of qualified national personnel in tbe
social and economic development of developing countries
The General Assembly,
Referring to its resolutions 33/ 135 of 19 December
1978, 35/80 of5 December 1980, 37/228 of20 December
1982 and 39/219 of 18 December 1984 on the role of
qualified national personnel in the social and economic
development of developing countries,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States,
Desiring to promote full implementation of the provisions of the Intemational Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade conceming
the important role of qualified national personnel in the
achievement of the development goals of the developing
countries, 130
Reaffirming the crucial role of human resources in the
socio-economic development process of developing
countries,
Taking into account the increasing importance of
United Nations activities in the field of human resources
development as they are envisaged in future years,
Recognizing that the training of qualified national personnel is an important and integral part of human
resources development,
l. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
the role of qualified national personnel in the social and
economic development of developing countries; 131
2. Reaffirms the importance of implementing the provisions ofits resolution 37/228;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to monitor the further implementation of its resolution 39/219;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to take into
account the need for an integrated and multidisciplinary
approach to ali aspects of human resources development,
in particular the training of qualified national personnel, in
the programmes of work of the United Nations and the
organizations of its system;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to continue bis consultations with the Govemments of Member States, in
accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 39/219, on the
role of qualified national personnel in the social and economic development of developing countries, and to submit a progress report, through the Goveming Council of
the United Nations Development Programme and the
110 Resolution 35/56. annex, para 4"
1 l l A/40/549 and Add

1.
