United Nations

A/RES/59/236

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 February 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 85 (f)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2004
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/59/483/Add.6)]

59/236. Convention on Biological Diversity
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/201 of 20 December 2000, 56/197 of 21 December
2001, 57/253 and 57/260 of 20 December 2002 and 58/212 of 23 December 2003,
Reiterating that the Convention on Biological Diversity 1 is the key international
instrument for the conservation and sustainable use of biological resources and the
fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the use of genetic resources,
Recalling the commitments of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
to pursue a more efficient and coherent implementation of the three objectives of the
Convention and the achievement by 2010 of a significant reduction in the current
rate of loss of biological diversity, which will require action at all levels, including
the implementation of national biodiversity strategies and action plans and the
provision of new and additional financial and technical resources to developing
countries,
Taking note of the entry into force of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic
Resources for Food and Agriculture, 2 the objectives of which are the conservation
and sustainable use of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture and the fair
and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from their use, in harmony with the
Convention on Biological Diversity, for sustainable agriculture and food security,
Expressing its deep appreciation to the Government of Malaysia for hosting
the seventh meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity and the first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol on
Biosafety, held in Kuala Lumpur, from 9 to 20 and on 27 February and from 23 to
27 February 2004, respectively,
Expressing its deep appreciation also to the Government of Brazil for its offer
to host the eighth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity and the third meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the Conference of FAO, Thirty-first
Session, Rome, 2-13 November 2001 (C 2001/REP), appendix D.
2

04-49042

A/RES/59/236

Convention serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol on
Biosafety, to be held in the first half of 2006,
Noting the efforts of the Government of France to organize a biodiversityrelated conference in Paris in 2005,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Executive Secretary of the Convention on
Biological Diversity, transmitted by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly
at its fifty-ninth session; 3
2.
Takes note also of the outcome of the seventh meeting of the Conference
of Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity3 and the outcome of the first
meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity
serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety,3 and
urges all parties to these respective agreements to implement their decisions;
3.
Notes the recent progress made with respect to the achievement of the
three objectives set out in the Convention on Biological Diversity;
4.
Notes also the progress made at the first meeting of the Conference of
the Parties to the Convention serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena
Protocol on Biosafety in establishing an operational framework for the
implementation of the Protocol, and reiterates that the effective implementation of
the Protocol will require the full support of parties and of relevant international
organizations, in particular with regard to the provision of assistance to developing
countries as well as countries with economies in transition in capacity-building for
biosafety;
Invites the countries that have not yet done so to ratify or to accede to the
5.
Convention on Biological Diversity;
6.
Invites the parties to the Convention that have not yet ratified or acceded
to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity 4
to consider doing so;
7.
Invites countries to consider ratifying or acceding to the International
Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture; 2
8.
Encourages developed countries parties to the Convention to contribute
to the relevant trust funds of the Convention, in particular so as to enhance the full
participation of the developing countries parties in all of its activities;
Urges parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity to facilitate the
9.
transfer of technology for the effective implementation of the Convention in
accordance with its provisions;
10. Takes note of the ongoing work of the liaison group of the secretariats and
offices of the relevant subsidiary bodies of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, 5 the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly
in Africa, 6 and the Convention on Biological Diversity, and further encourages

_______________
3

See A/59/197, sect. III.
See UNEP/CBD/ExCOP/1/3 and Corr.1, part two, annex.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
6
Ibid., vol. 1954, No. 33480.
4

2

A/RES/59/236

continuing cooperation in order to promote complementarities among the secretariats,
while respecting their independent legal status;
11. Stresses the importance of harmonizing the reporting requirements of the
biodiversity-related conventions while respecting their independent legal status;
12. Invites the Executive Secretary of the Convention on Biological
Diversity to continue reporting to the General Assembly on the ongoing work
regarding the Convention, including its Cartagena Protocol;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session, under
the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled “Convention on
Biological Diversity”.
75th plenary meeting
22 December 2004

3
