S/PV.7543

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7543rd meeting

Tuesday, 27 October 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Gombo
Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mrs. Adnin
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) (S/2015/813)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-33608 (E)
*1533608*

S/PV.7543

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014) (S/2015/813)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/813, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014).
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: The members of the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2139 (2014) in February
2014 in recognition of the magnitude of the human
cost this conflict carried. The purpose and intent of
the resolution was clear and unambiguous — to seek
protection for civilians caught in the midst of the fighting,
to ensure that civilian facilities and infrastructure
were not attacked, and to compel the parties to enable
unimpeded access for humanitarians trying to reach
people in desperate need of assistance. The 20 reports
of the Secretary-General submitted to the Council since
the adoption of the resolution highlight the parties’
contempt — month after month — for the Council’s
resolution and their minimum legal obligations under
international law.
The failure of the parties to uphold the basic tenets
of international humanitarian and human rights law
has propelled the Syrian people to levels of tragedy
and despair that could barely have been imagined five
years ago. By any measure, the situation in Syria has

2/6

27/10/2015

worsened since the beginning of the year. We now
estimate that some 13.5 million people in Syria are
in need of some form of protection and humanitarian
assistance throughout the country — an increase of
some 1.2 million in just 10 months. More than 6 million
of those in need are children.
This is one of the largest displacement crises of
modern times. Fighting and violence have forced over
half of the people in Syria from their homes in a period
of just over four years, many of them multiple times.
There are now some 6.5 million people displaced
inside Syria. In addition, nearly 4.2 million have fled
the country, with neighbouring countries in the region
bearing an enormous burden. An increasing number
of Syrians fleeing the war and violence are willing to
risk everything aboard unseaworthy boats and dinghies
to reach Europe; of the 680,000 arrivals by sea in the
Mediterranean in 2015, over 50 per cent are Syrian.
They have a right to seek asylum without any form of
discrimination.
The rising levels of fighting and violence over the
past few weeks have had an enormous humanitarian
impact, resulting in large-scale death, injury and
displacement to civilians, particularly in northern
Syria. Indiscriminate attacks on civilian-populated
areas continue with impunity. In Aleppo city, for
example, pro-Government forces and non-State armed
opposition groups have continued mutual shelling inside
civilian-populated areas, with hundreds killed and
injured in September. Meanwhile, clashes erupted in
the city in late September between the Kurdish People’s
Protection Units, the Al-Nusra Front and non-State
armed opposition groups, resulting in multiple civilian
deaths and temporarily impacting humanitarian access
to eastern Aleppo city. On 23 October, the main access
route from Hama to western Aleppo city was cut due to
an offensive by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). We are very concerned at this development,
which places at further risk some 700,000 people living
in the western part of the city.
The latest estimates indicate that over 120,000
people have been displaced in northern Syria since
early October as a result of aerial bombardment and
ground offensives among the parties. This includes
some 45,000 people displaced from the southern
outskirts of Aleppo city to relatively safer areas to the
west and south following a Government forces offensive
over the past week. Meanwhile, approximately 80,000
people have been displaced from northern Hama and

15-33608

27/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East

southern Idlib governorates to relatively safer parts of
these governorates since early October following an
offensive by Government forces. Elsewhere in Syria,
thousands more have been displaced in Homs, rural
Damascus and Deir ez-Zor governorates over the past
few weeks.
The pace of displacement in Syria remains
relentless. Well over 1.2 million people have been
displaced so far this year, many for the second or third
time. Further displacement is expected to continue at a
similar rate unless there is an end to the fighting.
Attacks on health facilities and health workers also
remain relentless. The United Nations and partners
have recorded attacks on five hospitals in Hama, Idlib
and Aleppo governorates since the launch of recent
offensives, leading to a number of casualties and
their immediate closure due to severe infrastructural
damage, exacerbating an already dire situation for
civilians living in these areas. Since the start of the
conflict, Physicians for Human Rights has documented
attacks on at least 313 medical facilities and the deaths
of 679 medical workers. Such attacks should cease
immediately; parties to the conflict must ensure respect
for and the protection of health facilities, workers and
patients under international humanitarian law.
While we know where those considered to be most
vulnerable are located, humanitarian organizations
are still not able to get sustained, unimpeded access to
millions of affected people. Latest estimates indicate
that some 4.5 million people are living in hard-to-reach
areas. Despite our best efforts, we have been able to
reach only a small fraction of people living in these
areas in 2015 as a result of active conflict, shifting frontlines, bureaucratic hurdles and conditions imposed by
the parties.
The parties to the conflict continue to use siege as
a weapon of war in Syria. Following a comprehensive
review, we now estimate that some 393,700 people are
living under siege in Syria, including some 200,000
people in Deir ez-Zor city, besieged by ISIL; some
181,200 people besieged by the Syrian Government
in various locations in eastern Ghutah, as well as
Darayya and Zabadani in rural Damascus; and some
12,500 people besieged by non-State armed opposition
groups and the Al-Nusrah Front in Foah and Kefraya
in Idlib. The 26,500 people in Nubul and Zahra, in
Aleppo governorate, are no longer considered besieged
following consistent and credible reports that access to
and from the enclave for people and commercial goods

S/PV.7543

have significantly improved over the past three months,
although access remains challenging and protection
concerns acute.
Access to besieged areas remains pitiful and
wholly insufficient. So far in 2015, the United Nations
has been able to reach only 3.6 per cent of people with
health assistance and only 0.5 per cent of people with
food per month in besieged areas.
Last week, humanitarian operations began under
the framework of the ceasefire agreement covering
Zabadani, Madaya, Foah, Kefraya and neighbouring
towns, reached in Istanbul on 22 September with the
facilitation of the Office of the United Nations Special
Envoy for Syria. On 18 October, 31 trucks delivered
medical and humanitarian supplies simultaneously to
29,500 people in Madaya, as well as the besieged areas
of Zabadani, Foah and Kefraya. A joint convoy of the
United Nations, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC)
and the International Committee of the Red Cross
accompanied 23 SARC trucks to rural Damascus,
where two trucks crossed into Zabadani and 21 more
entered Madaya and Buqayn, hosting many people
displaced from Zabadani. Eight trucks delivered
a proportional amount of health, food, nutrition,
non-food items and water, sanitation and hygiene
supplies to Foah and Kefraya via a United Nations
cross-border operation through Turkey’s Bab al-Hawa
border point, with the support of the Idlib branch of
the SARC. The United Nations and its partners stand
ready to immediately implement the remaining points
covered under the agreement, including the delivery of
additional humanitarian assistance and the evacuation
of the critically wounded. This complex mission shows
once again that when there is the political will, there is
a way to improve the situation for civilians trapped in
conflict in Syria.
Even as the political and military situation evolves,
the immediate priority for humanitarian organizations
remains reaching all people in need wherever they may
be found in Syria. To do this, we must have sustained,
predictable and unimpeded access throughout the
country. While I welcome the continued progress
made on visas for United Nations staff members by
the Syrian authorities, this must be followed by urgent
and significant progress in other areas. So far this year,
only 23 of the 85 convoy requests made by the United
Nations have been approved in principle by the Syrian
Ministry for Foreign Affairs, and fewer than half of
those approved have been able to actually proceed due

15-336083/6

S/PV.7543

The situation in the Middle East

to a combination of lack of final security clearances
from Syrian authorities, lack of safe passage from
non-State armed opposition groups, and insecurity.
I once again call upon the Syrian authorities to
urgently approve the 46 currently pending inter-agency
convoy requests and to allow convoys previously
agreed in principle, which are awaiting their clearance,
to proceed. I also call on Non-State Armed Groups, as
well as listed terrorist groups, to allow the deliveries
they are preventing. We would be able to reach an
additional 1.5 million people in dire need of assistance
in hard-to-reach and besieged locations through these
inter-agency convoys if approvals and safe passage
were granted.
We all need to guard against becoming numb to the
impact of this conflict, given the vast numbers and the
sense of political impasse. Yet recent developments in
Syria are a telling reminder that it is ordinary women,
men and children who continue to bear the brunt of this
conflict. Living conditions in all areas of the country
continue to deteriorate sharply. Entire neighbourhoods
and communities are at risk from explosive weapons;
over 11 million people are in need of health assistance,
including 25,000 trauma cases per month; nearly
9 million are unable to meet their basic food needs;
70 per cent of the population are without regular access
to safe drinking water amid continuing water cuts;
schools and hospitals are attacked; and poverty and
unemployment are rampant amid rising prices. Winter
is fast approaching and is likely to further exacerbate
the situation for many families.
The United Nations and its humanitarian partners
will continue to respond to the growing needs to the
best of their ability. While we are reaching millions
of people per month, we continue to try and find ways
to scale up life-saving assistance throughout Syria
in an extremely complex and insecure environment.
Humanitarian workers are putting their lives on the line,
but remain undeterred. I strongly encourage donors to
maintain, and where possible increase their generous
support for life-saving humanitarian operations, as
well as recovery and resilience activities, in 2016.
As I have said to the Council before, the crisis
urgently requires a political solution that addresses the
root causes of the conflict and meets the aspirations of
the Syrian people, who have suffered for far too long.
In the absence of such a solution, I sincerely hope that
the Council and relevant Member States will continue
to use their influence with the parties to the conflict in
4/6

27/10/2015

order to remind them to uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law, to
distinguish between civilians and combatants, and to
take all feasible precautions to avoid further civilian
injury and loss of life.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
Albert Einstein once said that insanity was doing
the same thing over and over again and expecting a
different result. Today, 60 years after Einstein’s death,
it seems that some Governments are still not familiar
with that reality. They continue to repeat their mistakes
and miscalculations and to expect different outcomes.
It is undeniable that interference in countries’ domestic
affairs leads only to the destruction of the country
concerned, creates humanitarian crises, leads to chaos
and devastation and creates fertile ground for terrorism
and murderers. That is clear from the destruction of
Iraq, Libya and other countries. Foreign interference
has brought us Daesh, the Al-Nusra Front, the Khorasan
group and other groups. Terrorists now have a State — a
caliphate, as some like to call it.
In spite of all that, failing to adhere to Einstein’s
logic, certain States continue to press on with the
implementation of this deadly recipe in Syria, using the
same slogans, even as everyone else has realized that
the resulting devastation is more than clear. Tony Blair,
former Head of the British Government, has said, 12
years after the British-American invasion of Iraq, that
that act of aggression was based on erroneous and false
information. Fourteen years after the terrorist attack
against the World Trade Center in New York, we see
that the strategy adopted in the context of the war on
terrorism has created hundreds of Bin Ladens, instead
of getting rid of just one Bin Laden. Instead of just one
Al-Qaida in Afghanistan, we have dozens of groups
throughout the world that have adopted its doctrine.
Terrorism has now come to those who support it.
A look at the humanitarian situation reveals the
same thing: the stubbornness of some to carry out the
same misguided policies while expecting different
results is more than evident. Some claim to want to
remedy the humanitarian crisis in Syria, but they
refuse to prioritize the fight against terrorism. They
15-33608

27/10/2015

The situation in the Middle East

continue to impose unilateral economic measures
against the Syrian people. They continue to deny the
Syrian Government its role, refusing to coordinate their
efforts with it in providing humanitarian assistance and
combating terrorism. Five years since the crisis began,
today it is absolutely clear to everyone that this policy
has failed to resolve the humanitarian crisis. Moreover,
it is undeniable that it has aggravated the crisis and
worsened the suffering of the Syrian people, forcing
a large part of the population to become refugees or
internally displaced persons. It is therefore essential to
change the way in which we address the situation, if
we want to have different results, that is, to tangibly
improve the humanitarian situation in Syria. To do so,
we need to take the following steps.
First and foremost, the main reason for the crisis
has to be resolved, namely, the creation and spread
of terrorism supported from abroad. That requires
the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, in particular resolutions 2170 (2014),
2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015), in collaboration with and
with the cooperation of the Government of Syria. Those
who believe that cooperating with the Government is
beneath them, whose sole interest is to undermine the
Syrian Government, President and army and who prefer
to deal with the demons of terrorism rather than with
the Government in order to tackle those demons are
creating an absurd situation that has nothing to do with
the rules of sane behaviour and thinking, nor with the
principles of political science and strategy.
This absurd situation has led to the presence in
Syria and Iraq of tens of thousands of foreign fighters
from more than 100 countries — as illustrated in the
nine reports of the Security Council Committees on
Al-Qaida and Counter-Terrorism, among other places.
Daesh, the Al-Nusra Front and associated groups did not
emerge from a vacuum. They were nurtured, financed
and trained. Their travel was facilitated via airports
and across borders. They were given visas. Through
Turkish intermediaries, they have even been allowed to
engage in trade in oil and gas. It is therefore necessary
to end the practice by the Governments of some
States of continuing to fund, arm and train terrorists.
We cannot talk about ending Syria’s pain and ending
the crisis and at the same time maintain a deafening
silence in the face of Turkey and Jordan using their
territories to allow the passage of foreign terrorists and
mercenaries, or while Saudi Arabia and Qatar support
terrorism with great generosity, rather than promoting
the financing of the humanitarian plan, which is only

S/PV.7543

37 per cent funded — in spite of the various pro forma
conferences held here and there for that purpose — and
at a time when the United States has spent half a billion
dollars, which would be enough to close the gap, as part
of its programme to train and equip the “moderate”
opposition, which now includes just five groups, the
Al-Nusra Front having regained its weapons thanks to
the United States.
The issue of combating terrorism brings me to the
second element necessary for ending the humanitarian
crisis, namely, supporting a political solution. Fighting
terrorism will contribute to the success of a political
solution, which must include a dialogue among
Syrians, under Syrian leadership, without external
interference and with full respect for the sovereignty
and independence of Syria, as well as its unity and
territorial integrity. That is in line with the provisions
of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and all
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, as well
as the Charter of the United Nations and international
law.
In that regard, I would like to recall that the
Government of Syria announced in the General
Assembly, via its Minister for Foreign Affairs (see
A/70/PV.25), its agreement to participate in the working
group proposed by Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral Staffan de Mistura, based on our belief that a
political solution is the only way to resolve the crisis.
The problem lies with the other parties, who do not want
such a solution to be reached. That was also the case
with regard to Mr. De Mistura’s suggestion following
the Geneva II conference for a cessation of fighting in
the city of Aleppo, as well as with regard to the Kofi
Annan plan. In spite of all that, there are still some who
unfairly say that the Syrian Government is refusing
a political solution. Meanwhile, they protect the very
parties who have refused Mr. De Mistura’s initiatives.
We have reviewed the report (S/2015/813) of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014). It is a biased
and politicized report, with many gaps and falsehoods.
We have transmitted two letters in that regard to the
President of the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral. I shall limit myself to saying that the report
fails to draw attention to the fact that the forces of the
so-called coalition have targeted innocent civilians
as well as infrastructure in Syria, including roads,
bridges, refineries, schools and hospitals. Also targeted
was a power station in western Aleppo, the only one in

15-336085/6

S/PV.7543

The situation in the Middle East

the entire city. In addition, a centre for children with
special needs in Raqa was destroyed, killing dozens of
innocent children, under the pretext that Daesh was the
target. Since the beginning of the coalition airstrikes,
we have seen greater numbers of Daesh terrorists
brought from abroad and the expansion of their areas
of influence. Thus we are surprised that the report uses
misleading accounts that are of unknown source, have
no credibility, and seek only to fish in troubled waters
and cast shadows over the joint Russian-Syrian efforts
under way to tackle Daesh, the Al-Nusra Front and
other terrorist groups, on the basis of a request from
the Syrian Government and the Charter of the United
Nations, which has led to the retreat of terrorist groups
in more than one place and forced them to withdraw
from several areas that were under their control.
We have said in the past that the term “non-State
armed opposition groups” is unacceptable and runs
counter to what we are seeing on the ground in Syria.
It also goes against what the Security Council’s own
sanctions committee describes. What the report
describes as non-State armed opposition groups are,
in fact, the Army of Conquest, which was created by
Turkey and which includes elements of Ahrar Al-Sham
and the Al-Nusra Front. Simple math — one plus one

6/6

27/10/2015

equals two — makes clear that the Army of Islam plus
the Army of Conquest equals the Al-Nusra Front, which
is on the list of terrorist entities. The Army of Islam,
which is active in rural Damascus, includes mercenaries
from Chechnya, other countries of the Caucasus and
elsewhere who are financed by the Saudi Arabian secret
service and have declared their allegiance to Daesh.
The Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade, financed and run
by a joint Arab-American operations room in Amman,
includes 8,000 Jordanian Salafists and thousands of
other terrorists.. Al-Nusra Front terrorists, openly
supported by Israel, are attacking the peacekeeping
forces in the Golan and have abducted Filipino and
Fijian soldiers. They not only receive support but are
also given medical attention by Israel.
All of this is summarized in a report of the
Secretary-General under “non-State armed opposition”;
but are these not foreign mercenaries?
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

15-33608
