S/PV.6810

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6810th meeting

Thursday, 19 July 2012, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Osorio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2043 (2012) (S/2012/523)

12-42815 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1242815*

S/PV.6810

Abstentions:
Pakistan, South Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The President (spoke in Spanish): There were 11
votes in favour, 2 votes against and 2 abstentions. The
draft resolution has not been adopted, owing to the
negative vote of a permanent member of the Council.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolution 2043 (2012) (S/2012/523)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members have before them document S/2012/538,
which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted
by France, Germany, Portugal, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
Members also have before them document
S/2012/547/Rev.2, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the Russian Federation.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2012/523, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2043 (2012).
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolutions before it.
If I hear no objection, in accordance with rule 32 of
the provisional rules of procedure of the Council, which
states that “[p]rincipal motions and draft resolutions
shall have precedence in the order of their submission”,
I shall put the draft resolution contained in document
S/2012/538 to the vote first.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Azerbaijan,
Colombia,
France,
Germany,
Guatemala, India, Morocco, Portugal, Togo, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
United States of America
Against:
China, Russian Federation

2

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting on the draft resolution contained in document
S/2012/538.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is appalled by the decision of Russia
and China to veto the draft resolution (S/2012/538)
aimed at bringing an end to the bloodshed in Syria and
at creating the conditions for a meaningful political
process. This is the third time that Russia and China
have blocked the efforts of the Council to address the
crisis in Syria.
More than 14,000 innocent Syrians have been killed
since Russia and China first vetoed our efforts to stem
the violence in October 2011 (see S/PV.6627). Since
then, the regime has intensified its use of heavy weapons
in population centres, including the use of artillery and
helicopter gunships. More than 100 civilians are being
killed every day. The events in Damascus over the past
48 hours demonstrate the need for urgent and decisive
action by the Security Council to stop the downward
spiral into chaos, which will claim many more innocent
lives and affect the stability of the region. Meanwhile,
the United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria
(UNSMIS) has been rendered inoperable due to the
dangerous security situation.
Against that backdrop, we proposed eight days
ago a draft resolution aimed at changing the situation
on the ground for the better. Its logic was simple and
clear — to use the collective weight of the Council to
provide greater support to the work of the Joint Special
Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States and his efforts to secure implementation of his
six-point plan. In so doing, we were aiming to create
the prospect of a reduction in violence by all sides
and the conditions for the political process agreed by
the ministerial Action Group for Syria in Geneva on
30 June, and to promote a conducive environment in
which the United Nations Mission could resume its
operations. We put the draft resolution under Chapter
VII of the Charter as a clear signal to all parties that
their commitments were binding.

12-42815

S/PV.6810

Both the Secretary-General and Mr. Annan had
repeatedly requested that the Council stipulate serious
consequences for non-compliance with the six-point
plan and resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). That
is precisely what we did in proposing draft resolution
S/2012/538. It is an approach supported by the Arab
League and all key regional actors. It focuses on the
removal of heavy weapons as a first step, because
we had been repeatedly told by the Envoy and the
Secretary-General that it was the first and most urgent
problem that must be tackled and the one most likely to
alter the dynamic on the ground.
Yet throughout the negotiation process, Russia
and China chose not to support the course of action
proposed by the Envoy. They claimed their agreement
to a transition plan in Geneva as a great step forward,
but when it came to turning words into action, taking
the decisions required to implement the two resolutions
that they have supported and securing an improvement
on the ground that might eventually lead to progress
against the transition plan, they chose to refuse
engagement.
They argued that a Chapter VII draft resolution
was somehow designed to seek military action through
the back door. Those arguments are irrational. The
Council has adopted many Chapter VII resolutions,
most recently on the Sudan and South Sudan. Today’s
draft resolution, like that one, was set under Article 41.
It was not under Article 42 of the Charter and could
not therefore be construed as a precursor to military
intervention.
We offered flexibility on Russia and China’s
concerns and gave them more time. But still, they
refused to engage. Instead, they advocated more of
the same approach that has consistently failed to have
an effect. Instead of the pressure that Mr. Annan had
requested, they advocated relying on Al-Assad’s empty
promises — the same promises that had been made and
broken with predictable consistency since November
last year. Instead of trying to generate the conditions
in which the United Nations Mission could become
effective, they argued for its extension in a manner that
willfully ignored the fact that it was currently unable
to operate.
By exercising their veto today, Russia and China
have failed in their responsibilities as permanent
members of the Security Council to help resolve the
crisis in Syria. They have failed to provide the Joint

Envoy and the Secretary-General with the support they
have asked for. They have failed the people of Syria.
They have, for the third time, blocked an attempt by the
majority of the Council and supported by most of the
international community to try a new approach. The
effect of their actions will be to protect a brutal regime.
They have chosen to put their national interests ahead
of the lives of millions of Syrians.
The consequences of their decision are
obvious — further bloodshed and the likelihood of a
descent into all-out civil war. For our part, we shall
continue to work with the Envoy, the Secretary-General
and responsible members of the international
community to achieve the political transition that is the
only way forward for Syria. It is deeply regrettable that
the Council has been unable today to play the role for
which it was established and is duty-bound to fulfil.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I had hoped
not to have to go through this ghastly list. By 4 October
2011, repression in Syria had already claimed 3,000
lives and Russia and China vetoed the Council’s action
for the first time (see S/PV.6627). By 4 February, 6,000
Syrians had been cut down by the regime, and Russia
and China exercised their second veto on the Council’s
action (see S/PV.6711). Today, 19 July, we now count
17,000 men, women and children dead. We mourn their
memory alongside the Syrian people, and Russia and
China have just exercised their veto of the Council’s
action for the third time.
We have done all in our power since the double veto
in February to ensure that the international community
could finally agree on a coordinated approach that
would respond to the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people to democracy, the rule of law and respect
for fundamental human rights.
We have attempted to rally the international
community around the mission of Joint Special Envoy
Kofi Annan. On the basis of those proposals, resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) were adopted. An observer
mission was deployed on the ground. A transition plan
was agreed in Geneva on 30 June (S/2012/523, annex),
in which we, alongside Russia and China, recognized
the right of the Syrian people to a democratic future,
with credible, legitimate leaders chosen by the Syrian
people themselves.
It is now clear that Russia merely wants to win time
for the Syrian regime to crush the opposition. For 17
months now, and with 17,000 dead, Russia and China

12-428153

S/PV.6810

have advocated soft pressure and diplomatic contact
and have assigned responsibility for implementation of
the process to the parties alone. Contacts with President
Al-Assad are systematically deemed to be encouraging.
The only matter deemed urgent has been the need to
wait. And it would appear that one is always too harsh
with bloodthirsty dictators.
But let us look at the facts. The provisions adopted
by the Council have been systematically violated by the
Syrian regime, which has not even started to implement
the first of its commitments. Since 21 March, the
Council has demanded that the Syrian authorities cease
the use of heavy weapons and withdraw their troops
from the cities. In that time, the civilian population has
been crushed by heavy artillery and attacks by combat
helicopters. In his report of 6 July (S/2012/523), the
Secretary-General can only note the intensification
of these attacks on the civilian population. Between
bombardments, the regime sends its terrifying militias
to cut throats, kidnap, rape and generate inter-communal
fear among the civilian population.
In response, the Secretary-General and the Joint
Special Envoy have called on the Security Council to
ensure that its decisions are implemented. That message
was echoed by the Secretary General of the League of
Arab States here, a month ago, and by the 107 States
that met in Paris within the framework of the Group of
Friends of Syria on 6 July.
That simple message has just come up against
the rejection of both Russia and China. Our draft
resolution (S/2012/538) included only a mere threat of
sanctions. It gave the regime 10 days to finally abide
by its commitments. Ten days is a long time when a
single decision would be enough to immediately halt
the use of heavy weapons in civilian neighbourhoods.
It is too long, as each day brings 100 new deaths. It
was then up to the Council itself to decide whether or
not its decisions had been implemented. It was up to
the Council to choose the sanctions it deemed necessary
to apply. The Council thus remained master of the
subsequent steps.
It will be said that the veto is the result of
disagreement on the way to achieve a common objective.
That is wrong. Russia and China have today exercised
a veto to all of the laborious work undertaken by the
Council in recent months to find a peaceful solution to
the crisis. We cannot simply call for political transition
ad infinitum. We must establish a credible momentum

4

for transition. To refuse to grant Mr. Kofi Annan the
tools to exert pressure that he has requested in order to
implement the road map that we entrusted him with in
New York and in Geneva is to undermine his mission
itself. We must not shirk our responsibilities.
The third veto on Syria means that, for Russia and
China, there will be no consequences for the Syrian
regime’s disregard of its commitments. The crimes
will go unpunished; their perpetrators will continue
to proceed with their disgusting plans; the people’s
legitimate aspirations can be disregarded; and the
victims are insignificant in number. History will prove
them wrong; history will judge them. It is already doing
so right now in Damascus.
We have gone as far as the veto in full awareness of
the situation. We cannot be complicit in a strategy that
combines a mockery of diplomatic action with de facto
paralysis. To do that would have been to give short
shrift to our responsibility as a permanent member
of the Council, short shrift to the credibility of this
Chamber, which cannot serve as a fig leaf for impunity,
and short shrift to the Syrian people.
I now turn to those men and women in Syria who,
in the face of unheard-of suffering, continue to carry
the torch of their ideal of liberty. France pays homage
to them. I will say again what I said on 4 February: no,
once again, the double veto will not stop us. We will
continue to support the Syrian opposition on its road
to a democratic transition in Syria. In every forum,
France is resolved to work unceasingly with those who
share its values — and the meeting in Paris showed
that there were many of them — so that the violence
perpetrated on the Syrian people can be ended, their
legitimate aspirations are realized fairly and swiftly,
and the perpetrators of crimes, and their accomplices,
are brought to justice.
This double veto leaves the Security Council
helpless against the violence of the Syrian regime,
but France will not leave the Syrian people to face the
crimes to which they are victim alone.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): When the people of Syria
peacefully took to the streets more than a year ago, their
legitimate demands for freedom and participation were
met with deadly force. Instead of initiating meaningful
political dialogue, the regime of President Al-Assad
responded with increased repression.

12-42815

S/PV.6810

From the start, we have warned against this spiral of
violence. We had strong concerns about the mayhem it
might bring to the whole region. We called on President
Al-Assad to embark on a process of credible political
reform. The Arab League, with the overwhelming
support of the international community, laid out a plan
for a peaceful political process. But President Al-Assad
did not listen.
Together with our partners, we worked to have the
Security Council act to stop the violence and human
rights abuses at a time when such action could have
prevented worse from happening. It is well known to
all how those attempts were rendered futile. Today,
more than 15,000 deaths later, Damascus is at war
with the Syrian people. What started as a peaceful
protest movement has in some parts evolved into armed
opposition. That, too, could have been avoided.
But with every day that the Al-Assad regime
escalated its violent repression, with every new shelling,
with every new massacre it became more difficult for
those Syrian voices that promoted peaceful change
to convince those who had lost hope for a political
solution. According to the International Committee of
the Red Cross, the situation in Syria is now one of civil
war. Let me be clear: responsibility for that lies fully
with President Al-Assad and his regime.
Al-Assad has failed to protect the Syrian people.
He has broken all commitments, made first to his
people, then to the Arab League and later to Joint
Special Envoy Kofi Annan. Mr. Annan personally told
President Al-Assad that he had to send bold signals; but
what he sent instead were tanks, mortars and helicopter
gunships.
The Security Council has a responsibility to help
the Syrian people find a peaceful solution. Kofi Annan’s
six-point plan, endorsed by the Council, was meant to
de-escalate the crisis, bring down the level of violence
and start a meaningful political process. As a first
step, the Syrian Government had to stop using heavy
weapons and withdraw both heavy weapons and troops
from population centres. Remember, it was Al-Assad
himself who made that commitment. We supported
those decisions, and we supported sending observers to
Syria, despite the severe risks and reservations. But the
hopes we had placed in those resolutions (2042 (2012)
and 2043 (2012)) were soon shattered. As Kofi Annan
himself has said, none of the elements of the six-point
plan have been implemented. Instead of silencing the

heavy weapons, the Al-Assad regime unleashed its
tanks and attack helicopters. Al-Assad used the heavy
weapons that he had pledged not to use anymore.
The Council cannot continue business as usual.
The Joint Envoy, Mr. Annan himself, has been clear
about what he expects from Damascus and from the
Security Council. First, he told President Al-Assad to
immediately stop using heavy weapons in populated
areas. Secondly, he has repeatedly stressed that the
responsibility to act lies first with Damascus. And
thirdly, he has repeatedly called on the Council to
insist on the implementation of its decisions and to
send a strong signal that there will be consequences for
non-compliance.
Our draft resolution (S/2012/538) would have
done what Mr. Annan himself has asked us to do. By
endorsing the Annan plan and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/523, annex) under Chapter VII of the Charter,
we would have obliged both sides — I repeat,
both sides — to immediately implement the draft
resolution’s provisions. The draft resolution would have
threatened Damascus with sanctions aimed at stopping
the indiscriminate shelling of populated areas. Such
shelling violates international humanitarian law and
Security Council resolutions and hinders any chance
of a political process. Ending it would have finally
opened up space for the observer mission to again play
a meaningful role.
In conclusion, let me make a further point clear.
Our goal has been to achieve unity in the Council. We
have conducted our negotiations in that spirit, a spirit
that was not reciprocated by all Council members.
The draft resolution would not have set the stage for
military intervention, as some have falsely claimed. It
would not have undermined Joint Special Envoy Annan
and the observer mission; quite the contrary, it would
have supported him and the observers on the ground.
And while it would not have been a silver bullet for
bringing about peace in Syria, it would have provided a
realistic chance — maybe the last chance — for finally
breaking the vicious circle of violence.
Today was an opportunity lost. History will show
us the price that the people in Syria and beyond will
have to pay. As for my delegation, I can say that
together with our partners, we have tried our utmost. In
the end, this was and is our moral responsibility. While
the days of President Al-Assad are numbered, people in
Syria are going through times of unspeakable hardship.

12-428155

S/PV.6810

I want to assure the Syrian people that Germany
will continue to support all those who cherish peace,
freedom and democracy. One day there will be a new
Syria. We call on all those within the Syrian regime
to seriously consider their future options, because one
thing is certain: there will be change.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): These are trying and most
unfortunate circumstances for Syria and its people. The
increasing violence, killings and violations of human
rights in Syria, which are being attributed to both sides
but of which innocent civilians are the main victims,
are totally unacceptable and must be condemned. Our
position in the Security Council has been motivated
primarily by the desire to end the violence and alleviate
the suffering of the Syrian people, as well as to address
their legitimate aspirations. That is also the desire of
the wider international community. And there was
agreement that the best way to address this increasingly
complex and volatile situation was through a political
process led and owned by the Syrians. Militarization
could only take us away from a peaceful solution and
cause even greater suffering for the Syrian people, as is
evident from recent developments.
After an initial period of division and stalemate,
what brought the entire Council together was the
mission of the Joint Special Envoy, Kofi Annan, and
his six-point plan. The Council subsequently agreed
unanimously to deploy the United Nations Supervision
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic (UNSMIS), the
value of which has been acknowledged by all despite
the circumstances under which it has had to work. The
Secretary-General has accordingly recommended the
continuation of UNSMIS. As the situation on the ground
got worse we saw other avenues explored, such as the
30 June Action Group for Syria meeting in Geneva,
the outcome of which (S/2012/523, annex) Pakistan
also agreed to support in good faith, even though we,
like many others, were not part of that process. The
objective was again to continue support for the Envoy’s
plan and the efforts for a political settlement.
Pakistan believes that the success of the Council’s
collective and stated objective to achieve a peaceful
solution in Syria hinged on a united approach, as has
also been consistently emphasized by the Special
Envoy. This was a time for the Council to remain united
and to build on the Geneva outcome, which provided
openings for the much-needed political track. It was
also an opportunity for all sides, especially the most
influential quarters, to throw their genuine and full

6

weight behind the Special Envoy’s efforts by engaging
and working with the parties.
It is unfortunate that, despite the clear objective of
supporting Mr. Annan’s efforts and despite the gravity
of the situation, the Council’s unity was undermined
by the divergence of views on how to move forward.
As a result, the Council has ended up not moving at all.
This is a serious setback that could have been avoided
had the divisive issues of Chapter VII and coercive
measures been set aside.
From the outset, Pakistan expressed its reservations
about a coercive approach, which in our view could
further escalate tensions and be counterproductive
and unhelpful in the pursuit of a pacific settlement of
the situation. A constructive spirit of flexibility was
necessary to bring all Council members on the same
page and to ensure that the Syrian crisis was resolved
with minimum damage to the country and without
extra-territorial repercussions. Regrettably, that spirit
was not upheld in the run-up to the draft resolution
(S/2012/538) that has just been put to a vote. Our
repeated calls for a united, consensus approach by the
Council were not heeded. We were therefore left with
no choice but to dissociate ourselves from the divisive
scenario that the Council has been led into, and thus to
abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.
As we have said before, this is not and must not
be a blame game, as any success of failure of the
Council will always be collective. The environment of
uncertainty resulting from today’s actions is extremely
dangerous and explosive. We therefore need to pick up
the pieces and quickly get our act together for the sake
of peace and of the Syrian people. We urge both sides to
eschew violence and to facilitate a Syrian-led political
process. Primary responsibility in this regard lies with
the Syrian Government. The forthcoming month of
Ramadan should be a reason for all sides to declare a
truce and engage in dialogue. That has become all the
more evident due to the condemnable suicide attack
targeting the Syrian leadership yesterday.
We believe that a continued UNSMIS presence
on the ground is crucial to facilitating and supporting
peace efforts. We are of the view that linking its mandate
extension to Chapter VII and coercive measures was
not the right course of action. We would therefore like
to propose, as an interim measure, a draft resolution
for a technical rollover of UNSMIS for a short period,
pending Council agreement on the vital issues for a way
forward.
12-42815

S/PV.6810

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me begin by
conveying our sincere condolences to the Government
and people of Syria on the terrorist attack in Damascus
yesterday, which caused the death of a number of high
officials, including the Deputy Prime Minister and
Defence Minister Daoud Rajha. We strongly condemn
that mindless and cowardly act of terrorism.
India remains gravely concerned at the events
unfolding in Syria, which have resulted in the death of
several thousand civilians and security force personnel.
From the beginning of the crisis, we have called for the
cessation of violence in all its forms and by all sides. We
condemn all violence irrespective of who its perpetrators
are. We voted in favour of General Assembly resolution
66/253, authorizing the appointment of an envoy to
engage with the Syrian parties and foreign actors for the
resolution of the crisis. We have consistently supported
the mission of Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan. We also
supported resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) in
the expectation that the United Nations Supervision
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic (UNSMIS) would
be able to oversee the implementation of Mr. Annan’s
six-point plan and facilitate the cessation of violence
and the commencement of a Syrian-led political process
to address the grievances of the Syrian people and meet
their legitimate aspirations.
Unfortunately, all parties have failed to comply
with their obligations under the six-point plan. Instead
of a political process, the parties have continued to
pursue a military approach that continues to cause
death and destruction in the country. There is an urgent
need for the Syrian parties to recommit themselves to
the complete cessation of violence and a comprehensive
implementation of the six-point plan.
Syria has been, both historically and in
contemporary times, an important country in the
Middle East. Its role in the Middle East peace process
and in ensuring the stability of the wider region cannot
be overemphasized. Prolonged instability and unrest
in Syria therefore have ramifications for the entire
region and beyond. Given the complexity of the ground
realities in Syria, we believe that it is necessary to retain
the presence of UNSMIS, to bear impartial witness to
events, and to assist the Syrian parties at all levels in
their search for a solution to the crisis without further
bloodshed. An UNSMIS presence is also necessary
to facilitate the implementation of the six-point plan
and the Action Group for Syria’s final communiqué
(S/2012/523, annex), which are the only viable processes

for the engagement of the international community in
the resolution of the Syrian crisis. We have therefore
supported action by the international community that
addresses the Syrian crisis in a balanced and impartial
manner.
We voted in favour of draft resolution S/2012/538
today to facilitate united action by the Security
Council in support of the efforts of the Joint Special
Envoy. It may be noted that the draft resolution
supported the extension of the UNSMIS mandate and
the implementation of the six-point plan and the Action
Group’s final communiqué in their entirety.
In our view, it would have been preferable for the
Council members to show flexibility so that a united
message could be conveyed to all sides in the Syrian
crisis, instead of pursuing domestic interests. It is
therefore regrettable that the Council has not been able
to adopt a resolution today and send the joint message
that was sought by Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan. In
spite of the vote today, we urge all Council members to
reconsider their approach and ensure that the UNSMIS
mandate is extended and the mission of Kofi Annan
supported, so that the Syrian crisis can be resolved
without any further bloodshed. We remain committed
to engaging with fellow Council members to that end.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Portugal is deeply
disappointed that the Security Council was not able to
remain united in support of the six-point plan and the
efforts of the Joint Special Envoy. The purpose of the
draft resolution S/2012/538, which we co-sponsored,
was to reinforce the Council’s commitment to the
Annan plan in a manner that could ensure its immediate
and effective implementation and to stop the violence
and the systematic violations of human rights taking
place in Syria.
We very much regret that, despite the flexibility
demonstrated by the sponsors, the Council failed to heed
the reiterated calls of the Secretary-General and the
Joint Special Envoy for united, sustained and effective
pressure in order to implement its decisions and send a
message to all that there will be serious consequences
for continued non-compliance. We have indeed tried
our utmost to preserve the unity of the Council.
On 21 April the Council mandated the United
Nations Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS) to
monitor a ceasefire and support implementation of
the six-point plan. UNSMIS was devised as a means
to an end, namely, the creation, through the full

12-428157

S/PV.6810

implementation of the six-point plan, of a conducive
environment for the political process and the Syrian-led
transition to democracy in conformity with the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.
Since then, the situation on the ground has only
worsened, and the level of violence has increased
daily to unfathomable levels. Eighteen months into
this persistent conflict, the country continues to slip
into civil war and chaos, destabilizing neighbouring
countries and threatening the integrity of Syria itself,
with grave risks for regional peace and security.
Three months after the adoption of resolution 2043
(2012), the six-point plan has yet to be implemented.
Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the armed
conflict. The Syrian armed forces persist in their
indiscriminate use of tanks, heavy artillery and
helicopters to systematically shell populated areas in
blatant violation of the Council’s resolutions. UNSMIS
operations remain suspended owing to the security
conditions on the ground.
Events in Damascus over the past days have
dramatically underlined the urgent need for concerted
action by the Security Council to enforce Joint
Special Envoy Annan’s plan. The draft resolution (see
S/2012/538) vetoed by the Russian Federation and China
sought precisely that, namely by placing the six-point
plan and the political conditions set out by the Action
Group in Geneva on 30 June 2012, under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations. It also sought to
ensure an immediate end to all violence and to promote
a permissive environment on the ground, without which
a reconfigured UNSMIS will not be able to undertake
its mandated task effectively and safely.
Contrary to what some have argued, the
imposition of sanctions in the eventuality of continued
noncompliance would not be automatic. It would
require another Security Council resolution. Moreover,
by restricting eventual coercive action to measures
under Article 41 of the Charter of the United Nations,
the text clearly excluded any possibility of a military
intervention.
Portugal firmly believes that to be effective, to be
credible and to fulfil its responsibilities, the Council
must exert united, sustained and effective pressure on
all sides, and on the Syrian authorities in particular, in
light of their primary responsibility under the six-point
plan to put an end to the violence. We very much regret
that, once again, this was not possible, with all the

8

dire consequences that failure entails. Nevertheless,
Portugal remains ready to continue engaging with all
members of the Council to provide meaningful and
effective support to the efforts of the Joint Special
Envoy Annan.
Finally, Mr. President, allow me a special word of
appreciation for Major-General Robert Mood, Chief
of UNSMIS, and his able leadership, as well as for all
the personnel of UNSMIS. We thank them greatly for
their courage, commitment and professionalism in such
challenging and perilous circumstances.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The vote that just took place should not
have taken place at all. The sponsors of the draft
resolution just rejected (S/2012/538) were well aware
that it simply stood no chance of being adopted. The
Russian delegation had very clearly and consistently
explained that we simply cannot accept a document,
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
that would open the way for the pressure of sanctions
and later for external military involvement in Syrian
domestic affairs.
The Western members of the Security Council
denied such intentions, but for some reason refused
to exclude military intervention. Their calculations
to use the Security Council of the United Nations to
further their plans of imposing their own designs on
sovereign States will not prevail. Instead of levelling
crude insinuations against the policy of the Russian
Federation, which for the whole period of the conflict
in Syria has never slackened in its efforts to find a
political solution to the situation and provide key
support for the mission of the United Nations-Arab
League Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Kofi Annan, the
Western members of the Council, which today made
unacceptable statements, could have done something,
anything, to promote dialogue between the Syrian
parties and prevent the further militarization of the
Syrian crisis, rather than fan the flames of extremists,
including terrorist groups.
These Pharisees have been pushing their own
geopolitical intentions, which have nothing in common
with the legitimate interests of the Syrian people. This
has led to an escalation of the conflict — one that has
reached such tragic proportions. Instead of contributing
to enhancing the efforts of the international community
to settle the crisis in Syria, as provided for in the
Geneva document of 30 June 2012 (S/2021/523, annex),

12-42815

S/PV.6810

the sponsors of the draft resolution that just failed have
attempted to fan the flames of confrontation in the
Security Council. The draft just voted on was biased.
The threats of sanctions were levelled exclusively
at the Government of Syria. That runs counter to the
spirit of the Geneva document and does not reflect
the realities in the country today. Their approach is
especially ambiguous given what took place yesterday
in Damascus. I am referring to the grave terrorist attack.
The Western members of the Council have refused
to work on the text of the draft resolution (S/2012/547,
Rev.2) submitted by the Russian delegation. Its thrust is
to bring the members of the Security Council together
to further back the Kofi Annan peace plan and to extend
the mandate of the Supervision Mission in Syria.
We believe that continued confrontation in the
Security Council is useless and counter-productive, and
for that reason, we will not submit our draft resolution
to a vote. In the present conditions, we would consider
it right for the Security Council to adopt a brief
de-politicized resolution on a technical extension of the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria mandate
for a specific period of time. It would be useful to
preserve the useful potential of the Mission, even if it
is limited in its time. It is important to continue to have
the international community back the Special Envoys
so they can continue their work on settling the crisis in
Syria.
As far as the political basis for the Special Envoy’s
work is concerned, that is covered by the outcome
document of the Geneva conference (S/2012/523, annex),
which all responsible members of the international
community, as well as the Syrian parties, should be
guided by.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala voted in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2012/538) that the Council just failed to adopt. In
our judgement, that resolution was the best opportunity
and perhaps the only remaining opportunity to put an
end to the mindless violence that affects the Syrian
Arab Republic and to initiate a political transition led
by the Syrians themselves and corresponding to long
repressed popular demands.
As is known, the by-no-means trivial issue that
impeded a consensus today is based on the resistance
that some members have had to invoke Article 41 of
the Charter of the United Nations, which covers the
possibility of applying coercive measures in the event

of non-compliance with the Council’s decisions.
That same Article 41 expressly excludes punitive
measures, such as the use of armed force. It is one of
the measures of preventive diplomacy at the disposal
of the Security Council as it seeks to exercise its role
in maintaining international peace. We believe that the
potential application of sanctions on the grounds of
non-compliance was the least we could do, given the
sequence of broken commitments on the part of the
Government of Syria in recent months.
We deplore the fact that the draft resolution was
not approved. We regret the outcome, in the first place,
because of the people of Syria, whose children suffer on
a daily basis the horrors of the spiral of violence, which
began with peaceful protests by citizens against their
Government, but has now spawned an armed conflict
where barbaric acts can be attributed to both sides. The
main thing is to put a stop to the violence, no matter
where it comes from, and the key to taking the first step
is in the hands of the Government.
Secondly, we regret that the work of Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan has been seriously compromised.
Even the final communiqué of the so-called Action
Group for Syria (S/2012/523, annex), adopted just three
weeks ago partly as a result of Mr. Annan’s creativity,
has ended up being a dead letter.
Thirdly, we regret this action because of its impact
on the Council and, in more general terms, on the United
Nations, whose prestige has suffered a new blow. Our
inability to adopt a unified position is a serious setback
on this unique occasion, with all that it implies in the
real world.
The larger moral of the scene we have just witnessed
is not that the Security Council is impotent, because the
Council has demonstrated time and again that it can act
decisively and firmly to achieve tangible results. The
important point here is that we were unable to forge
a consensus to fulfil the responsibility entrusted to us
by the Charter, which is a major collective failure for
us all.
The ultimate irony is that what the draft resolution
sought to prevent — an expansion of the wave of
violence — will have the perverse effect of achieving
the exact opposite. For that reason, what we have just
witnessed saddens and disappoints us immensely.
In conclusion, our delegation profoundly regrets
that we have not been able to respond to the calls of
the League of Arab States, the Joint Special Envoy,

12-428159

S/PV.6810

the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Secretary General of the Arab League. We call on all
members of the international community to persevere
with new initiatives to find a solution that responds
to the interests of the Syrian people and especially to
avoid the spread of this conflict to the neighbouring
countries.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): This is the
third time in 10 months that two members, Russia
and China, have prevented the Security Council from
responding credibly to the Syrian conflict. The first
two vetoes they cast were very destructive. This veto is
even more dangerous and deplorable.
The draft resolution (S/2012/538) just vetoed
demanded that all parties cease violence. It invoked
Chapter VII of the Charter to make more binding on
the parties their obligation to implement the six-point
plan of the Joint Special Envoy and effect the political
transition plan agreed by the Action Group for Syria
in Geneva on 30 June. It also threatened the only party
with heavy weapons, the Syrian regime, with sanctions
if it continued to use those weapons brutally against its
own cities and citizens. But it would not even impose
sanctions at this stage, and despite the paranoid, if not
disingenuous, claims of some to the contrary, it would
in no way authorize or even pave the way for foreign
military intervention. What the draft resolution would
have done was to provide the political support to the
United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic (UNSMIS) that might have given it a fighting
chance to accomplish its mandate. It is a shame that the
Council was unwilling to do so.
There should be no doubt about this. The only way
that unarmed United Nations observers could ever
deter violence is if their reports of the Syrian regime’s
persistent violations of the Annan plan and of their own
commitments led the Security Council to impose swift
and meaningful consequences for non-compliance, as
requested — indeed, demanded — by our Joint Special
Envoy. As the United States explained when voting for
the establishment of UNSMIS three months ago (see
S/PV.6756), we were and remain deeply skeptical of the
Syrian regime’s intentions, and thus of the efficacy of
the observer Mission.
Week after week, the Secretary-General, the Joint
Special Envoy, the Head of UNSMIS, General Mood, and
others have told the Council that the Al-Assad regime
continued to fire heavy weapons in population centres,
in contravention of resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043
10

(2012). Week after week, they told us that the Syrian
Government continued to detain and torture citizens
and to maintain a horrific posture of intimidation and
harassment. They reported recently that the Syrian
regime had escalated its crackdown, employing tanks
and helicopter gunships. They reported on various
occasions that the Syrian-backed shabiha militia were
terrorizing entire communities, including by sexually
assaulting women and children.
The escalation of the regime’s attacks against its
own people is even more troubling because of its large
stockpiles of chemical weapons. We have made it clear
that those weapons must remain secure and that the
regime will be held accountable for their use because,
as the situation deteriorates, the potential that this
regime could consider using chemical weapons against
its own people should be a concern for us all.
On 13 July, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon wrote
a letter reiterating his call on Council members to
“insist on the implementation of the Council’s
resolutions and to exercise their common
responsibilities by taking necessary collective
action under the United Nations Charter”.
Yet the United Nations Mission’s reports of persistent
and flagrant violations and the appeals of the
Secretary-General the Joint Special Envoy have been
met only with intensified violence and Security Council
inaction.
The blame for that unacceptable situation does
not lie with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Joint
Special Envoy Annan or the United Nations monitors.
Unarmed United Nations military observers and
civilian staff have performed their tasks bravely under
very dangerous conditions, and we thank them and
the troop-contributing countries profoundly for their
dedicated service.
Rather the fault lies squarely with the heinous
Al-Assad regime and those Member States that refuse
to join the international community and their fellow
Council members in taking firm action against the
regime. Their position is at odds with the majority of
the Council that voted in favour of the draft resolution
today. It is at odds with the League of Arab States. It is
at odds with over 100 countries in the Group of Friends
of the Syrian People that called for decisive action
under Chapter VII to stop the killing and start a process
of transition to post-Al-Assad Syria. And it is at odds
with the wishes and aspirations of the vast majority of
12-42815

S/PV.6810

the Syrian people, who deserve so much better from the
Security Council.

civil war, in which all parties have responsibilities and
obligations under international humanitarian law.

We have missed yet another critical opportunity to
work together. We, and especially the people of Syria,
cannot afford to miss any more. Yesterday’s dramatic
attack in Damascus was indicative of how the situation
in Syria will continue to deteriorate in the face of the
Council’s inaction. The perpetuation of the status quo
is in no way static. It is in fact a recipe for intensified
conflict, increased terrorism and a proxy war that could
engulf the region. It is simply not credible to argue that
the mere continuation of an unarmed observer mission
in the midst of these threats and spiraling violence can
or will fundamentally change anything. Everyone in
this Chamber knows that.

The highest priority should be to stop the killing
and end the suffering of civilians. The suicide bombing
in Damascus yesterday, which killed the Syrian
Defence Minister and others, coupled with frequent
horrific massacres in various parts of the country,
clearly indicates that there is more than one party to the
conflict. This volatile situation has also become fertile
ground for terrorist groups. Acts of violence committed
by any party are unacceptable and a clear violation
of their commitments under the six-point plan, and
should be condemned. Reports of the continued use of
heavy weapons by the Syrian security forces are also of
serious concern to us.

The United States has not and will not pin its policy
on an unarmed observer mission that is deployed in
the midst of such widespread violence and that cannot
even count on the most minimal support of the Security
Council. Instead, we will intensify our work with a
diverse range of partners outside the Security Council
to bring pressure to bear on the Al-Assad regime and to
deliver assistance to those in need.

South Africa strongly supports the efforts of Joint
Special Envoy Kofi Annan and believes that his plan is
the only credible mechanism that could deliver a positive
and realistic outcome. Coupled with the Annan plan is
the final communiqué of the Action Group for Syria
(S/2012/523, annex), adopted in Geneva on 30 June. It
constitutes a significant proposal on the way forward
in Syria and has been supported by all permanent
members of the Security Council. We should not fail
to support Mr. Annan, as his efforts may be the only
branch to which to cling before the seismic currents of
a bloody civil war push Syria over the brink into a state
of total collapse.

The Security Council has failed utterly in the most
important task on its agenda this year. This is another
dark day in Turtle Bay. One can only hope that one day,
before too many thousands more die, Russia and China
and will stop protecting Al-Assad and allow the Council
to play its proper role at the centre of the international
response to the crisis in Syria.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): South Africa
strongly condemns the continuing violence and the
huge loss of life in Syria. It is now 16 months since
the crisis began, and there is no end in sight. Instead,
the security and humanitarian situations have become
worse. The deteriorating situation in Syria highlights
the urgency for all sides to stop armed violence in all
its forms, implement the six-point plan presented by
Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan, and move rapidly
towards a political dialogue and a peaceful, democratic,
Syrian-led transition.
The International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies has just classified the situation in
Syria as meeting the conditions of an internal armed
conflict. The United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights has made a similar statement. This
means that the situation has reached the threshold of a

South Africa is disappointed that, because of
the divisions among the members of the Council,
the Council has been prevented from executing its
responsibilities. Differences within the Council should
be addressed in a spirit of compromise and mutual
respect, and with the Council’s broader responsibility
in mind. All members of the Council have consistently
expressed their support for the Kofi Annan plan, the
Geneva action plan communiqué and the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS).
Yet the common cause that we affirmed when we
adopted resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) three
months ago has not seemed to prevail. We should have
shown the utmost maturity in strategically executing
these crucial tasks, taking into account the realities of
the situation on the ground. Instead, we allowed narrow
interests to destroy our unity of purpose.
We agree with the Joint Special Envoy that
the Council must insist that these decisions be
implemented, that a strong message should be sent to

12-4281511

S/PV.6810

all parties involved, and that there will be consequences
for their non-compliance with its decisions. We fail to
see, however, how the text that was submitted today by
the sponsors would end the violence or contribute to
the implementation of the six-point plan. Instead, the
text, in an unbalanced manner, threatens sanctions
against the Government of Syria without realistically
allowing any action to be taken against the opposition,
which would be permitted to defy the six-point plan
without consequence. In similar situations where
the international community, including the Security
Council, has preferred one side over the other, such bias
has resulted in the polarization of the conflict. This is
especially true for such fractious societies as Syria’s.
The failure of the Council today to reach a
balanced agreement threatens the Kofi Annan plan
and undermines the possibility of finding a peaceful
political solution to the Syrian crisis. Our failure to
renew the mandate of UNSMIS — the only functional
tool for verifying and corroborating information on the
ground and supporting the Annan plan, as recommended
by the Secretary-General — is disappointing. While we
are concerned about the safety of the observers, South
Africa continues to believe that UNSMIS has been a
critical part of our effort to find a solution to the Syrian
crisis, and should therefore continue its work in one
form or the other when conditions on the ground so
permit. South Africa is therefore deeply disappointed
that the future of UNSMIS is under threat because of
the divisions in the Council.
It is for these reasons that South Africa abstained in
the voting on draft resolution S/2012/538. South Africa
stands ready to work with all members of the Council to
achieve a strong, balanced outcome in support of Kofi
Annan’s efforts and a renewal of the UNSMIS mandate.
In conclusion, for the time being South Africa
supports the proposal for a possible technical rollover
of UNSMIS for a very short term.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
Morocco voted in favour of draft resolution S/2012/538
because it was in line with the recent resolutions of the
League of Arab States and our perception of the situation
in Syria, which shows quite clearly that no mechanism
adopted by the Council to address the crisis has had the
hoped-for result and that the parties in Syria have not
complied with the plan, including the complete cessation
of violence, to which they committed themselves. The
number of victims continues to grow, and the violence
has reached an unprecedented level.
12

We voted in favour of the draft resolution because
it endorsed the final communiqué of the Action Group
for Syria adopted in Geneva last month, which laid out
the main principles for ensuring a successful political
transition in Syria. In our views, the ideas contained
therein are in line with the political transition advocated
by the Arab League. We also voted in favour because
we support the efforts of the Joint Special Envoy and
seek a genuine cessation of violence.
Given the fact that the Council was unable to
adopt a strong resolution, all that we can do is to voice
our disappointment over such a result, whose only
loser is the brotherly Syrian people and the region to
which it belongs. Up until the final moment, including
during last week’s intensive negotiations, we remained
hopeful that we would achieve consensus among all
Council members around a common vision of the plan
to be adopted to effectively address a crisis that has
continued to intensify in Syria and that has now lasted
more than 16 months. We had hoped that the Council
would remain united after adopting resolutions 2042
(2012) and 2043 (2012), which laid the foundations
for pragmatic action to tackle all aspects of the crisis
in Syria. Morocco is convinced that the Council’s
unified action remains a decisive factor in ensuring the
international community’s successful achievement of a
timely solution to the crisis in Syria.
From the very outset, the League of Arab States has
worked with the Council to find a peaceful solution to
the crisis in Syria. It is convinced that the parties alone
will not be able to end the violence or to pursue dialogue.
The violence and the number of Syrian victims have
reached a level that prevents the parties from tackling
the Syrian crisis through existing mechanisms.
For that reason, the Arab League has urged the
Security Council to take strict measures that would
enable the Council to work within the framework of
Chapter VII of the Charter in order to put an end to
the growing violence in Syria, ensure that all members
shoulder their responsibilities, and create a climate
conducive to dialogue.
In his discussion with members of the Security
Council, the Secretary General of the League of Arab
States emphasized that the scope of the measures in no
way included military intervention. On that basis and
in view of its responsibilities within the framework of
the League of Arab States, Morocco has worked with
other members of the Council to elaborate a strategic
vision aimed at a peaceful solution to the crisis in Syria
12-42815

S/PV.6810

by re-establishing existing mechanisms, including the
six-point plan that served as our main reference for such
a solution. It included, of course, the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS).
The Council and countries that contributed to
UNSMIS were aware of the fact that the dispatch of
observers to Syria was somewhat different from other
missions. But Morocco chose to support the international
effort to find a peaceful solution to the crisis, including
after the acceptance of the six-point plan by all parties,
whose first demand was the complete cessation of
violence and the relaunching of the political process
to enable the Syrian people to achieve their legitimate
aspirations.
To conclude, I wish to reiterate our firm conviction
of the need to continue our common, joint work on
restoring unity in the Council. What unites its members
is their Charter responsibility and its imperative to
prevail over differences of opinion.
We are heartbroken over the suffering of the people
in sisterly Syria. A credible solution that restores hope
and faith to the people of Syria is necessary to ensure
their understanding that the crisis will end and that
their aspirations will be fulfilled with the support of
the Council.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is deeply concerned over the increasingly challenging
situation in Syria. We oppose terrorism and violence in
all their forms and strongly condemn the recent killing
of civilians and the bomb attack in Damascus on 18 July.
The top priority of the international community
now is to fully support and cooperate with Joint
Special Envoy Annan’s mediation, and to promote
the implementation of the final communiqué of the
Action Group for Syria (S/2012/523, annex), adopted at
its meeting of Foreign Ministers held in Geneva, the
relevant Security Council resolutions and Mr. Annan’s
six-point plan. The international community should urge
an immediate ceasefire and cessation of all violence and
establish the necessary conditions to resolve the crisis.
To that end, the United Nations Supervision Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic (UNSMIS) has played
an important and exceptional role. China therefore
supports the extension of the UNSMIS mandate and
endorses Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s proposal to
adjust its tasks accordingly. China calls on the Security
Council to send a clear signal in support of Mr. Annan’s
mediation and promotion of a political settlement

to the Syrian crisis. We have vigorously pushed for
consensus among Security Council members through
consultations. However, draft resolution S/2012/538
submitted by the United Kingdom, the United States
and France completely contradicts such aims.
First, the draft resolution is seriously flawed, and
its unbalanced content seeks to put pressure on only
one party. Experience has shown that such a practice
would not help resolve the Syrian issue, but would only
derail the matter from the political track. It would not
only further aggravate the turmoil, but also cause it
to spread to other countries of the region, undermine
regional peace and stability, and ultimately harm the
interests of the people of Syria and other regional
countries.
Secondly, the draft resolution would seriously
erode international trust and cooperation on the issue
of Syria. Mr. Annan’s mediation is an important and
realistic way forward towards a political solution
of the Syrian issue. It is an important tool. Not long
ago, thanks to the efforts of all parties, the ministerial
meeting of the Action Group for Syria, initiated by Joint
Special Envoy Annan, adopted a final communiqué
that forged consensus among the major parties and
opened a new window of opportunity for an appropriate
settlement of the Syrian crisis. At present, Mr. Annan’s
efforts to implement the outcome of that meeting are
at a critical juncture. However, the draft resolution
essentially undermined the consensus reached at the
Geneva meeting and seriously disrupted the new round
of mediation efforts undertaken by Joint Special Envoy
Annan.
Thirdly, sovereign equality and non-interference in
the internal affairs of other countries are the basic norms
governing inter-State relations enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. China has no self-interest in the
Syrian issue. We have consistently maintained that
the future and fate of Syria should be independently
decided by the Syrian people, rather than imposed by
outside forces. We believe that the Syrian issue must
be resolved through political means and that military
means would achieve nothing.
That is China’s consistent position on international
affairs. It is not targeted at any specific incident or
moment. Our purpose is to safeguard the interests of
the Syrian people and Arab countries, and the interests
of all countries — small and medium-sized countries
in particular — and to protect the role and authority of

12-4281513

S/PV.6810

the United Nations and the Security Council, as well as
the basic standards that govern international relations.
Fourthly, the draft resolution jeopardizes the unity
of the Security Council. The Council was unanimous
in adopting resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012),
displaying a hard-won spirit of unity and cooperation.
During consultations on today’s draft resolution, the
sponsoring countries failed to show any political will or
cooperativeness, adopting a rigid and arrogant approach
to the reasonable basic concerns of other concerned
countries and refusing to make revisions. It is even more
regrettable that, in circumstances where the parties
were still seriously divided and there was still time
for continued consultations, the sponsoring countries
refused to heed the calls for further consultation made
by China, some other Council members and Joint
Special Envoy Annan — until an approach acceptable
to all parties could be reached — and pressed for a vote
on the draft resolution. China is strongly opposed to
such practices.
For the aforementioned reasons, China could not
accept today’s draft resolution and voted against it.
This morning, various countries made statements
that confused right and wrong and made unfounded
accusations against China. They are completely
mistaken and are based on ulterior motives. China
is firmly opposed to such behaviour. We have
participated in all of the Council’s consultations on
resolutions concerning Syria in a positive, responsible
and constructive manner, with a view to pushing for a
ceasefire and a halt to all violence in Syria, as well as
for implementation of the communiqué from the Geneva
meeting (S/2021/523, annex), of resolutions 2042 (2012)
and 2043 (2012) and of the Annan six-point plan.
China has been committed to reaching a consensus,
worked hard for a smooth extension of the mandate of
UNSMIS and supported Mr. Annan’s mediation efforts.
In contrast, a few countries have been eager to interfere
in the internal affairs of other countries, to fuel the
flames and to sow discord in complete disregard of
the possible consequences. From the very beginning,
they have shown a negative attitude to Mr. Annan’s
mediation efforts and to the deployment of UNSMIS
over the past few months, proclaiming the futility and
failure of those efforts.
This time they have repeated their old trick of
setting preconditions as obstacles to the extension of
UNSMIS’s mandate and have accompanied that with an
invocation of Chapter VII of the Charter and the threat
14

of sanctions, in an attempt to change or even repudiate
the hard-won consensus reached by the action group
during the Geneva meeting. They have shown only
arrogance, not sincerity, during the consultations.
We cannot help questioning their willingness to see
UNSMIS’s mandate extended and a speedy settlement
of the Syrian crisis through a Syrian-led political
process. We urge those countries to reflect earnestly on
their policy and behaviour and to return immediately to
the right road.
At present, some time still remains before the
mandate of UNSMIS expires. We hope that the sponsors
will change their minds and call on them to do so, in a
positive response to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan’s proposals, by
supporting the extension of the UNSMIS mandate with
a view to arriving at a political solution to the Syrian
question and protecting the fundamental interests of
the people of Syria and other countries in the region,
as well as to safeguarding the credibility, authority and
unity of the Security Council.
China supports Pakistan and South Africa’s
proposal to adopt a draft resolution on a technical
roll-over of the UNSMIS mandate, and hopes that
Security Council members can reach a consensus on
that proposal as soon as possible.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
speak in my capacity as Permanent Representative of
Colombia.
In April of last year, during Colombia’s previous
presidency of the Security Council, we saw the first
signs of a spiral of violent repression that has not ceased
and has become more acute by the day. Thousands have
died, disappeared, become refugees, been tortured or
arbitrarily detained. The world stands appalled at the
terrible human tragedy, unusual levels of violence and
flagrant lack of respect for human rights that Syrians are
enduring. It is deplorable that the Syrian Government
has not taken the measures necessary to implement the
Joint Special Envoy’s plan and resolutions 2042 (2012)
and 2043 (2012), and that the opposition has made no
contribution to this either.
Colombia voted in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2012/538) submitted by the United Kingdom, France,
Germany, Portugal and the United States, because we
believe that its text provides the necessary support and
sends a clear message to all parties in Syria on the
importance of complying with the commitments and

12-42815

S/PV.6810

obligations in the six-point plan and the aforementioned
resolutions, as well as with the agreements reached
in Geneva within the framework of the Action Group
for Syria (S/2021/523, annex). We deplore the fact that
differences have prevailed on the many views on and
ways of responding to the Syrian crisis, and that we
have not been able to arrive at concrete proposals that
could help achieve effective progress among the parties.
It could have enabled us to find a political way out that
met the legitimate aspirations of all sectors of Syrian
society.
However uncertain Syria’s future may seem, its
people have taken the irreversible road of change. The
negative results of today’s vote are frustrating, but we
must not abandon our efforts to arrive at a political
solution to the crisis in Syria. Colombia will continue
to contribute to efforts to end all forms of violence and
violations of human rights, and to find ways to help the
Syrian people establish the democratic institutions that
will enable them to live together in brotherly peace.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
Upon the request of the sponsor of the draft
resolution contained in document S/2012/547/Rev.2, the
Council will not take action thereon.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The people and Government of Syria had
indeed expected that the Security Council, having
reached the age of reason — that is, being 67 years
old — would act positively and objectively to aid our
country. Any such positive contribution would stem
directly from the benefits of a rich culture and the
long experience that the Council has acquired over
decades in determining what must be done to help the
people and Government of Syria. That can be achieved
by respecting the provisions of the United Nations
Charter and the principles of international law, and has
nothing to do with projecting the national interest of
any member onto the agenda of the Security Council, an
agenda that is essentially focused on the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Before every Security Council meeting on the
situation in Syria, the concerns of the Syrian people
increase and their tensions heighten. As we have long
warned, this is due mainly to the suspicious timing of
those meetings and the treacherous terrorist acts that

have affected many innocent Syrians, their institutions,
their cadres and their human and material resources.
Members no doubt remember that the attacks and
massacres that have terrorized many people throughout
Syria have coincided with Security Council debates on
the situation in my country. Regrettably, all Syrians have
just seen a recurrence of that phenomenon. Yesterday
morning, terrorist devastation reached ministers and
leaders of security institutions while they were meeting
in the Syrian capital, Damascus. Equally regrettably,
the Council has again failed to condemn that act.
However, we do thank the Secretary-General and the
Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Kofi Annan, for condemning
that terrorist act.
If such a terrorist act can fail to incur the immediate,
strong condemnation of the Security Council, that means
that all the consensus the international community has
built on combating terrorism has been mere talk. That
failure sends the wrong message to terrorists all around
the world, which is that they are beyond accountability.
That failure also means that any talk of support for
a peaceful political solution in Syria and an end to
violence is mere sloganeering to gain time, delude
international and Syrian public opinion, and avoid
implementing the Kofi Annan plan.
Syria has officially welcomed the final communiqué
of the 30 June meeting in Geneva (S/2012/523, annex),
especially its basic points about commitment to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Syria, putting an end to violence and human rights
violations, disarming armed groups, the need to avoid
militarizing the situation, protecting civilians and
launching a Syrian-led political process. All of that
underscores that it is the Syrian people alone who can
come to the table to make decisions about their future,
in dialogue without foreign intervention.
Is there anyone in this Chamber who disagrees that
that is a reasonable statement? If there is no opposition
to the outcome of the Geneva meeting, based on the
Annan plan of action, why can the Council not agree
on a simple, purely procedural matter, which is the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
(UNSMIS), in keeping with the basic principles that
I just listed and that have been agreed to by all who
participated in the Geneva meeting?
Our endorsement of the outcome of that meeting was
an example of our open approach to seeking a peaceful

12-4281515

S/PV.6810

solution to the crisis in Syria and in keeping with our
positive response to the efforts of the Joint Special Envoy
and UNSMIS. In this context, we note that, on his visit
to Damascus, Mr. Annan held constructive and positive
talks, as he himself has emphasized and reiterated. A
number of mechanisms have been agreed for putting an
end to violence, restoring peace and security throughout
my country, and preparing conditions conducive to a
comprehensive Syrian-led national dialogue among all
Syrians, in accordance with the Annan plan.
It has become clear to all that the success of the
Annan plan and of UNSMIS — which of course have the
full support of the Syrian Government, which has more
interest than any other in seeing the plan succeed — will
require sincere international commitment and political
will on the part of all parties, especially those that have
influence on the armed opposition groups. What is
needed is the political will to encourage dialogue, reject
violence and militarization, stop arming and financing
terrorist groups, and lift the illegitimate unilateral
sanctions against the Syrian people.
I must draw attention to the fact that some countries
are still bent on undermining any serious effort to
solve the problem in Syria peacefully. That has been
made very clear by their efforts to ensure that the
Annan plan fails by twisting their interpretations of
the communiqué and rushing to hold parallel meetings
under the so-called Group of Friends of the Syrian
people. In their objectives and purposes, those meetings
run contrary to the Annan plan, which Syria and the
international community accept, and to the outcome of
the Geneva meeting.
Some parties with a direct interest in fanning the
flames of the crisis in Syria make a habit of giving
erroneous information and distorting the facts about
Syria and the response of the Syrian Government to
the crisis. They summarize the situation by drawing
a misleading picture that seeks to advance the idea
that there is a tyrannical regime killing its unarmed
citizens, whereas the crisis in Syria is a complex,
multidimensional problem with internal and external
ramifications.
At the internal level, there are some who have
peacefully called for reform and dialogue and expressed
their legitimate concerns through a political process.
The Government has not denied those concerns, but
rather considers them a priority. On the other hand,
there are those misguided others who have taken up
arms and destroyed public and private property. They
16

have made mistakes, but the road for them to return to
their senses is still open, as manifest in the amnesty
declared for all who turn in their weapons. About
4,302 people have benefited from the amnesty through
17 July 2012. Some of these various people belonged to
terrorist and non-terrorist groups that receive external
support and carry out maimings and killings of civilians
and military personnel. They have also committed the
massacres that have been brought to the attention of
the meetings of the Security Council devoted to the
situation in Syria.
Those groups include elements from Al-Qaida,
Arab and non-Arab jihadists and extremist terrorist
groups. Some at the United Nations would be only
too happy to call them third-party groups. The Syrian
State, however, as a responsible Government that is
supposed to protect its people like all other responsible
Governments in the world, cannot accept their acts.
In that respect, the majority of the Syrian people,
including sectors of the responsible nationalist
opposition, rejects external intervention and rejects
violence. They also reject arms and reject the blowing up
of electricity plants. During this very hot summer, they
rejected assassinations. They rejected the destruction
of television stations and gas and oil pipelines as a
means to attain the desired reforms in Syria.
Indeed, I am sure that some members of the Council
that have decided to close their embassies in Damascus
and to withdraw their ambassadors do not know that the
armed groups have three times attacked electric power
plants in Syria — the latest attack was on the day before
yesterday.
There are some countries that from the start
adopted a balanced and constructive position towards
the Syrian problem and emphasized the need to solve
the problem peacefully through dialogue and political
means, basing their positions on the principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
There are others, however, that seek to interfere in
the Syrian situation in a flagrant manner. They beat the
drums of war and made themselves part of the crisis by
providing arms and funds, political and media support
and logistical support to the armed groups in Syria
that incite violence and terrorism. Imposing sanctions
is illegitimate and harms the Syrian people. Such
sanctions have negatively impacted their daily lives,
ignoring all the principles of good-neighbourliness
and the international norms and instruments that

12-42815

S/PV.6810

criminalize such actions. Those States have severed
their diplomatic relations with Syria, which has closed
dialogue and all channels of direct communications.
To those countries, we say, in the name of our people,
that if they want to impose the law of the jungle on
others and if they find that that is the logical course of
action, then they should allow that course in their own
countries as well.
Those who sympathize with the armed groups
and the terrorists in Syria should host them in their
own countries and provide them with what they want,
namely, the freedom to carry weapons and destroy the
social fabric and the structures of the State under the
slogans of realizing democracy and calling for reforms.
What has been said repeatedly of late in the media
about chemical weapons and Syria’s intention to use
them has no basis in fact whatsoever. The media is
trying to plant some insidious intentions, and if those
insinuations reflect anything at all, they reflect the
intentions of some who would want to use chemical
materials against our people in order to find a pretext to
accuse the Syrian Government and garner the support
of the Security Council and international public opinion
against Syria.
All Syrians are concerned and seek to participate on
the basis of reconciliation, joint action and tolerance in
order to reconstruct what has been destroyed by the war
and anarchy and to proceed to re-establishing the rule
of law and reshaping peace and stability. They do not
seek to invoke Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations or seek external military intervention, of which
the Security Council’s memory is full of examples. One
need only look at the disasters that it has imposed on the
peoples of States Members of the Organization against
which such interventions were applied.
It is up to us Syrians, including the national
opposition, to realize that those countries that claim to
be eager to support the Syrian people and their interests
are not in any way looking for a peaceful solution that
would maintain the unity, stability and independence
of the country and achieve the common aspirations of
the Syrian peoples. Those so-called friends of Syria
are targeting the Syrian State and people and the roles
played by Syria at the Arab, Islamic and regional levels
by using the political contradictions that have surfaced
in the Syrian arena during the crisis.

Who can believe those who deceived the Arabs by
imposing the Sykes-Picot Agreement and the Balfour
Declaration on us, assassinated the first Syrian Minister
of War and bombarded the Syrian Parliament in 1945.
They opened a wound that is still bleeding in Palestine,
invaded Afghanistan, Iraq and Libya and provided all
forms of political, military and diplomatic support to
Israel so that it could occupy the Syrian Golan and the
Palestinian territories and what remains of the Lebanese
territory. Anyone who believes that those people are
today willing to provide Syria with anything that would
serve its real interests is deluded.
Consequently, it is incumbent upon all of us to
realize that the only solution must be a Syrian solution
through a comprehensive and inclusive Syrian political
process that satisfies the aspirations of the Syrian people
in a national dialogue in which all participate under
the umbrella of the homeland in order to establish a
democratic, pluralistic country where all enjoy equality
before the law, far from any political or ideological
tendencies, a State where political and economic
opportunities are available to each and everyone
without discrimination, where there are democratic,
transparent and free elections in which all compete, as
is the case in other countries.
The Syrians alone are capable of defending their
country and preserving its invincibility against any
geopolitical interest that seeks to attack its existence
and dignity. Let us heal our wounds. Let us recall our
common history. Let us understand what is being plotted
against us. Let us build our homeland, a country that is
strong enough to withstand any heinous aggression.
I would like to conclude by quoting the wisdom of a
Sufi philosopher who lived in Syria in the tenth century
and who advised his students and followers:
“My children, the rational individual person must
not lose his perspicacity when he participates in
writing history. Those who have had a problem
with the Devil should not seek to find a solution by
consulting Satan.”
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

12-4281517
