United Nations

A/RES/62/63

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 January 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 80

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 December 2007
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/448)]

62/63. Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and
experts on mission
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 59/281 of 29 March 2005, in which it endorsed the
recommendation in paragraph 56 of the report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations 1 that the Secretary-General make available to the United
Nations membership a comprehensive report on the issue of sexual exploitation and
abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
Noting that the Secretary-General, on 24 March 2005, transmitted to the
President of the General Assembly a report of his Adviser concerning sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations peacekeeping personnel, 2
Recalling its resolution 59/300 of 22 June 2005 endorsing the recommendation
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations 3 that a group of legal experts
be established to provide advice on the best way to proceed so as to ensure that the
original intent of the Charter of the United Nations can be achieved, namely that
United Nations staff and experts on mission would never be effectively exempt from
the consequences of criminal acts committed at their duty station, nor unjustly
penalized without due process,
Reaffirming the need to promote and ensure respect for the principles and rules
of international law,
Reaffirming also that the present resolution is without prejudice to the
privileges and immunities of United Nations officials and experts on mission and
the United Nations under international law,
Reaffirming further the obligation of United Nations officials and experts on
mission to respect the national laws of the host State, as well as the right of the host
State to exercise, where applicable, its criminal jurisdiction, in accordance with the
_______________
1

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/59/19/Rev.1),
part one, chap. III, sect. D.
2
See A/59/710.
3
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/59/19/Rev.1),
part two, chap. II, sect. N.

07-46755

A/RES/62/63

relevant rules of international law and agreements governing operations of United
Nations missions,
Deeply concerned by reports of criminal conduct, and conscious that such
conduct, if not investigated and, as appropriate, prosecuted, would create the
negative impression that United Nations officials and experts on mission operate
with impunity,
Conscious of the importance of protecting the rights of victims of criminal
conduct, as well as ensuring adequate protection for witnesses, and noting the work
of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on Assistance and Support to Victims of
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse,
Recalling its resolution 61/29 of 4 December 2006, establishing the Ad Hoc
Committee on criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on
mission,
Noting that the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, in paragraph 75
of its report, 4 looked forward to the conclusions of the Ad Hoc Committee,
Having considered the report of the Group of Legal Experts established by the
Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 59/300 5 and the report of the Ad Hoc
Committee, 6 as well as the note by the Secretariat on criminal accountability of
United Nations officials and experts on mission, 7
Convinced of the need for the United Nations and its Member States to
urgently take strong and effective steps to ensure criminal accountability of United
Nations officials and experts on mission,
Expresses its appreciation for the work done by the Ad Hoc Committee
1.
on criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission and
the Working Group of the Sixth Committee on the same subject;
Strongly urges States to take all appropriate measures to ensure that
2.
crimes by United Nations officials and experts on mission do not go unpunished and
that the perpetrators of such crimes are brought to justice, without prejudice to the
privileges and immunities of such persons and the United Nations under
international law, and in accordance with international human rights standards,
including due process;
Strongly urges all States to consider establishing to the extent that they
3.
have not yet done so jurisdiction, particularly over crimes of a serious nature, as
known in their existing domestic criminal laws, committed by their nationals while
serving as United Nations officials or experts on mission, at least where the conduct
as defined in the law of the State establishing jurisdiction also constitutes a crime
under the laws of the host State;
Encourages all States to cooperate with each other and with the United
4.
Nations in the exchange of information and in facilitating the conduct of
investigations and, as appropriate, prosecution of United Nations officials and
experts on mission who are alleged to have committed crimes of a serious nature, in
_______________
4
A/61/19 (Part II). For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session,
Supplement No. 19.
5
See A/60/980.
6
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 54 (A/62/54).
7
A/62/329.

2

A/RES/62/63

accordance with their domestic laws and applicable United Nations rules and
regulations, fully respecting due process rights, as well as to consider strengthening
the capacities of their national authorities to investigate and prosecute such crimes;
Requests the Secretariat to ensure that requests to Member States seeking
5.
personnel to serve as experts on mission make States aware of the expectation that
persons who serve in that capacity should meet high standards in their conduct and
behaviour and are aware that certain conduct may amount to a crime for which they
may be held accountable;
Urges the Secretary-General to continue to take such other practical
6.
measures as are within his authority to strengthen existing training on United
Nations standards of conduct, including through predeployment and in-mission
induction training for United Nations officials and experts on mission;
Decides that the Ad Hoc Committee on criminal accountability of United
7.
Nations officials and experts on mission shall reconvene from 7 to 9 and on 11 April
2008 for the purpose of continuing the consideration of the report of the Group of
Legal Experts, in particular its legal aspects, taking into account the views of
Member States and the information contained in the note by the Secretariat, and that
the work shall continue during the sixty-third session of the General Assembly
within the framework of a working group of the Sixth Committee;
Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to submit a report on its work to the
8.
General Assembly at its sixty-third session;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to bring credible allegations that reveal
that a crime may have been committed by United Nations officials and experts on
mission to the attention of the States against whose nationals such allegations are
made, and to request from those States an indication of the status of their efforts to
investigate and, as appropriate, prosecute crimes of a serious nature, as well as the
types of appropriate assistance States may wish to receive from the Secretariat for
the purposes of such investigations and prosecutions;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its sixty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution on the basis of
information received from Governments, in particular with respect to paragraphs 3
and 9 above;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the
item entitled “Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on
mission”.
62nd plenary meeting
6 December 2007

3
