. I . a•..11

1&"111"••••••IIlJl'.ll11111. . l.ll1!11.•Willll..

GENERAL

serve its
o live in
hey now

let.Cong

1957th

United Nations

r people

to the
9 an end
nination.

lIIiIIl. ...
I.IlliIIllllll. .Jl;JI'lI1ill1il\l11llll1il11llll
..llil
....p ; : . , , ~ ~ ,

l lIll

PLENARY MEETING

ASSEllIBLY

Thursday, 7 October 1971,
at 3 p,m.

TWE'NTY-SfX'l'H SNSS/oN

. .

-Official Recorch
~

NEW YORK
---------_0_-__-

.

4. 'lllis session marks 10 years of meritorious service on
the part of Secretary-General U Thant. The most brilliant
leaders of the world hold deep sympathy and undying
gratitude for this man. His, concerns and his efforts h9.ve led
him to all parts of the wurld where there has been a need to
be satnsfied or a problem to be tackled. In Nicaragua we
were also honoured to receiv~ him as a messenger of peace.
We are particularly fond of remembering his visit and our
Head of State, President Anastasio Somoza, as well as all
Nicaraguans, have special feelings of admiration, gratitude
and friendship for hir.:.

CONTENTS
Agenda item 9:
General debate (continued)
Sptlcch by Mt. Guerrero (Nicaragua) •.••••••...•••
SpCleclt by Mr. GIlti6rrez Gutl6rrcz (Bolivia) •••••.•..
Speech by Mr. GaUitnorc (Jamaica) •••••.••••.•••
Speech by Mr. Khalld (Sudvn) ••••••.•••••••••.•
Agenda Item 69:
Question of Oman: report of the Spceir.l Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration 011 the Granting oflndependenee to Colonial
Countries and Peoples
Report of the Jo'ourth Committee .•.••.•.......

Page

1
S
11

14

18

S. With gratitude and deep emotion, I must say that our
country gladly goes along with the well-deserved tribute
paid to U Thant by the nations on the eve of his voluntary
retirement from his honoured post, a post which he
honoured by his devotion. I think that the best tribute to
his efforts would be to adopt resolutions that carry out the
philosophy and guidance which he bequeathed to us in the
introduction to his report on the work of the Organization

Agenda item 2S:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations (continued) •••••••••••.••••••••••.••••••••••

19

Agenda item 9:
General debate (continued)
Reply by the lepresenta!ive of Libya ••...•.......
Reply by the representative of Iran .......•.•....
Reply by the representative ofIraq ......•...•...

22
23
23

[A/8401/Add.lJ.
6. It is our task to find a successor to U Thant who will be
worthy of his dedication as a statesman, someone who, like
him, will keep alive his faith and be willing to struggle so
that the ideas and purposes of the United Nations might
cover all parts of our globe with his mantle of peace.

President: Mr. Adam MALIK (Indonesia).
AGENDA ITEM 9
General debate (continued)

7. During the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, when the President of my country made use of
this fOIU!ll to add his voice to those of the leaders of the
world who were celebrating the great event, a question was
asked of the Assembly: "... what would have happened in
the world had the United Nations not existed?" And he
told us:

1. Mr. GUERRERO (Nicaragua) (interpretation from
Spanish): Mr. President, on behalf of Nicaragua, I greet you
and congratulate you on your election to the presidency of
the General Assembly. In you, Sir, we greet a distinguished
statesman of an outstanding nation, who, on many counts,
is worthy of universal appreciation and respect. We understand the pleasure which the Republic of Indonesia must
have when one of its most outstanding sons has assumed,
amid the applause of the world. the seve~e responsibility of
presiding over this session of the Assembly, asa recognition
of your personal merits and civic virtues, and in honour of
the devotion which your country has for the noble and just
causes of mankind.

"Let us therefore strengthen what cost so muWl
sacrifice to create. let us be untiring in our search for
peace. let us be understanding to realize that it must be
based Oil justice. let us build peace, devoid of prejudice
and ambitions, a peace filled with understanding and
good faith...." {1881st meeting, para. 150.J
8. Prompted by the feeling of our President, who was
expressing the faith which the world has in the United·
Nations, we think that the twenty-sixth anniversary is the
proper occasion to repeat our faith in this world Organization, which has entered its maturity with new vigour and
which is now enriched by new blood with countries which,
after haVing achieved their freedom, are co-operating in the
.
great task of furthering international p.'lace.

2. Through you we pay a tribute to all those peoples who
have not yet achieved their freedom. Your high office,
signifying as it does th..: greatest degree of equality, is the
best guarantee which oppressed peoples have that the
United Nations will be watching out for their rights.
3. We should also like to greet your distinguished predecessor, Mr. Edvard Hambm, who Wisely presided over the
work of the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session,
and in so doing honoured his well-respected international
personality.
74-2,200

9. let us extend a welcome to Bahrain, Bhutan and Qatar,
whose presence is a stimulus to the new nations which are
coming to share the experiences and responsibilities of our

.

1

2

»7th

liNG

'1971,
3p.m

ORK

ice on
rUlimt
ldying

I.'ve led
eed to
ua we

peace.
Id our
as all
titude

at our
ribute
lfitary
ch he
ute to
ut the
in the

~ation

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings

times in a common effort to. preserve, for progress and
freedom, the new g~neratiQns of mankind.

10. Nicaragua is carefully observing what the big Powers
are doing to solve, through mutual agreement, the problems
of the world. The leaders of these Powers wish to shoulder
the enOlmous responsibility of deciding the fate of millions
of human beings who are today living and who will be living
in the future.

11. The Government of Nicaragua, wiSl"ting, as it does, to
contribute to t.l1is universal task, a task which cannot and
must not he delegated to others, calls upon all the Stateii
Members of this Organization to take a more active role in
its tasks so that we can rt tare in this way the responsibility
of determining our own destiny.
12. Our Government understands that the budgetary
burdens iLllposed by our Organization on the big Powers do
not give these Governments preferential rights and, as our
countries progress, this economic burden should be shated
byus<

13. The United Nations is a productive investment which
goes beyond the ideals of p~ace and brotherhood. It has
practical aspects of great value for our developing nations,
which very often lack capital and the necessary technology
to move ahead. Our Organization is bringing about the
closing of this gap between the developing and the
developed countries and prodl\Ging sure benefits for those
of us who are contributing to its maintenance and
operation.

~ill be

),like
gie so
might

rnited
Ise of
If the
nwas

led in
ldhe
mUI:;fl.
h for
1St be

udice
; and

was
nited,
sthe
niza: and
hich.
11 the

latar.
1 are
four
1957

14. My country has received from the United Nations and
its specialized agencies economic and technical assistance
for the development of various programmes of public
administration. This is assistance whose influence has been
felt in a beneficial manner throughout the national econ·
omy. We have hopes that the request made for the
competent organs to study the feasibility of channelling the
San Juan River and its adjacent zones will make possibl~ for
the abrogation of the Charnorro-Bryan Treaty, l which
marks an historical landmark in the relations between
Nicaragua and the United States of America, and this will
be not only a cause of patriotic satisfaction for our citizens,
but would also make it possible to transform the San Juan
River into a development project which would benefit the
peoples of Central America and mcrease their· opportunities
of trading wit.lt the rest of the world.
15. This project for building a canal is part of the general
programme which the Govermnent of Nicaragua has for
making the most efficient use of its water resources, a use
which has begun with h:'droelectric dams at the Tuma
River and the g!'owing use of the living resources of our
seas.
16. On this last point my Government believes that the
international community has an interest in two aspects of
my country's position on questions of the sea.
17. In accordance with the fishing law of 1958, Nicaragua
has for several years been exploiting the living resources of
1. Signed at Washington on 5 August 1914.

the territorial sea in a zone 200 miles wide. In the same way
explorations have been undertaken to determine the
mineral resources of the continental shelf over which we
have been exercising full and uninterrupted possession and
sovereignty.

18. We shall be participating in the conference on the law
of the sea with a realistic attitude and shall maintain our
country's already recognized right of exploitation of an
area of 200 miles in width and over the adjacent zone for
reasons of health and defence which have been determined
with the closest adherence to the practices which exist
among States. We believe that the C-cncva Conventions
ought to be revised to fix the extent of the territorial
waters and the continental shelf, leaving it up to the
contiguous States to determine, through treaties, the
corresponding marine borders.

19. The developing countries, as their technological capacity increases, must resort increasingly to the exploitation of
resources of the territorial seas, and of the soil and the
subsoil of its seas and oceans. Nevertheless, there will have
to be readjustment between the desire to have wide areas in
the sea and the continental shelves for strictly nationalist
regions, and the demands of the international community,
which has declared as a benefit and common property a
zone of the sea and of its soils and subsoils the size and
limitations of which have not yet been determined.
20. Nicaragua considers this action of the international
community to be very hopeful. It will offer unsuspected
possibilities for co-operation a.'l1ong States through a
system of exploitation which will promote intergovernmental enterprises and will also make it possible for the
international community to give justice to those countries
which are less favoured economically through a fair use of
the benefits resulting from exploitation under an international regime.

21. There exist at present among States situations of
manifest and unjust inequality of opportunities which have
produced extraordinary advances for a few sectors of
peoples of the world and progressive under-development for
the vast majority of its peoples. This is a situation which
must be corrected. If the international regime over the seas
does not incorporate the germ of a more just world order, it
will make no difference whether it is 200 miles or nothing,
since the same regime among States will produce the same
inequalities.
22. The important thing is that the conference on the law
of the sea should give impetus to the creation of an order of
relations among States which will make a reality of the
dream of development and offer a real equality of
opportunity to the peoples of ...i.e world. Towards this
pragmatic alternative all efforts of the Government of
NicaraguR will be directed at the conference. We, as
Nicaraguans, will try at that conference to see to it that
these goal? are crystallized through international action and
by me,;. "ftured by the United Nations as an institution
whicl-, ".'p,idt? ,!,f)'~tions among States, an instituion which
is sUPP0o,r,;l to ~, CJld unilateral actions which have tended to
defend ~l"'~'d"" t"",,,,nomic and social interests rather than the
interests ami needs considered vital to mankind.

esame way
Innine the
. which we
session and

on the law
aintain our
tion of an
1t zone for
determined
vhich exist
:onventions
territorial
up to the
eaties, the

lical capacoitation of
III and the
e will have
ide areas in
nationalist
lmmun ity,
property a
le size and

d.

ternational
nsuspected
through a
ltergovernlIe for the
l countries
fair use of
, an inter-

Ilations of
~hichhave

sectors of
lpment for
:ion which
er the seas
Id order,i t
If nothing ,
'the same
on the law
n order of
ity of the
luallty of
lVards this
nment of

,. We, &S
to it that
lction and
institution
lion which
tended to
r than the

1957th meeting -7 October 1971
3
23. Nicaragua ms always based its international policies
earliest days of our independence. The people of Nicaragua
on a recognition of the same right in other States which we
have favoured a two-party political system; nevertheless,
demand for ourselves. The traditio n of Nicaragua of using
our laws gi':e the right to any democratic and peace-19ving
peacGfuI means, arbitration and constructive dialogue goes
group to assist through its own philosophy in guiding and
back to the first years of Our indepen dent life. Numerous
even reforming the development of national life. Examples
treaties and conventions have defmed our jurisdiction and
of this assertion are abunda nt in our history, and on various
sovereignty, and there is not an inch of our territory which
occasions political parties have governed jointly in order to
has been added through conquest, nor has there been
favour a climate of peace and co-operation among citizens.
arbitrary action on the part of our Government to the
detriment of the interests and rights of other peoples.
30. Consistent with that traditio n, the two major parties
of Nicaragua recently signed a political convention before
24. Possibly it was in recognition of what I have just said
the diplomatic representatives of 'many of the world's
that the States Members of the United Nations, with the
nations. Their top leaders, the President of the Republic,
invaluable support of the Latin American group, honoured
Anastasio Somoza, a~ the head of the Uberal Party, and
Nicaragua with the de.signation of non-permanent member
Dr. Fernando AgUero Rocha, as head of the Conservative
of the Security Council, the presidency of which it was thus
Party, signed this convention, inspired by a desire to
able to assume in the person of Ambassador Guillermo
incorporate into our Constitution the most modem ideoSevilla Sacasa, one of the most outstanding sons of our
logical currents and the most advanced principles of social
country.
justice in order to make a reality of the aspirations of the
people of Nicaragua, not as a unilateral action of th~ party
25. Conscious of the great work of Ambassador Sacasa
in power, but as a result of free determi nation and full
and the praiseworthy manner in which he has carried out
involvement of the nation itself in deciding and achiev'..ng
his responsibilities in strict compliance with the legal
its own future, with all its hopes and ambitions.
traditions of our country and in the spirit of the Charter of
the United Nations, my Government would like to pay
31. Inspired by this desir~ "0 achieve and mainta in the
public tribute to him in the same way in whicl1 he has paid
broadest participation of all our citizens, the parties signing
tribute, so fittingly, to other great men who have made of
t.i.e political convention, although togethe r they. include
their lives, as has Mr. Sacasa, living eX'Ullples of dedication
almost all our citizens, have made provisi on for safeto justice and devotion to peace and total service to the
guarding the participation of other political groupings in
good of all.
the coming election of deputies to the National Constituent
Assembly, and have agreed to invite observers from regional
26. This is a good opportu nity to pay a tribute, as the
organizations sufficient in number to enable the world· to
Foreign Minister of Nicaragua, to the correct manner in
witness· the pUrity of the coming electoral process.
which other members of the perman ent mission of my
country to the United Nations have carried out t.heir own
32. My Government is pleased at the tendenc y ot the
delicate tasks.
other Governments in the world to make use of all possible
means to decrease interna tional tension s' Tne Heads of
27. Our contrib ution to the efforts of the United Nations,
State and their cabinets have increased their negotiations
to its aspirations and philosophy, has not been limited to
and contacts in order to guide their peoples towards the
words and actions in the international field. We think that
desired goals of peace, freedom, justice andpro gress. The
justice begins at the level of States when we cause to
leaders of the great Powers and their diplomatic representaflourish in them a just internal order and when we educate
tives have drawn closer together in attempt ing to resolve
new generations in the principles of solidarity, equality of
harmoniously the principal problems of the present world,
opportu nity and co-operation among individuals. The interparticularly those separating their own countries. This is
national panorama reflects these actions and attitudes and
why we note with satisfaction such advances as the
the values by which peoples are able to live among
incorporation of the People's RepUblic of China into the
themselves within the jUridical framework of their own
international order, the rapprochement between the two
States.
Germanys, and the talks concerning Berlin, disarmament,
the tensions in the Middle EalJt and th·,~e i.., South-East
28. Nicaragua therefore has maintained and does main.tain
Asia.
in its full meaning the fullest observance of rights and the
broadest civil liberties. Our respect for freedom of Con33. We have also been attentive and interested witnesses to
science, information, and the full exercise of civic participathe efforts being exerted byI...at in American political
tion of our citizens ha.> gone beyond laws and is found in all
leaders to strengthen the ties of friendship and co-operation
forms of life. Reliable evidence of this fact can be found in
among institutional orders inspired by a pluralit y of
the stability of our institutions and the free exercise of
ideologies. That plurality, which we have respected, is
political interests and perman ent dialogue, which we have
revealing of the freedom that has been implant ed in the
instituted as a definite means to serve:; our own developAmerican contine nt as the key to its progl'es' and development.
ment, and of the observance of ilie prim..ple.s of selfdetermination of peoples and non-intervention in the
29. In accordance with the pure ideals of the Charter of
internal affairs of other States, both of whic:h are cornerthe United Nations, political groups in Nicaragua enjoy
stones of the Organization of American States.
absolute freedom to join togethe r in a search for their own
goals, and dialogue and co-operation have been character34. Loyally conforming to the political inspiration of our
istics whose development we have stimulated since the
regional organization, the Govermnent of Nicaragua has

4

3
Nicaragua
rertheless,
lce-19ving
iding and
Examples
n various
I order to
: citizens.
lr parties
In before
world's
~epublic,

lrty, and
servative
lesire to
~m ideoof social
IS of the

he party
and full
.chievi...ng

tain the

s signing
include

or safe-

pings in
stituent
regional
{Orld to

,.

of the
possible
eads of
tiations
rds the
:ss.The
'esentaresolve
world,
This is
as the
lto the

le two
ament,
th-East

sses to
)litical

~ratP.on

ity of

:ed, is
in the
velopfselfn the
orner-

)four
a has

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings

striven to improve present· conditions in the Central
American Common Market by establishing numerous bilateral and multilateral contacts in which the leaders of the
Central American countries have participated with praiseworthy interest. As a result, we have seen a lessening of the
differences that had sepatated two neighbouring countries
the contribution of which is essential for the success of our
economic inttigration.
35. We have also greeted with profound sympathy the
recent initiatives taken by the President of the Republic of
Guatemala on the occasion of the sesquicentenary of the
independence of Central America. My Government believes
that positive steps should be taken to lay the groundwork
for politicm integration of the Central American countries,
as suggested by the President of Guatemala, because to do
so would not only imply the satisfaction of a long-standing
desire of our States, but would also establish the real basis
for the tmal and successful outcome of the economic and
social development of Central America.
36. The economic and political integration of the Central
American countries should arise out of the awareness of our
peoples themselves. The efforts and intentions of out'
leaders could very well- be hindered if there has not been a
previous decision on the part of the citizens of Central
America. Each and every Central American should have a
clear awareness and a flrm will to join his efforts and
aspirationswitiin a single nationality. It is essential that we
str;.:,ngthen th~ Organization of the Central Americhn States
as a·nucle1lS anrl driYing force for the political unity of the
isthmus, liIld formulate a concrete plan so that in the five
countries it will be the people who will put into effect this
new attempt to set up the Federal Republic of Central
America.
37. With a less ambitious purpose but with no less
sincerity, the Government of Nicaragua has been trying to
strengthen and multiply the ties that unite it to our sister
Republic of Mexico and to the entire Latin American
community. To that end, the President of Nicaragua
accepted the cordial invitation extended to hiln by Mr. Luis
Echeverria, the President of Mexico, and together with
members of his Cabinet and distinguished representatives of
private enterprise in Nicaragua, he recently visited our sister
Republic, laying the groundwork for profltable agreements
for co-operation that will be reflected most certainly in
beneflts to our own development.

In these times in which the security of every nation is
closely tied to that of other nations, it is necessary to speak
of world security. Any other conception of security would
be Iiestrictive and not in accordance with the facts of
histoL)'.
40. One of the essential foundations of security is that it
must not depend solely on the control of offensive and
defensive weapons, but rather on the efitablishment of a just
international order and of equally just national orders. We
must wipe out. poverty, disease and inequality of educational and economic opportunities, and guarantee for every
human being the satisfaction of his fundamental needs and
the full development of his individuality. Such an order can
be established only with the disappearance of all forms of
domination by force or by economic and technological
supremacy. Otherwise, unless such injustices are removed, it
will not be possible to speak of the security of any nation,
because the only permanent foundation for security is the
one that results in justice in relations a.-nong individuals and
among States.
41. My Government wishes to take this occasion, when
the representatives of the world's Governments are gathered
to make history, to make an appeal to all Members of this
Organization, urging them to solve the old problems that
afflict present-day society and that demand prompt a'1d
energetic action.

42. The problems existing on the African continent and in
Asia; the proliferation of micro-States, the worsening of
economic inequalities among nations-all these can be the
spark igniting a holocaust which it is, our duty to prevent.
Let us prevent it by carefully paying due attention to the
principles of coexistence among States and to the right of
every human being fully to enjoy his own resources and to
decide his own future.

43. Freedom cannot continue to be the privilege of
nations which lmve been able to achieve it, but a right,
consecrated and assured to ..ill nations of the world. There is
no human or divine justiflcation for some countries to
enjoy this freedom whereas others are kept in a state of
complete deprivation of this fundamental need of human
beings.

38. In essence, the Government of Nicaragua, within the
context of the Latin American community, has joined in
positive fashion in the political life of the continent. It has
done so with full awareness of the necessity for harmonious
co·operation among peoples and persuaded that violence
from the right and the left must be eliminated through
democratic processes, nationally as well as internationally,
because we have proscribed all use of force as &.'1 instrument
of policy. We fmiUy believe that the doctrine that seeks to
make of the continent of Colombus a continent for its own
inhabitants and one which will be a repository for the hope
and faith of the world, is today more than ever the
collective responsibility of all our peoples, one that we
must carry out with prudence and firm will.

44. Universality within the United Nations can be
achieved only through these means. It is not enough that
new countries or old States come into the United Nations
but are left out of the responsibilities and beneflts. If the
incorporation of the People's Republic of China, with
millions of people and the immense potential of its age-old
culture, is justifled by the principle of universality, if that
same principle also justifies the permanent membership of
free peoples, such as the people of Nationalist China, whose
permanence in our Organization ought to be ensured, the
achievement of this principle of universality justifles acceleration of the process of decolonization, so that new
peoples haVing received international recognition of their
right to be free and sovereign can become members of the
universal concert for which we are working in order to
bring about the rule offreedom and justice in the world.

39. The Government of Nicaragua notes with satisfaction
the initiative of calling a conference on European security.

45. Freedom alone can ensure progress and full selfrealization for mankind. The misery which now affects

£AL

. £1.

a-r

. 2JL

. [jJ SL.

is.llI!iN ..... .Id L

kW,;

:r'

1957th meeting - 7 October1 9 7 1 5

ery nation is
ssary to speak
ecurity would
the facts of

millions of human beings in the Middle East and in
Pakistan, as well as in many other areas in the world of
which we know, is the result of a social order which we
have set up and which requires careful and well-defined
reform.

uity is that it
offensive and
ment of a just
lal orders. We
lity of educantee for every
ltal needs and
1 an order can
If all forms of
technological
re removed, it
of any nation,
;ecurity is the
ldividuals and

46. The United Nations has appointed a commissioner for

:casion, when
:s are gathered
~mbers of this
problems that
i prompt a.'1d

ntinent and in
worsening of
lse can be the
ty to prevent.
tention to the
o the right of
sources and to

privilege of
l, but a right,

vorld. There is
countries to
in a state of
eed of human

ions can be
,t enough that
fnited Nations
,enefits. If the
, China, with
1of its age-old
rsality, if that
lembership of
:China, whose
e ensured, the
justifies accelso that new
tition of their
embers of the
g in order to
the world.
and full selfaffects

1 now

Palestine refugees, who is administering and co-ordinating
international assistance. We are convinced that a sinlilar
post should be created for the millions of Pakistani refugees
who also deserve the protection and assistance of our
Organization.
47. But those measures are insufficient. Human suffering
bears witness that we are living in an insecure world. There
can be no security if we persist in maintaining a social order
which provokes such suffering, a fact which is clear
evidence of the need to rectify the situation. Security ought
to be universal, and must be achieved by strengthening the
United Nations and by the realization of its principles and
ideals as instruments which will be of its own makIng and
which will strengthen and make more universal its scope of
action. To act in any other way would be tantamount to a
death sentence for the greatest Organization which man has
created for the achievement of happiness for mankind and
would make of the collective responsibility, which we have
all freely sought, a partial decision of a group of States
which has been .set up outside our world Organization and
the beneficial influence of the hwnan community.
48. In the firm conviction that we. are\cting under the
inspiration of the purest h).lmanist principles, and hoping to
see justice and reason prevail over ambition. I should like to
raille my prayers to the God of Nations so that as a result of
our deliberations, ·we may show a capacity to give future
generations the hope, justice and security which we desire
for ourselves.
49. Today's world, our own world, is facing a situation
which requires serene action and the broadest spirit of
co-operation iUIiong individuals and States. We are facing it
with only the arms of a fretful human spirit. We are facing a
situation of change, as seen in the irrepressible pYOgress of
new values which are creating a new awareness in the world.
We do not believe that by isolating ourselves or raising
protective barriers, material or spiritual, we will find
solutions adequate to our task. Better interaction, better
co-operation, better understanding and growing solidarity
are the tools which we will have to use tD produce a change
towards real bases of happmess, freedom and justice as the
common heritage for all human beings.

52. My welcome goes to the young countries of Bhutan,
Bahrain and Qatar on their democratic entry into the
United Nations. They will surely contribute to our cause
with their force of spirit and their creative energies.
53. I bring to this Assembly a message from a country
situated in the centre of South America, from a people
great in terms of its virtues and l;acrifices, a people whicl1
has been able to overcome, worthily, many misfortunes and
from a nation which emerged at the dawn of time with the
appearance of our original races and which married the
Spanish conqueror and then gave birth to the Republic.
That was a social compact to which we in Bolivia pay
homage and because of which we cannot strike out about
500 years of history; we can deny neither the motherland
of Spain nor the motherland of our own native soil, which
brought us their faith, their beliefs, their traditions, their
culture and their languages in harmonious combination,
making of the New World, together with its prod!gious
natural wealth, the hope of the human race.
54. My country has undert';i:en structural changes, from
1952 on, in order to liberate the cortunon people from
feudalism and to attenuate the rigours of plutocratic
exploitation. The dispossessed of the countryside have
c{lased to be slaves and the tin which brings income into our
Treasury no longer benefits its former possessors. Such are
the virtue!) of the agrarian reform and the nationalization (.1'
mines.
55. Petroleum, gas, zinc, gold, timber, sources of waterall our natural resources form part of the heritage of the
nation. In my country it is no longer possible for an
economic super-State to arise which would challenge the
State itself.
56. Revolution is proceeding now in Bolivia on the basis
of a unanimous consensus and long the glorious path of full
nationalism. It will always be welcome in America, as
elsewhere, so long as it preserves its autonomy and the
hallmark of genuine authenticity. When the revolution
tries to transfer its own sovereignty it becomes anti-national
and hence anti-American.

Mr. Molina (Lbsta Rica), Vice-President, took the Chair.

congratulating you upon your well-deserved election to the
presidency of this Assembly, and I should like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Mr. Edvard Harnbro upon his
successful tenure of office at the previous session.

57. This is precisely what happened in Bolivia under the
former administration, which relinqui')hed control of events
to outside influences and permitted itself to pervert
freedom and to prostitute justice and to cover up political
crimes, to make the law its tool, to disregar j institutions
and deny democracy. All this was done to replace the
national sovereignty with another sovereignty and to raise
up petulant popular assemblies which were made up of false..-.representatives appointed arbitrarily, and was done' by
setting up irregular courts designed to imprison free citizens
fuld to consign the opposition to the ftring squad, all of
which was openly avowed with unwonted arrogance.

51. To U Thant, on behalf of the Government of Bolivia, I
should like to express our sL.'lcere appreciation; he has
earned the confidence of many nations during his long
tenure of office, in which the destiny of humanity has
wavered between uncertainty and hope, and he has
measured up to his task.

58. We are all aware of the principles of AID.ericawhich
proclaim justice, which we all admit and we are all
a~customed to defend Vlrith a certain readiness and boldnp,ss. But no one can ignore that these also compel the
countries of America to preserve human and civil rights, to
preserve their independence in fue face of all form') of

50. Mr. GUTIERREZ GUTIERREZ (Bolivia) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, I take 'pleasure in

6 :

5

outside interference in their internal decisions. and to repel
jointly any kind of aggression.

s of Bhutan.
ry into the
:0 our cause

59~ Yes. we have been able to carry out this sacred task
imposed upon 'us by the revolution and the free and
civilized conscience of America.

~ies.

na country
lm a people
eople whicll
fortunes and
me with the
married the
le Republic.
Bolivia pay
.e out about
motherland
~ soil. which
:itions. their
Clmbination.
: prod!gious

anges, from
leople from
plutocratic
ryside have
me into our
rs. Such are
lalizaiion r·;

S of water-

itage of the
ibIefor an
lallenge the
m the basis

path. of full
~erica, as

wand the
revolution
rrti-national

: the Chair,
l-under· the
)1 of events
to pervert
Ippolitical
institutions
'eplacethe
nd torai'ie
up of false.,".; done by
ree citizens
uad, all of

lce.
iricawhich
veare all
and bold:ompel the
i1rights~to

. forms of

Gene1tU Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings

60. In order to save the freedom of our country, which
was on the point of being alienated by outside forces, in
our policy we have applied the maxim of "~elp yourself".

i

r

I
t
t
I

61. In order to obtain this. Bolivians have been inspired by
lofty sentiments, as,· for example, in Colombia where
liberals and conservatives joined hands and forgot their old
quarrels in order to serve their country better. Our two
great rival parties,· the Bolivian Socialist Falange and the
Revolutionary Nationalist Movement,' both with popular
and .nationalist roots, •both equally pugnacious, have
decided to join forces in the face of the danger threatening
Bolivia. And this political instrument, forged with such
detachment and grandeur. has served the armed forces of
the nation to -rise victoriously, hand in hand with the
peQple .and under the leadership- of Huga Banzer Smlrez,
leader of. the Nationalist Popular Front, which governs my
country.

I
t

)

L.

62. Contl"cU'Y to false and self-interested 'versions alleging
non-existent fascism and a reaction which no longer is
active . in Bolivia, the new Government is inspired by
profound democratic faith and by the conviction that it is
preferable to run the risks of liberty. As soon &s the
circumstances of the political crisis which now confront us
have been overcome, the powers of the nation will be
established through the free exercise -of universal_ suffrage.
Parallel to this psychological preparation of the Bolivian
people for the ennobling exercise of the. billot box, we are
seeking a-beneficial counterweight to control of the public;
sector by the State through incentives to private initiative
and proper guarantees for foreign investments. Bolivia is a
country which -requires capital for its development and
needs currents of immigration which wiU help it to grow.
Social achievements such as the trade-union movement and
workers' movements are being maintained unchanged.
National universities have bean suspended until next March
while we undertake their restructuring on a modem basis,
as has been done in other American universities. The
reforms of 1930 are outmoded,anachronistic and inadequate. These reforms did not include in higher learning the
new disciplines .which are indispensable in our day. Economic -and social development, the investigation of local
realities and the training of medium-level scientists and
technicians were not part of its <;>bjectives. In order to bring
up to date our institutions of higher learning what we will
need are sustained efforts, apart from the necessary
resources and technical assistance from international organizations.
63. It is all very well to say that there exists a third world
made up of developing nations or by nations considered to
be backward and dependent, including Bolivia. My party,
the Bolivian Socialist Falange, 30 years ago, at the end of
the Second World War, spoke of a third point of the
triangle, a third position distinct from the exploiting right
and the anarchistic left. Toaay we are pleased to observe
that our idea has been implanted democratically in the

conscience of the countries which do not have the power of
decision in world politics and need the understanding and
solidarity of the strong and powerful States.

64. In the process of development, of industrialization
through international co-operation. the concept of a third
world distinct from the major Powers in conflict is
naturally proper. At a time of defInitions. at the supreme
moment when the destiny of man and the fate of nations
will be at stake. among the opposed and hostile forces
which "third worldism" presupposes. each country is faced
with a critical choice. There is no room for neutrality in the
great historical contests. Ji sexual indeterminacy of certain
species does not permit biological transformation neither
can there be in social terms a fruitful conciliation of the
neuter with well-defIned and categorical characteristics.
65. Quite a few members of the third world are considered
to be non-aligned countries. This non-alignment is more
apparent than real. ll!>tening with due attention to the
magnifIcient speech.es which have been made in this hall at
this present twenty-sixth session, it has been possible to
observe that the Governments of our respective countries
are in fact clearly aligned in taking a stand on each of the
great subjects which perturb mankind today, and, even in
dealing with specifIc problems of each nation, we observe a
well-defIned position which indicates a certain philosophy
and a camp in which action is taken. The results of the fInal
votes will show us better than anything else that we are all
aligned in one way or another.

66. Some people involved in the atmosphere of "third
worldism" have unfortunately been given to \oiolence, to
terrorism and to urban and rural guerrilla warfare. These
people confuse the moral and the economic posture of the
countries of the thirr world, a posture which should be
understood in a constructive way with a facile and
convenient appeal to subversion and disorder for criminal
ends.
67. Violence, and there is no way of denying it, is the
great midwife of history. But violence is legitimate and
proper when it is exercised by the weak against the strong,
byt.'le exploited against the exploiter, by slaves against
their masters. Blind violence through motives of revenge or
resentment or as reprisals for a defeat wbich ha, been
sustained, vr the expression of impotence with regard to
fIghting openly is reprehensible and cowardly and deserves
the most energetic condemnation.
68. A political doctrine which practices organized criminality and for this purpose resorts to ann-social elements is
not of course something which reveals the virtue of its
principles, but _a diabolical spirit which is intrinsically
anti-natural :md perv~rse, that of the Cains who swarm over
the face of the globe and who will never be able to raise the
standard of human hope.
69. Along with the terrorism which is practised as a
politiCal system, we fmd this tendency to intervene in. the
internal policies of other countries. Bolivia has been a
victim of this kind of foreign aggression with the guerrilla
fIghters in Nancahuazu. The death of their leader in La
Higuera attests to the fact, and attests to the violence done

Ive the power of
derstanding and

ndustrialization
lcept of a third
hI conflict is
at the supreme
fate of nations
I hostile forces
~ountry is faced
leutrality in the
inacy of certain
mation neither
.clliation of the
racteristics.

l are considered
nment is more
tention to the
.e in this hall at
een possible to
lctive countries
on each of the
y, and, even in
n, we observe a
:ain philosophy
ults of the final
: that we are all

neIe of "third
to "iolence, to
warfare. These
posture of the
rich should be
a facile and
er for criminal

lying it, is the
legitimate and
inst the strong,
slaves against
s of revenge or
blch ha: been
with regard to
y and deserves

'ganized crimi~ial elements is
~ virtue of its
is intrinsically
ho swann over
ble to raise the

Jractised as a
itervene 111 the
ia has been a
h the guerrilla
r leader in La
violence done

--- --- --- --- --- -'-- --- --= --- --

1957th meeting -7 Octobe r) 971

to the American principles of self-determination and
non-intervention in the internal affairs of other States.

70. During the last attemp t to "Viet-Namize" Bolivia,
there was public incitem ent to revolt from foreign rostrums.. Well·knbwn guerrilla fighters from another country
have made their headquarters in the Gabriel Rena Moreno
University in the east of Bolivia.

7
land-looked situatio n of my country is well-known, as well
as its historical background, so that it would be redund ant
for me to dwell upon this. It would be better to approach
this question in the light of the integrationist though t
which concerns us all in more or less degree in accordance
with the standing of our countries and the nature of the
problem.

71. Our case is not an Isolated one. Among other
countries, Guatemala, as we have been told here by its
Foreign Minister, has also "suffered from an intensive
divisive campaign, inspired and support ed from outside the
country , which afflicted the country with ways of violence
and subversion by extremists and clandestine factions".
{1947t'J meeting; para. 92.J He concluded with the justified compla int that ''the measures adopted [to prevent and
punish acts of terrorism, kidnapping and violence] have not
been as efficacious as we have hoped" , a situation which, in
his judgement, "threate ns international peace and security"

77. Chile is facing a diffic:J.1ty that has its origins in the
capricious insular nature of its territor y, which is isolated
from the contine nt by the Andes. With a coastline of more
than 4,000 kilometres it has a reduced tenitori al mass and
its extensive norther n area is desert. That is why it is
interested in geographical factors which Bolivia ntight offer
to it in guaranteeing not only the security but also the
flOUrishing of regions which lack natural resources. The
fresh water of th~ cordillera, the petroleum of the eastern
part of Bolivia, the flow of trade in the departm ents of
Oruro, Cochabamba and SantaC ruz, are "non-territorial
compensations" which their statesmen and strategists have
been thinking about since 1930.

72. In the noble and democratic American community
there is no place for ignoring anyone except States which
exclude themselves by their own actions in promoting, in
defiant ways, the undermining of public order in other
countries. The right to the recognition of one's own
personality begins with respect for the free determination
of other peoples and the right to govern themselves in
conform ity with their own will.

78. Bolivia, on the other hand, is an enormous continental
mass of mure than a million square kilometr~s, an area
which is greater than Chile, withou t a single centimetre of
coast on the Pacific. It is obvious that a country with !ouch
an unusual geography must seek out its own supplementary
maritime facilities.

{ibid.J.

73. That the leaders of independence of America intervened in our countries is not historically true, nor does it fit
the present situation. BoIivar and Sucre, San Martin and
Artigas, just to mention four of our distingUished liberators,
belonged to one and the same country , which was able to
preserve its unity but which, for the good or ill of our
contine nt, split up into various countries. These republics
today constitute different countries which have agreed in
embracing certain principles and whose violation is a grave
condemnation of the country which commits them.

79. It would seem that Chile had found the means for
solving this difficult situatio n in its provinces in the north
by means of integration with Bolivia through the Andean
Group. Possibly it thinks that this is a way· to help it to
achieve its objectives. Bolivia, on the oti.'ler hand, by
integration merely through the ways of development which
it has been using, will not be able to satisfj its urgent need
for rounding out its development through a sovereign access
to the sea. The principal leaders of the Andean Group have
a very heavy historical responsibility which is related to the
future of our suboregion and the peace of the southern part
of the contine nt.

74. Happily, the United. Nations cultivates the same
extremely noble and basic ideals as America and is
determined to preserve human freedom, the security of
nations and universal peace. Within its competence also we
fmd the promot ion n9t only of econontic development but
also of social development of countries struggling with an
overwhelming scarcity of resources due to their situation of
producing only one produc t, countries which are lashed by
the scourge of evils.,p k.l sow fear and give us this lack of
confidence in the f..t, iliJ .

80. Furthermore, as far as Bolivians are concerned, our
incorporation in the western ocean is more pressing since
the sea is considered now to be an inexhaustible empori um
of food reserves and of staggering natural resources. This
wealth is even more abunda nt since the territorial sea has
been expanding to a width of 200 miles and the world is
also beginning to legislate concerning the sea-bed· as a
common and universal dominion.

75. No less importa nt and significant is the task wmch the
United Nations has assumed of stimulating the processes of
integration. This phenomenon, which is characteristic of
the time in which we live, is due to the growing
interrelationsmp between States and a growing interdependence which requires dialogue and a positive policy of
international co-operation. There are attempt s to integrate
in Europe as well as in Asia, Mrica, Oceania and America.
76. In South America there is a problem which affects
Bolivia and Chile and which has effects also on the policy
for development and integration of the Andean Group. The

81. Making this approach more specific, we can say that
the sea for Bolivia and the non-territorial geographical
factors for Chile, will make it possible for the Andean
Group ;0 bring its far-seeing policy of integra tion to its
fullest and happiest conclusion.
82. Next, I should like to express my concern about the
stability of the United Nations; in other words, the life
itself of the Organization. This stability rests fundamentally
on the prestige which the Organization can achieve, based
on its fidelity to principles which it has proclaimed and the
unswerving correctness of its conduc t and the efficacy of its
decisions.

8

7

mown, as well
be redundant
ir to approach
onist thought
in accordance
nature of the

origins in the
ich is isolated
stline of more
)rial mass and
is why it is
ia might offer
but also the
isources. The
)f the eastern
partments of
Ion-territorial
rategists have

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings

83. Once the prestige of the League of Nations was
compromised, the. League came to an end without sorrow
or glory. As ahealthful exercise, let us refer to some of the
efforts which contributed to that dissolution. In that way
we will see to it that the United Nations, which raises
greater hopes, in spite of the scepticism of some of its
Mt:\mbers, is able to meet its grave historical responsibilities.

I

i1

84. One of the faults of the League of Nations was the
withdrawal. of the Uilited States from it, after it had
sponsored its creation in the Treaty of Verslillles. This event
came on top of the previous isolation of Germany al1d
Russia, which were the big Powers of the time. Today the
United Nations counts on the active participation of the
United States and the Soviet Union, as well as new Powers,
although others of undisputed impOltance are being
ignored.

i

i
I

,! .

85. One thing which weakened the League of Nations
morally was the institution of an International Court of
Justice which could apply an optional arbitration without
mandatory force. This implied an abandonment to the
stronger countries of the solution of conflicts between the
weaker countries, since the former did not have to use the
arbitration of the Court. In our Organization some of this is
occurring on. some levels and it is. endangering its effectiveness.

IS continental
tns, an area
:entimetre of
try with ~'Uch
Ipplementary

86. Universal disarmament, in order to achieve peace,
stumbled over insuperable obstacles in the League of
Nations and its results, of course, could not prevent
countries from anning themselves and from preparing a new
war. TIlen we spoke simply cif the "manufacture of arms
and munitions" and the "reduction of arms". Our generation is alarmed to' see the production of nuclear weapons
and the massive destructive power which they have. To
limit and to dismantle this apocalyptic race towards a
catastrophic extermination of men and nations is an
unavoidable duty which cannot be escaped by the prominent Members of the United Nations.

le means for
in the north
the Andean
~o help it to
lrhand, by
jmentwhich
urgent need
~reign access
Group have
Hated to the
mthern part

87. The Foreign Minister of Peru referred [1947th meet-

ing] in detail to the risks of pollution of the atmosphere
and the waters, of the seas as well as the insecurity which is
involved in atomic tests. In so doing, he was wise to
emphasize the great urgency in adopting means to avoid
proliferation of these deadly tests and in having an
improved convention banning thermo-nuclear weapons. We
:might note, in· this connexion, the reassuring words of the
representative of France, a country which however is not
the only one carrying out this research.

lcerned, oUr
ressing since
eemporium
mrces. This
>rial sea has
the world is
ia-bedas a

88. .The image of the League of Nations was affected also
by the process which was followed in the admission and
rejection of new States. Some were rejected, others were
accepted, and this was based on discrimination which was
often not well founded. The rejection of Armenia had
special characteristics which we ought to recall.

an say that
eographical
he Andean
ltion toits

I about the
ds, the life
damentally
ieve, based
led and the
icacyofits

89. The case of Armenia was debated, and it was said that
the League of Nations ought to support a new State whose
existence was being threatened. All the members of the
Assembly agreed. that this step ought to be taken, but they
fOl!!'1 that the League did not have the weapons, armies or
fl!l.l.t; to do so. Later on, when the recognition of Armenia

..._'•.

_-',.~

came up again, the League of Nations, in a contradictory
manner, decided to reject it, and ill that way it wounded its
own authority and prestige.

90. In looking at this background we can see the negative
influence which might be exercised in the United Nations if
we are to accept and expel Members, to say that there is
protection and not to bring about that protection because
of insufficient means or operative inefficiency. That is why
the Foreign Minister of Spain hit the mark when he said
that the United Nations ought to find out whether
constitutionally it is able to meet the challenges of the
present time [1949th meeting, para. 13].
91. These references, as illustrative examples, strengthen
our conviction in saying that the admission of the People's
Republic of China ought to take place both in the
Assembly and in the Security Council, and iliat the
Republic of China ought to be kept in the Organization.
There must be discretion in the acts of the United Nations
if we l/.Ie not to commit ilie mistake of harmil1g its moral
vigour ;;md detracting from its political authority.
92. Let us not regret the delay in the necessary incorporation of the People's Republic of China into this world
Organization. The fact is that we are proposing it today as a
matter of justice in the face of the principle of the
universality of nations, which has been invoked by so many
outstanding speakers and because of what might be called
the doctrine of realities. Continental China is a country
which cannot and should not be ignored because of the size
oUts territory, its enormous population, the strength and
expansion of its economy and because it is an organized
State. Bolivia is especially interested in speaking to China,
about the production of antimony, wolfram and tin, and
about the whole policy of prices.
93. At the same time and using the same principles and
reasons, we can in no way reconcile this with the expulsion
of Nationalist China from this great amphitheatre of peace,
progress and solidarity of nations. A State which has 14
million people, a flOUrishing industry with exports of about
$4,000 million a year, which is the same as the exports of
the People's Republic of China, with a high cultural and
technical level and which is in a position to give valuable
assistance to other developing countries, cannot be refused,
as Armenia was in ilie past, without ilie Organization
compromising its serious purpose, and even less so now
when the country involved has been one of its principal
Members from the very outset.

94. If, at the beginning, in the opinion of some, Formosa
was a "fictitious State", at present the Republic of China
shows ilie attributes of a modem State and is an example to
others with its virtues of organization and its historic will to
exist and to nourish lofty and constructive ideals.
95. There might also be an impression that, if we were to
abandon the island of Taiwan, there would be a hidden
intent to allow that State to become the victim of the use
of force. The reconquering of territories is a dangerous
precedent which might be transformed into a terrible
boomerang for the United Nations, some of whose
Members might fmd themselves in similar situations. This
risk flows from the words of one head of a delegation,

1957th meeting -7 October 1971
when he said that Taiwan should be recognized as part of
China and that representatives other than those of cantinental China should be expelled.
96. WUh respect to the conflict in t.'te Middle East, the
framework of which is the Arab-Israeli conflict, this is a
matter which should be duly sorted out and properly
settlen. Two principles shotl1d be pointed out here, the
importance of which cannot be doubted by anyoIi<l and the
rational application of which might lead to the result which
we all desire. These are the principle of dialogue, which is a
worthy means of human understanding, and the principle
of non-recognition of territorial acquisitions resulting from
armed c.onflict.
97. Both doctrines form a single whole for Bolivians.
Direct conversation, enlightening dialogue-these are
unchanging policies which Bolivia wishes to cultivate with
Chile in solving its own problems and which it would like to
see applied now in controversies such as the one which
exists between the Arab States and l'lrael. The nonrecognition of territorial annexations through the use of
force has always been the key position of the Governmen1
of my country, and now we are pleased to hear this from
the Minister for Foreign Affairs for Chile, when he says that
Israeli troops should be withdrawn from the occupiec
territories and that any attempt to annex territories shoule
be condemned, under Security Council resolution
242 (1967), whic4 embodies this principle and which is to
be found in international public law in Latin America as
one of its guiding doctrinal concepts [1948th meeting,
para. 168J.

98. No less censurable would be an attempt to bring about
the destruction of Israel as a State. Even though Israel is a
young State, it belongs to an old nation, whose origin goes
back to biblical times and the beginning of man on earth.
Israel in its short life as a modern State has astonished the
whole world by its extraordinary capacity to organize itself,
to preserve its independence and to advance resolutely
forward along a broad road towards progress and the
structuring of a just society, one which favours science, the
arts and letters.
99. To guarantee the secmity of Israel would seem to be
just as important as to guarantee the territorial status of the
Arab countries. Let reason and prudence, the mother of
wisdom, and equity, upon which rests the theory of
balances, of the "golden mean" spoken of by the ancients,
let these, rather than th.J clouded intellects and frustrated
wills of sectarianism, say the last word in this controversy
between nations worthy of admiration and respect.
100. The armed struggle in Indo.china has not only
become unpopular, as all wars do which become prolonged,
but it has become a blind and irrational fact which is
incomprehensible for most men. This conflict has incorporated a new term in the human lexicon-the idea of
"Viet-Namization" as the division of countries through
ideological motivations. The threat of "Viet.Namizing"
Bolivia or dividing it if necessary was made by a labour
union leader from the grounds of our legislative palace
which was converted into a sort of Paris commune, but not
to· bring about a revolution in favour of the Bolivians,as
Was carried out in France in favour of· the French, a

9

revolution which was made on the march, a nationalist,
realistic and profound revolution, but one which was
intended to yoke the Bclivian State to foreign Powers,
forgetting that America must become leader of its own
destiny. The inclusion of the People's Republic of China in
this Organization might constitute a der.isive factor in
favour of re-establishing peace in Viet-Nam. The present
Government of the United State~ of America, in turn, with
its comprehensive and constructive attitude, might win the
palm of victory in this manner. It would be a victory for
the cause of peace, which is so deeply yeamed for by the
long-suffering people of Indo-China, by United States
citizens and by the citizens of the entire world.
101. Among the main problems before the world is the
question of the Federal Republic of Germany and the
German Democratic Republic, into which the Third Reich
was divided after the last war. In the territory of the old
Germany, which was unified by the Iron Chancellor new
European borders were laid out separating the leading
Powers of the world. Some favour the admission of both
Germanys as Member States of the United Nations.
Actually, I would say that each Germany-West Germany
and East Germany-deserves a seat in this great Assembly.
We are pleased in this way to pay a tribute to a
hard-working nation whose industry and human intelligence
have contributed to progress and the ideological orientation
of mankind.
102. It would possibly be better to leave it up to the
Germanys to settle their big problem now or in the future.
No one could agree more than the Germans that they are a
single nation which has been temporarily divided into two
States because of transitory differences and that foreign
interests have raised between them a wall of hateful
connotations. This is a wall which, because of human
comprehension and the transcendent unity of a people, will
no doubt be demolished to give rise to an active and fruitful
understanding which will prepare for the future the
reunification of the German nation in a sin~e State, with
the democratic understanding of the great Powers.
103. It would be premature to arrive at conclusions on the
various items concerning the problems of the seas to be
considered by the plenipotentiaries who will take part in
the conference on the law of the seato be held in 1973.
104. In the broad field of the law of the sea, the problems
of land-Ioc!'..eu countries have relatively little meaning for
the international community. Nevertheless, they take on
vital characteristics when the interests of States lacking a
sea coast are at stake, as in the case of BoliVia.
105. Of course the right of free access to the sea is givelI- .
to land-locked countries. In this connexion, I should like to
point out that the improvement of this law, which is a
matter of concern to my country, does not mean now, nor
will it ever mean, giving up the rights that are helping it to
hold its own sovereign rights in the seas of the world.
106. There is another aspect which should be pointed out.
The universaUty of the law for the use and the exploitation
of the sea, which the twenty"fifth session of the General
Assembly proclaimed ina solemn declaration of princi-

~ ~ ~"'\.,

10

!,,,~S;;:k:,,•.,,~
. ...,\i;£%:.~~~14lWil,'l-l-~~~~T~~7~~'I~~·,':.\,.t,.,,.;.....'"i",7'.~!'
... ;"'!~;j\i.~~~~,~.I,'?'

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings

ples,2 would be partial and incomplete if it were applied
only to coastal States and if the legitimate rights and
aspirations ofland-locked countries were to be forgotten.

r

h

J'

I
I'

I
I
r

I
\

107. The international community began to confirm and
to codify in 1958 various principles relating to the right of
access to the sea, in the Convention on the High Seass as
well as the Convention on the Transit Trade of LandLocked States.4 In addition, there are hundreds of bilateral
agreements in this field. This matter has been the subject of
special studies carried out by the Secretary and by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
[UNCTAD].
108. As UNCTAD has quite correctly pointed out, landlocked status is one of the factors which ought to be taken
into account in identifying the characteristics of countries
haVing a relatively lower degree of development. It is
obvious that, as is the case in the Andean Group, account
should be taken of the fact that there are not only
countries having a relatively lower degree of economic
development but also land-locked countries that are less
developed, and those countries ought to be accorded a
doubly preferential treatment.
109. In the organization of international machinery to
administer the exploration and the exploitation of the
resources of the sea-bed, consideration should be given to
the fact that the recognition of preferential rights for
coastal States over extensive areas adjacent to their coasts,
would automatically transfer to land-locked States access
rights to the deepest and most inaccessible ocean trenches,
thus making such rights purely hypothetical ones. Such a
situation would become even more absurd if it were
established that land-locked countries have no right to the
living resources even of the adjacent sea.
110. At the end of this month and at the beginning of
next month there will be a ministerial meeting. in Lima of
representatives of the Group of 77 to prepare a joint plan
of action to guide their deliberations dUring the third
session of UNCTAD to be held next year in Santiago, Chile.
111. Bolivia will be present at both meetings and will deal,
with a special :interest, with the important problems that
concern the developing countries in their permanent relationship with the highly developed countries. I should add
to this that Bolivia has complete solidarity with the views
expressed by the Group of 77 in favour of co-operation for
development, balanced and just internatioilal trade, the
transfer of technology, special measures ill favour of the
relatively less developed countries and the special problems
of land-locked countries, in order to comply with the
objectives of the International Development Strategy of the
Second United Nations Development Decade [resolution
2626 (XXV)].

112. Without going into further analysis I wish to add at
this point that Bolivia will give its support to improving
2Pec1aration of Principles Governing the Sea-Bed and the Ocean
Floor, and the Subsoil Thereof, beyond the Limits of National
Jurismction(resclution 2749 (XXV).
3 Signooat Geneva on 29 April 1958.
4 Signed at New York onS July 1965.

regional organizations, the expansion of the number of
members of the Economic and Social Council and, if
necessary also to modifying some of the present characteristics of that body which do not correspond to the demands
of our time and, finally, to examining closely the conditions for implementing the Second United Nations Development Decade.
113. The Bolivian delegation has maintained and will
continue to maintain its systematic &Ild consistent attitude
against all forms of colonialism and against racial and
religious discrimination which are still afflicting various
peoples of the world.

,

114. Furthermore, my country reiterates its concern at
the situation in Belize, the Mal"inas and Gibraltar, which is
of interest to Guatemala, Argentina and Spain and which
endangers relations between those countries and the United
Kingdom. The same thing can be said for the Canal Zone,
whose recovery is being sought by Panama.
115. Among the interesting matters before this body is the
Convention of the Central American Community, which
this Organization ought to welcome with great pleasure.
This event shows us that Bolivar did not plant seeds in the
desert. Bolivar's ideal for an American union, proclaimed in
the amphictyonic Congress of Panama and in the Treaty of
Confederation of 1848 in Lima, is being brought back to
life and is gaining a new expression with the new Central
American Community.
116. Five nations of the same origin and the same destiny
in the continent, tied by the sam-e tradition and similar
ideals, have manifested their desire to band together to
create a Central American Community of Nations. Let us
hope that such a generous effort will reach a defw :"
crystallization for the good of America and the general fate
of the world.
117. In 1907, at the beginning of this century, an
outstanding Brazilian jurist, Ruy Barbosa, the father of the
Constitution of the Federative Republic of Brazil, defended
in The Hague the principles of the juridical equality of
States, which ha£ become the corner-stone upon which this
modern edifice of great international organizations has been
raised. With the welcome passage of time, we now see the
forming of a corollary doctrine, the idea of the economic
equality of nations in international co·operation for development.
118. The first thesis has led us to the concepts of regional
and world security, as well as of the recognition of the
rulers of self-determination and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other States.
119. This second thesis must lead us to the establishment
of sure markets and stable prices for the raw materials of
the developing countries. At the same time, it should ma,ke
it necessary for us to safeguard freedom of trade and the
stability of currencies,
120. All that can be possible if we faithfully followthe
international rules which we accepted and if, at the same
time, we reject movements for hegemony in the eager
search for a great universal concert of natioIls.

o

h
di

1957th meeting - 7 October 1971
-_._-----------_
..

--~--------------------,

121. Science, technology and the great processes of
iudustrialization today shouid not be used for destruction
and death. We &re facing a great challenge to man: a new
and great adventure for his intelligence. That will be what
will make it possible for us to become aware of and to
dominate the forces of nature in the service of mankind and
not of war in order to bring about the miracle of the
realization of our ardent desire for justice, progress,
universal peace and a better knowledge of the mysteries'
which the univ~rse holds.

lt1r. Malik (Indonesia) resumed the ChQl:".
'J

,

122. Mr. GALLIMORE (Jamaica): We are met together in
this Assembly in a further attempt to resolve some of the
issues which continue to militate against the progress and
prosperity of nations great and small-' Indeed, many of
these issues have been on our agenda since the inauguration
of the Organization. Frustrating as that may be, we must
continue to apply ourselves to the task in an endeavour to
fmd solutions to these problems if we ar(! to save mankind
from self-destruction.
123. It is against that background, Mr. President, that you
have assumed the presidency of this twenty-sixth session of
the General Assembly, and my delegation extends to you
sincere congratulations on your election and pledges to you
its full co-operation. We take this opportunity also to
express our appreciation to Ambassador Hambro of
Norway, who so ably guided the deliberations of the
Assembly's twenty-fifth se8sion.
124. lhree newly independent nations-Bahrain, Bhutan,
Qatar-have now become members of this Assembly.
Jamaica extends to them a hearty welcome, feeling sure
they will play their full part in the deliberations of this
Organization.
125. Once again the time seems to have come when the
United Nations must find itself a new Secretary-General. It
appears that we must take as fmal our Secretary·General's
pronouncement that he will not be persuaded to accept an
extension of his term. At the appropriate time my
Government will wish to have the opportunity to place on
record an expression of our appreciation of the contribution U Thant has made to the cause of world peace, our
awareness of the delicacy and inherent difficulties of his
many responsibilities, and a sense of our indebtedness and
that of all humanity for his distinguished service. For the
present, however, it appears that the United Nations must
now address itself to the task of selecting his successor. In
that connexion, there is one thought I would wish to leave
with my colleagues.
126. Whenever a change in the office held by the chief
international civil servant is contemplated everyone succumbs to the temptation of proceeding to defme the almost
superhuman qualities of mind of heart a United Nations
Secretary-General must bring to his task. In that respect we
are all no doubt quite right. Seldom, however, do we, the
Member countries of the United Nations, pause to remind
ourselves that there are obligations which we owe the
holder of that post and which have probably not been
discharged with sufficient concern for his effectiveness..

11

127. In the view of my delegation a special responSIbility
devolves upon the smaller Powers of the United Nations to
make the effectiveness of the office of Secretary-General
their particular concern. It is in the interest of the smaller
Powers that the United Nations should grow in strength and
prestige. It is in our interest that this trend towards the
removal of world issues from the United Nations forum
should be reversed. It is we who mainly stand to gain from
an effective Organization; it is primarily our interests that
are damaged when the United Nations fails. And to
strengthen the hand of the Secretary-General is to
strengthen the whole United Nations.

128, My delegation would urge that, as we go to the
selection of a new Sacretary-General, we should pledge that
we will together provide our Secretary-General in the future
with the unswerving support he will need for the effective
discharge of his onerous duties.
129. Looking now at the background against which the
twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly is being held,
my delegation must express its deep concern at the global
fmancial crisis that has greeted the opening of the Second
United Nations Development Decade, a crisis which has
been highlighted by the announcements of the President of
the United States on 15 August.
130. In many an international forum the issues raised and
the problems posed to the international community by
these recent measures are being actively debated, and it
would be inappropriate and no doubt impracticable to
debate this range of issues here in this Assembly. Speaking,
however, as one of the developing countries of the world, it .
is our view that the present international monetary crisis
can be traced to the trading, financial and social policies of
the developed countries. Their unwillingness to open their
markets to the developing world or to accept restrictions
upon thair manufactured goods hinder the attempts of the
less developed countries to industrialize. Those policies,
linked to the poor flow of aid tied to their source, have
worked to create a level of international conflict, misunderstanding and economic autarchy that has produced the
present crisis. If conditions of trade which for us are normal
can be rapidly restored, we shall see the upward movement
of our economies continue, but if they are not restored, we
shall soon find that a dramatic reversal will take place in the
upward movement of our economies and in the already
inadequate increases in our living standards. Unemployment
will grow, and so will its well recognized and inevitable
consequences.
131. Although the great trading nations have commendably decided that their response to the events of 15 August
will be an attitude of understanding and offers-of cooperation-and we commend them highly on that-we must
remind both them and the United States that the present .....
uncertainties in matters of trade cannot be allowed to
continue. We are in grave danger of inadvertently creating a
global contraction in trade that in turn will. mean a
dramatic fall in {he totalli;':ing standards of all mankind.
132. It is here in this. Assembly that the political decision
should be urge~ upon' the major trading nations not to
permit such acon'i:rClction of trade. The disastrous consequenc(;:s it would inflict upon the living standards of us all
are well known.

I

I

I
r

~

f

I

12

l

,I '

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session ;- Plenary Meetings

133. In 1970 the over-all development progress of the
developing countries achieved a growth rate of 5 per cent.
That was also the average growth rate of the 1960s-a rate
not regarded as satisfactory by the countries most con·
cerned. The developing countries are conscious of their own
problems: rapid population growth; rampant unemployment; haphazard urbanization; inadequate housing;
undiversified and meagre diets; insufficient facilities for
health and education. They eau and are tackling those
problems by their own efforts and with outside help when
it is available. But they suffer greatly from other problems
not of their making and outside their control.
b4. This globe is but a small world. Economic impulses
are transmitted from one country to another almost
immediately. Inflation in one country is quickly exported
to another, and the more powerful the inflation-producing
country, the more widespread the havoc. It is obvious that
the main responsibility for finding solutions rests with
those that possess the greatest economic strength. An
orderly economic expansion of the rich countries is vital
not only for their own benefit but also for the progress of
the developing countries, which depend on the delicate
links of international trade and fmance for the wherewithal
to meet their own development ambitions.
135. Bearing that in mind, Jamaica believes that, should
the enlargement of the Europe~"l Economic Community
come about, due consideration will be given in the
formulation of its future plans and policies to the needs of
the developing countries-and, in particular, th()se whose
economies will be seriously affected by the merger.
136. My delegation welcomes the progress made at the
fifty-first session of the Economic and Social Council in the
area of global and regional co·operation. At that session a
genuine effort was made to reorganize the functioning of
the Council, which is the main policy·making body of the
United Nations system in the economic and social fields. A
standing committee on matters relating to the transfer of
operative science and technology to the developing coun·
tries was established by Council resolution 1621 B (LI), and
we welcome the recognition by the Council of the
increasing rola which regional economic commissions
should play in the advancement of the interests of the
countries which they service.
137. We look forward with high expectation to the
forthcoming meeting of minist(lrS from the developing
countries to be held in Lima, Peru, and to a successful
conclusion of the work of the third session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade" and Development, which will
be convened in Santiago, Chile, in 1972. In the midst of all
these preparations, it is hoped that there will be an early
resumption of confident trading on the international,
financial, .commodity and other markets. That return to
confidence is necessary for trade amongst developed and
developing countries, for the promotion of East-West trade
and for trade among the developing countries themselves.
138. The application of science and technology to development isa question which hlstorically has not been given
great attention in the developing countries. Many of those
countries have. achieved their independence without having
inherited the scientific institutions and technological infra-

structures that would allow them to implement adequate
development policies. We are thus faced with the double
task of trail'Jng manpower while at the same time establishing institutions and carrying out development plans.
139. Jamaica therefore welcomes the United Nations
World Plan of Action for the Application of Science and
Technology to Development and expects to co-operate
fully with the Secretary-General in that regard. If, by the
misapplication of science and technology in the past, the
developed countries have polluted the atmosphere and the
oceans, and if the problems of health and poor liVing
conditions in the developing countries have remained
unalleviated because of a lack of science and technology,
then that is all the more reason why all countries, both
developed and developing, should co·operate with the
Secretary-General so that his world plan will contain a
co-ordinated set of ideas which can act as a guide to their
Governments in implementing their particular national
strategy.
140. The link between environment, development and
technology is too obvious for a.'1.y Government to ignore. It
is no longer necessary to impress upon representatives or
upon the public at large the dangers inherent in the present
ecological state of affairs which have been brought about
by one-sided development and the ruthless exploitation of
natural resources.
141. The United Nations system now offers us a new
opportunity for global planning and for future development
which we cannot but grasp willingly. Relative to our
resources, the correction of past mistakes can be costly, but
let me here and now emphasize that, from the preliminary
research which has so far been done, it is becoming quite
obvious that development planning which takes account of
environmental factors need not be more costly than
development planning which ignores the environment. Let
us not be deterred by the larger number of inputs reqUired
for environmental planning. The fact is that even in the
short-run the outputs from this type of planning can be
much more comprehensive, useful and economic than from
ad hoc decision-making.
142. We recognize that waste should not be regarded as "an
inevitable nuisance. We now recognize that noxious gases·
which have been released and·which pollute the atmosphere .
can be a squrce of valuable raw materials. We now recogitize
that with. environmental plannin:g~~E.tural resources need
not be wasted, and th}).t throughenv1rDnmental planning
techniques investmentscmade at.a, particular ·point in time
can be saved from obs6lescence for much longer period.
.
.
~.'-

a

143. Bearing all those considerations in mind, my delegation expresses the hope that this session of the General
Assembly will take measures to ensure that each and every
country on earth will have access on an equal footing to the
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, to
be held at Stockholm in 1972. We cannot expect to have
the world half polluted and half clean.
144. Jamaica attaches the greatest i1J.1portance to the
activities being pursued under United Nations auspices
regarding the law of the sea, the utilization of the resources
of the sea, and the preservation of the sea as a clean,

I.

r, i

I:

1957th meeting -7 October 1971
healthy and natural resource for the benefit of all mankind.
Delegations from Jamaica have actively participated in
conferences and seminars sponsored by the United. Nations
on these questions. We look forward to an early agreement
on the establishment of a new internRtional regime for the
seas and oceans. However, we cannot but feel some disquiet
over the reticence on the part of some Powers \.0 recognize
that the time has come when no nation can seek to capture
for itself, and exploit in a haphazard manner, the resources
of the sea-bed and of the ocean floor.

,,\.

t

145. The changes and turns of history have given a few
great Powers the technology necessary for such exploitation. Their technological developments in ocean-floor
exploration and utilization are proceeding, but these seem
aimed at selfish national advancement. Do the great Powers
really imagine that they can now carve up the ocean floor
among themselves in the same way as they pre.viously
carved up the land into colonies?
146. While there might have been an excuse in earlier
centuries for a chauvinistic approach to the exploitation of
those natural resources not yet belonging to any individual
or group of individuals, today we have adequate machinery
wittrln the United Nations to ensure that a peaceful and
harmonious development of the ocean floor takes place in a
manner consistent with the over-all needs of all countries,
large and small, developed as well as developing.
147. The fishing rights of the developing countries in their
off-shore waters should be preserved. The technologically
advanced nations cannot hope to squander their own
fishing resources and merciles~ly exploit the off-shore
fishing of other countries and appropriate to themselves the
resources of the ocean floor. The Government of Jamaica
looks forward to a sane and humanitarian approach to the
settlement of these problems in the future meetings and
conferences of the various bodies within the United Nations
system, and in the forthcoming conference on the law of
the sea.

i,
j
I

!:
. --

;..J

~;
~

.'

~

148. Last year in his address to the General Assembly my
Prime Minister underlined the necessity for us to relieve the
United Nations of the burden of responsibility for the
exclusion of the People's Republic of China [1875th
meeting, para. 49]. He also noted, however, that the
principle of universal membership and simple realism called
for a solution which would recognize that the millions of
people in Taiwan de facto stand outside the political
authority of Peking.
149. The present session sees us actively seeking a solution
to this problem, "with which the international community
has grappled for some two decades. My delegation feels that
a new sense of reality has been brought into this Organization by the increasing recognition of the fact that a quarter
of the world's population cannot remain unrepresented in
these halls. But we also note that there are certain rel!lities
in the situation in east Asia which need to be borne in
mind: de facto, the Government of Taiwan has exercised
effective control over that country for over two decades.
By any accepted concept of international law, this would
normally constitute a right to separateness-a separateness
which the international community should be willing to
recognize. We neit.1ter assume nor believe that it is beyond

13

the bounds of present-day diplomacy to .fmd a formula
which could give to the People's Republic of China its
United Nations representation, including a permanent seat
on the Security Council, a.qd a seat in the General Assembly
to Taiwan.
150. Is the time not right for all the so-called divided
States which de facto have op(lrated for two decades or
more as separate entities to be given their rightful voices in
the worl<l forum? Such a global solution of these problems
which have been the accidents of war could surely be
designated a great leap forward by the United Nations.
Whether or not a decision on the representation of China i8
finally taken at this session, my delegation expresses the
hope that the Assembly will be able to turn its attention
this year to the problem of the divided States and their
admi&>ion to the United Nations. My delegation will
co-operate with other Member States in appropriate initiatives which may be taken to that end.
151. It is with regret that the question of the Middle East,
far from being settled, is regarded by many as one of the
intractable problems of the world. My delegation once
more expresses its heartfelt sympathy to all those persons
who have been uprooted from their homelands and to their
offspring, who have never known a home. A solution must
be found whereby these unfortunate people can be made to
feel that they have not been swept aside by the tide of
history and that the world community will never refuse to
recognize L1.eir claim to a just se":tlemellt. It is still the view
of ~'Jy delegatil>il that the issue of resettlement still holds
the :,ey to the solution of the Middle East problem.
152. We appeal to nations not to use the Middle East as a
pawn in the game of power politics. It cannot be in the
current interest of the great Powers for thing:: to remain as
they are. The situation continues to be a strain upon
commercial relations between the countries of the Indian
and Atlantic Oceans and represents a fmancial burden upon
the international community. Again, my delegation would
urge that this Assembly establish a new commission to seek
and fmd solutions for the plight of the refugees and to
prepare proposals for their resettlement and compensation.
153. As if the long-standing probiem of the Palestinians
was not enough, this year has seen a sudden increase of
many millions in the world's refugees as the domestic
disagreements of the people of Pakistan have spilled over
national boundaries. When all the possible exaggerations
and overstatements have been allowed for, the present
situation and the plight of the refugees still remain a human
tragedy of monumental proportions. There is no State
Member of this Organiiation that is not moved by the
immensity of the misfortune and would not help to fmd
solutions if it could.
154. The political dispute is indeed a domestic affair of
the sovereign nation of Pakistan and as such is not a matter
of international concern; but the possibility always exists
that external involvement could make it a threat to
international peace and· security. Apart from this possibility, however, my Government is concerned primarily
wi~hthe humanitarian problem of the refugees. Jamaica
supports the United Nations efforts made so far to. gain
access to the refugees, to ascertain the facts concerning

I'

,t.I-

t

I

ii
?

14

:

;

f
r,

ii

,.

,

\1
~I
,
I·".

!

I
f

1

1

I

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings

their condition and to appreciate the circumstances in
which their return to their homeland might be made
possible. In the same way my Govermnent supports the
United Nations efforts to restore basic infra-structure,
repair roads and bridges, reopen waterways and otherwise
assist in restoring the normal life of these communities.

problems of peace and want, can e~erge only out of the
continuing spirit of co-operation and the realities demanded
of all of us here. The future of the Organization and the
realization of the ideals expressed 1..-1 its Charter rest
squarely on the international community. Jamaica will
continue to fulm its responsibilities to this end.

155. We know that many distinguished individuals have
offered their good offices in this tragedy. Many governments are quite ",;lling to do the same. We can only hope
that a way will be found by which this willingness to help
might be conwrted into effective help.

16 L Mr. KHALID (Sudan): Your election to this office,
Mt. President, is a tribute to your distingUished self, a man
of purpose and integrity; to your great country, a country
to which mine is related by faith and heritage; and to the
whole of the non-aligned family. Tne Sudan wishes you
success in discharging your onerous task and steering this
~ession of the Assembly to a happy completion of its
agenda in the best tradition of your predecessor, Edvard
Hambro of Nonvay, an erudite scholar and a fInished
diplomat.

156. The situation in the southern countries of the
African continent continues to be a cause for grave
concern. The Territories over which the Government of
Portugal still exercises colonial control are in turmoil, with
the tide of rebellion and depression sweeping backward and
forward across t.~e face of the land. Under de facto illegal
regime, apartheid moves gradually into all aspects of the
social and economic life of Rhodesia. No amelioration of
this policy of apartheid is in sight. Only in Na1t'jbia is there
a ray of hope.
157. At last year's session of this Assembly my Prime
Minister urged the United Nations to go to the rescue of the
people of Namibia [1875th meeting, para. 66]. Since then,
by majority vote, the ltlternational Court of Justice has
rendered its advisory opiPion on the legality of the South
African presence in Namibia. s We have been told that no
legal basis exists for that continued presence. A foundation
has been laid for such action as the United Nations might
choose to take within the limits permitted by the Charter
to remove that South African presence. The Jamaican
delegation supports the initiative taken by a number of
Member States in urging the Security Council to give
practical effect to the legal opinion. In my country's
judgement, the international community has a solemn
obligation which it should no longer postpone.
158. let us continue to address ourselves also to another
decolonization problem: the fate of small unviable colonial
and Trust Territories. In this connexion, I repeat my Prime
MitPster's proposal of last year that a Committee should be
set up to study possible terms of their association with the
United Nations.
159. In closing, I should like to express the gratitude of
my I!elegation to the staff members of the United Nations
for their untiring service in die cause of peace. In particular,
I wish to place on record the high appreciation of the
Government and people of Jamaica to Dr. Ralph Bunche,
who, for the fIrst time that I can recall in these many years,
is not with us in this hall. His dedicated and imaginative
contributions to the improvement of the lot of the world
community have received international recognition and
have brought prestige and honour to the United Nations.
160. Solutions to the many difficulties which beset
international relations and answers to the intractable
5 Legal· Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
South Africa.· in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), AdVisory Opinion, LC.J.
Reports 19.71, p. 16,

162. The Macedonians earned Plutarch's description:
"... rude and uncivic", because, in his words, "they call a
spade a spade". All societies have their established sense of
decency. A departure from the beaten track offends that
sense. But tradition need not be preserved to the point of
polite sterility. So, in departing from the beaten track in
this general debate, I hope that I will not place myself in
the category of the uncivic.
163. last year we came here to celebrate, in solemnity
and dignity, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations. The gathering was impressive. The deliberations
were serious and dignifIed. The mood of the world was one
of stock-taking and self-examination. The United Nations,
to the world, was meant to achieve a new heaven and a new
earth. It failed to do so. The imperatives of the new era
were peace, freedom and progress. But in many parts of the
world, our part of the world, peace is still remote, freedom
denied, and progress unattainable.
164. That session ended with a h"ppy tone. The President
of the General Assembly chose to call it a session " ... of
hope and of commitment to the ideals of the United
Nations from all geographical groups, across political,
philosophical and ideological boundaries" [1933rd meeting,
para. 381].
165. We have solemnly handed down to the world two
historic documents that were painstakingly elaborated: the
International Developme.lt Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade [resolution 2626 (XXV)] ,
and the Declaration on Principles of International Law
Concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
[resolution 2625 (XXV)]. A year has elapsed since those
solemn declarations on peace and friendly relations and on
development were adopted. It will be an indulgence in
self-delusion if we say that the world today is better off
because of adherence to them.
166. On peace and friendly relations, satisfaction was
expressed here, and by many a speaker, over recent
achievements in the direction of peace. The satisfaction is
indeed justifiable and we share it: satisfaction over achievt,;ments in Europe, in the normalization of relations between
the Federal Republic of Germany and. its East European
neighbours: the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin, signed

,•.• ~,"=\,r·v"'''''''''''·:·''''''.'""""'--""'"""'=~:'''''=-''''':-=''''<:'''''';:''''":'''''';''-:..=""""""""",,~,--~~, .•"",.-"-~~~_._-_._-~-~ ..
I"

1957th meeting - 7 October 1971 .

e
d

at Berlin, on 3 September 1971, and the preparation for an
all-European Conference; satisfaction over the glimpses of
hope in Asia, discerned in the peace proposals of Hanoi,
which might lead to a breakihrough, if. only foreign
aggression abates. All those are hot-beds of trouble where
nasty and brutish confrontation rages or its danger looms
large.

e

t

1

n

167. But In our effusive expressions of satisfaction, we
failed to underline also the cardinal fact within our context
here at the United Nations: the fact that in all those
agreements, in all those cases, the United Nations remains
on the periphery.

y

e

1

s
s
i
i

168. hi the field of development we outlined a Strategy
based on certain trends of inte.national trade and development and adopted it. We emphasized, individually and
collectively our will and commitment to implement those
policy measures.

f

169. To us, in the developing world, who want to hurtle
into the twentieth century, the task is impossible. United
Nations statistics reveal to us grim facts: that only half of
the children between 5 and 14 are at school, that 790
million people are illiterate, that 50 per cent of our labour
force is under-utilized, that water supply is not available to
90 per cent of the people in our rural areas. My countrf,
like many others in the third world, is suffering from these
problems and deprivations.

t

f

170. I wish to dwell on one of those problems, the
development of water resources, a problem which has
reached disastrous proportions in my country. The figures
are alarming. Our statistics tell us that the minimum water
requirement for man and animal is calculated at 240 million
cubic metres. Under our present scheme of things, only 60
million cubic metres are available. With an annual population increase of 2.g per cent and an annual animal increase
of 6 per cent, the basic total amount required in 25 years
would be 670 million cubic metres. Given our present
resources and ability, we need 69 years to meft basic needs
for humans and animals. But if we have to irrigate and
develop our arable land of 200 million acres with our
present capabilities, we would need 1,000 years.
171. It is for this reason that my Government has
launched a World Anti-Thir;;t Campaign, which was inaugurated in Khartoum on 20 February 1970 by Josip Broz
Tito, President of Yugoslavia.

",'

172. hiternational assistance came from many countries,
and to all of them we express gratitude. However, I wish to
single out three of them as examples of solidarity with the
less privileged nations: Sweden, which has shown and
continues to show an ever-increasing interest in this serious
human problem, Yugoslavia and Nigeria.
173. Going back to the world situation, grimmer statistics
were also revealed: 7.2 per cent of the 'World's gross
national product goes into military expenditure-exactly
the same amount that is spent for health and education in
the whole world-5 per cent for education and 2 per cent
for health.
174. The world cannot, of course, be changed overnight.
Efforts, both national and international, should not relent

15

and solemn pledges should be respected. However, it has
taken only a decision of one State to disrupt the operation
of the international monetary system, which has had
serious repercussions on the pattern of international trade,
the flow of technical and financial assistance, the balance of
payments and the development efforts of all States.
175. Addressing this Assembly last year at the commemorative session [1859th meeting], we said that the United
Nations remams on the periphery of events, be it in the
field of peace-making or development. We said that, as long
as the United Nations remams marginal in the great Powers'
concept of foreign policy, the Organization will continue to
be hindered from effectively discharging its basic responsibilities.
176. The attitude of the major Powers, both within and
without the Organization, continues to be the most
important-though not the only-erosive factor. The selfimposed policemanship, the imperial outposts, the subversion of established Governments, the pre-eminence of
national and strategic interests over international obligations, are all situations which are not concomitant with a
world order.
177. In so saying, it is our intention neither to deny nor to
undermine the power of the major nations inherent in the
Charter. All that we call for is the realization on their part
that power has its own compulsions and ,that it has to be
exercised alongside a correlative sense of responsibility. One
of the great masters of power politics of this country in
which we are meeting, Theodore Roosevelt, saidin one of
his better moments: "I beJj~ve in power; but I believe also
that responsibility s.llOUld go with it."
178. And we smaller nations-where do we stand in the
face of all that? Should we allow the strategic and national
interests of the major Powers to continue to actuate their
policies to the detriment of world order, the interests ofthe
rest of the world, and, sometimes, the norms of international morality? Should we leave the destiny of our own
peoples and continents to be determined by others?
Should we allow ourselves to be passive pawns in an
international game?
.
179. The non-aligned group-of which my country and
yours, Mr. President, are founding members-was created
because of our concern with the right of all our peoples to
freedom and independence, their rightto a free choice ,of
forms and ways of internal development, their right to
sovereignty, their right to territorial integrity, and their
refusal to mortgage their independence at any cost.
180. The Conferences of Bandung, Belgrade, Cairo and
Lusaka have asserted those principles. They, have also
marked our will to resist hegemony and designs to drag us
into zones, of influence and dubious alliances.
181. Within the United Nations, the non-aligned group
this year-more than at any time before-is asserting its role
and its place. Our family. has been enhanced by the
participation of the fIrst Latin American country, Chile,
with its great tradition of liberty and independence. And it
is only through. the unrelenting efforts to put an end to
hegemony made by the non-aligned nations, together with

16

\

f
i

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings

many of their friends of the third world wpjch, for one
reason or another, did not join our family, that a more
balanced world order can be established. This effort must
also take the form of completing the unfinished national
revolution and I believe t1:lat there is more to nationalism
than just a patriotic sense deriving from the possession of
real estate.
182. Politically, the unfinished revolution has to be
achieved by aiding our brothers and sisters still fighting for
the attainment of their independence and basic human
rights. It has to be achieved by stimulating national
integration, often disrupted by the manoeuvres of some of
the etStwhile colonial. Powers. It has to be achieved by the
completion of the transfer of the real centres of decision
from the ''metropole'' to the homeland.
183. Culturally, the unfmished revolution has to be
achieved by ending the alienation of our elite. It has to be
achiev~d by acculturating our social and technical development. It has to be achieved through educating our illiterate
masses. It is only through self-realization and the affirmation of cultural identity that we can contribute to the
civilization of the universal. In many instances today we are
only appendages, we are not an enriching complement.
184. Economically, the unfinished revolution in the third
world has to be achieved through the inculcation of the
principles of self-help in our people and in our systems, in
accelerating the process of economic co-operation and
integration in· our regions and subregions, in diverting all
our energies into the main task of development, and in
reinforcing and furthering the principles of the Charter of
Algiers and the second session of UNCTAD at New Delhi.
185. General Edgardo Mercado Jarrm, the Foreign Minister of Peru, had an important message to convey to us the
other day when he said:
"•.. the true freedom of the peoples of the third world
can only be achieved when they are able to free
themselves n.ot only from th.e economic and political
control of others, but also from the cultural and
ideological control of the great centres of power ..."

[1947th meeting, para. 9J.
And General Jarrin could not have been more apt when. he
added that the emergence of the third world is one of the
great revolutiona..-y conditions of the day, both at home
and internationally. It is internationally where the new
image has to be more clearly reflected and amplified.
186. The polarization of the 1950s, within and without
the United Nations, might well become a matter of the past
on.the admission of the People's Republic of China to the
United Nations. We have noted. with satisfaction the
positive, though· hesitant, steps taken by the United States
of America this year towards. a normalization of relations
with that great country. But we have followed with concern
the. efforts .of. the United States in this Organization to
introduce a new element that threatens to wreck all that
was hitherto achieved.
187. As far as the Sudan is concerned, we wish to affirm
that we shall· fight every attempt through procedural

manoeuvres or constitutional artifice that would stop the
People's Republic of China from joining our ranks here in
this Organization. And we are detennined to see to it that
the question of the representation of China this year: I
cease to be unfmished business on the agenda of lJle
General Assembly.
188. To the third world the United Nations is essential.
We do not want to erode its influence through actions that
shake carefully established balances. But we do not want
others, the major Powers, to corrode its influence, either
through cynicism or through the undisciplined exercise of
power. The late Prime Minister of India, Jawaharlal N~hru,
addressing the General Assembly on the occasion of its
fifteenth session, had this to say:
'''The structure of the United Nations when it started
was weighted in favour of Europe and the Americas. It
did not seem to us to be fair to the countries of Asia and
Africa, but we appreciated the difficulties of the situation
and did not press for any changes. With the grovJth of the
United Nations and with more countries coming into it,
that structure today is still more unbalanced. Even so, we
wish to proceed slowly and with agreement and not to
press for any change which would involve an immediate
amendment of the Charter and the raising of heated
controversies. Unfortunately, we live in a split world
which is constantly coming up against the basic assumptions of the United Nations. We have to bear with this
and try to move ever more forward to that conception of
full co-operation between nations. That co-operation does
not and must not mean any domination of one country
'by another, any coercion or compulsion forcing any
countf'j to line up with another country. Each country
has something to give and something to take from others.
The moment coercion is exercised, that country's freedom is not only impaired but also its growth suffers."
[882nd meeting, para. Ill.J
189. Eleven years have since passed, during which the
United Nations has grown, but the problems of the world
have grown even more. But actions on the part of the major
Powers-often the super Powers-continue to derogate from
the authority of the Organization. Such a derogation is seen
in the exclusion of the Organization from major policy
decisions. It is seen in actions detracting from the initiative
of its Secretary-General, an initiative inherent in Article 99
of the Charter. It is seen in pretexts for tax evasion,
resulting in impoverishing the Organization's coffers, be
they pretexts of bilateral commitments or the inadmissibility ofrespomibility for past ills.
190. This tragic fmancial situation cannot fail to have its
political implications, as was aptly depicted by the Secretary-General in thc;; introduction to his report on the work
of the Organization:

"It would cause me deep personal sorrow and· regret if
my service as Secretary-General were to end on this note.
Unfortunately the tragedy-far transcends any personal
aspect: what is at stake is the Organization, for which we
have all held, and continue to hold, such high hopes
despite the fact that its credit standing and reputation
have already been seriously impaired by its fmancial
plight." [A/8401/Add.l, para. 122.J

1957th meeting - 7 October 1971

the
e in
that

1
Lfie

tial.
that
rant
ther
~ of

~ru,

. its

~ted

;.It

and
:ion
the
lit,
we
tto
iate
ted
lrld
up-

this

lof
oes
try

my
try
~rs.

'ee·

's."
the
rld

jor
)ffi

ien
icy
ive

99
>n,
be
;si-

its
re,rk

if
te.

lal

"e,es
)n

ial

191. And in this connexion, I wish to place on record the
complete trust and confidence the Sudan has in U Thant. I
wish also to exprellJ our sincere hope t.lIat he will, despite
what he has said in the past, enable this Organization to
continue to draw from his inexhaustible reserve of sagacity
and patience.
192. I said that, where we in the United Nations are
directly involved in peace-making, our credit side of the
ledger is pitifully meagre. I would like to refer specifically
to two areas of conflict: Africa and the Middle East. And I
am not doing this only because the problems in those areas
are nearer home.
193. In Africa, the unholy trinity of South Africa,
Portug~l and Rhodesia continues to persist in its crimes
agaL.'1St humanity. This Assembly listened last rear to the
speech of President Julius Nyerere of the United Republic
of Tanzania [1867th meeting]. It haJ lis ened this year
[1938th meeting] to the moving appeal of President
Moktar Ouid Daddah of Mauritania. Both Presidents came
here to mark the concern of Africa with this problem.
President Nyerere came here to request that elementary
justice to be done to fellow men. President OuId Dadd2h
came here to appeal for a sacrifice, by the great Powers of
the West, of short-term solidarity for a wider engagement in
humanity.
194. For three weeks five African Ministers, speaking on
behalf of the Organization of African Unity-Mr. Makonnen
of Ethiopia, Mr. Grimes of Liberia, Mr. Arikpo of Nigeria,
Mr. Hassane of Chad, and myself-have bee"l here at the
United Nations to deal with one episode of the southern
African drama, the case of Namibia. And it js distress'ng to
note that some people have given us the impression of being
exhausted by what seems to be an interminable problem.
The record of this Assembly's resolutions upholding the
rule of law in South Africa, Rhodesia and Namibia is
impressive. The constant urgings and advice of the &lcretary-General-often unheeded-are gratifying. But it is
regrettable that the only absentee fr0m t.lUs honourable
endeavour is the major law-enforCing organ of the United
Nations, the Security Council. It is all the more regrettable
that this inaction is generally prompted by considerations
of strategic interests, inherited patterns of aid and trade, or,
in some cases, the sheer reactionary lust of some private
concerns which are powerful back home. 'Those who covet
gold do not often sin by cov~ting honour.
195. In coming here we intend neither to engage hi a
sterile debate nor to force unrealistic decisions. At the same
time, we do not !ntend to pace the, carpets of the Assembly
halls awaiting futile resolutions. Africa is impatient, and its
impatience is legitimate.
196. In addressing themselves to us, some have chosen to
urge moderation and dialogue. But in a state of desperation
all calls for moderation are meaningless. And those who
listened to South Africa, in the Security Council, exulting
over its reactionary and racial policies, can well ask
themselves how one can engage in dialogue with that
country. South Africa is persisting in upholding the most
pernicious and obsolete concept of the social order.
Portugal is determined to fight' to the last NATO gun to
maintain a decaying empire. Africa appeals fof action on

-17

th~

part of the United Nations, especially the Security
Council. But Africa also wishes to tell the world that
African land south of the Zambeli represents the front line
of its struggle for freedom and justice-and it is a struggle
that Africa is determined to continue with unabated vigour.
197. In tile Middle East a combustible sitlll!.tion continues
to exist, with all the imponderables of sudden eruption. I
wish here to say that the term "Middle East" is euphemistic; the problem at issue is Israeli occupation of Arab
territories and the restoration of the rights of the Palestinian people-and the word is "people", not "refugees".
198. The incurable optimists were telling us that happy
tidings were coming from the direction of Tel Aviv. It was
for that reason that we listened with iuterest the other day
[1946th meeting] to Mr. Abba Eban. the Israeli Foreign
:Minister. But Mr. Eban ca.rne here with an eloquent speech
to embellish an old theme. He tried t" words and wit to
paint a picture of a new world ot reconciliation and
dialogue as evidenced by the European detente and
normalization, as if Palestine were Upper Silesia. He also
tried to chart what he described as a new road for peace.
But Mr. Eban's endeavour was-and the words 1&111 quotL'lg
are from The New York Times of 4 October 1971-"... an
excursion into familiar byways" when stalled peace talks
are desperately in Deed of new wl'ections.
199. The problem, as I said, is plain: aggressive occupation
of the territories of :.1ember States, which is condemned by
all. the world, including the United Nations. And occupation tS occupation, and no stylist rhetoric can ref'me it.
200. Restoration of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and calls on international charity may eclipse
the facts in the eyes of the half-educated but will never
extinguish the reality.
201. Even The New Yark Times was not impressed with
Mr. Eban's vision of this problem. To the Times, Mr. Eba'l's
statement 011 the Palestinian issue was "a detour leading
nowhere as long as practically every country involved insists
on treating the Palestinians merely as refugees and not as a
nation stillborn, now already clanlouring for life".
202. Mr. Eban is understandably not happy that the whole
world does not share his vision of the problem.' He has
therefore chosen to engage in a dangerous role of disdain
for the Assembly and its decisions. To him, our decisions
on 'the Arab-Israeli problem represent a pre-ordained
triumph of automatic majorities. This was indeed his mood
even before addressing us. The· Christian Science. Monitor
tells us, in its 9 September issue, that Mr. Eban, before
leaving Jerusalem, had this to say:

;,-'

"If the Arab States decide· that the earth is flat and not
round" they will immediately have some 50 votes in th~
United Nations to support :mch a decision."
But Mr. Eban knows more than anyone else that it was one
of those so-called automatic majorities that gave birth to
the State of hrael itself.
203. Mr. Eban also reserved a certain measure of contempt
for the Security Council, where, according to him, decisions

,

,~

,

18

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings

are based on sentimental or ethnic predilections. The
contemptuous and arrogant 1ejection by Israel of Security
CouncH resolution 298 (1971) on Jerusalem is in consonance with this line of thinking. It would indeed be a sad
world if decisions were to be taken in our Council on the
basis of ethnic l!ffinities or afftliation by pigmentation.
204. Mr. Eban, perhaps conveniently, saw fit not to pose a
simple question to himself: why is the majority of the
world condemning Israel? -the majority of the world,
including some of Israel's traditional friends. A victory that
leaves the victor lonely is a desolate victory, particularly if
we look at it within lJ. broader historical context.
205. The issues in the Middle EasL qu~stion are simple:
withdrawal of foreign troops of occupation, and restoration
of the inalienable rights of the people of Palestine.

211. Mr. ISMAIL (people's Democrati<: Republic of
Yemen): The delegation of the People's Democratic Repub·
lic of Yemen has, on several occasions, made its position
clear regarding the admission of Oman to membership in
the United Nations and it wishes again today to express the
.;ame position in respect of the recommendation of the
Fourth Committee on the question of Oman which is
contained in the report now under consideration.

Les
Ma
Mau
New
Para
Ron
Afri
Rep

Tw:
Uni
Tan
Ven

212. With due respect to the Fourth Committee, my
delegation is astonished to see that Committee, which oVbr
many years has always considered Oman as a coloiUal issue,
suddenly change its ftrm position and cede to the allegation
of the United Kingdom that Oman has achieved the goals
set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples.

TI
206. Mr. Eban has taken us on an excursion of wit, as far
as metaphysical wit can fly. He does not answer the basic
questions. The questions, as expounded in Ambassador
Jarring's aide-memoire of 8 February 1971 [A/8541,
annex I] are still open for an answer. Witty equivocation
does not help; indeed, it can be an added stimulus to
mistrust.
207. Let me close by saying that, to us 111 the third world,
the United Nations, despite all its imperfections, will
continue to offer the unique possibility for enlightened
international action.. Despite disappointments, our hopes
for a better world order, though idealistic, shall not
dwindle. For, in the words of Chesterton, to say that a man
is an idealist is merely to say that he is a man.

1 ab

213. In fact, Oman has not achieved such goals and is still
under colonial rule. No independence has been declared;
nor has the Britl::h political and military presence been
eliminated.
214. We still maintain our views. Thus our vote will be
against the recommendation of the Fourth Committee-and
we regret this-to "conclude consideration of the item
entitled 'Question of Oman' ".

219.

215. We reserve our right to explain our vote when the
next item, on the admission of Oman, is considered by this
Assembly.
216. The Rapporteur of the Fourth Committee, as he
presented the report now under consideration, said:

AGENDA ITEM 69
Question of Oman: report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Gnmting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples
REPORT OF THE FOURTH COMMITTEE (A/8456)
208. Mr. TADESSE (Ethiopia), Rapporteur of the Fourth
Committee: I have the honour to introduce the report of
the Fourth Committee on agenda item 69 [AI8456], which
contains a draft consensus in paragraph 6.
209. When it decided to submit this draft consensus to the
General Assembly, it wa~ clearly understood by the Fourth
Conllnittee that, in view of the limited time availablewhich did not permit as wide a consultation as possibleand taking into account the circumstances which reqUired
priority consideration of tI~e item, any Member States
wishing to put forward their view~ on Lite matter would be
given the opportunity to do so when the report of the
Fourth Committee was placed before the General Assembly
for examination.

Pursuant to rule 68 of the rules of procedure, it was
decided not to discuss the report of the Fourth Committee.
210. The PRESIDbi-.IT: I shall now call on the representative of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, who
wishes to explain his vote before the voting.

"When it decided to submit this draft consensus to the
General Assembly, it was clearly understood by the
Fourth Committee that, in view of the limited time
available-which did not permit as wide a consultation as
possible"that meansh<lt c0nsuitation was not as wide as possible
and that a cOlisensus took its place.
217. We regret to have to ask for a recorded vote on this
item.
222.
its
Nati

218. The PRESIDEfIll: The General Assembly will now
vote on the draft consensus recommended by the Fourth
Committee, which is contained in paragraph 6 of its report
[AI8456]. A recorded vote has been requested.

A recorded WJte was taken.
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Bhutan,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Cant-la, Central African
Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Cyprus,
Czechoslovakia, Dahomey, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Khmer Republic, Kuwait, Lebanon,

6
..

l

was

-

6:

,.

1957th meeting -7 October 1971

, ',~

~'

(

a

i.

19

Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Republic, Luxembourg,
addition, thele are bases under construction in Salalah and
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Masira. From these bases British aircraft not only strike at
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands,
the revolution in the area, but go further by committing
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
continuous aerial infringements of the borders of our
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic. The most recent of these occurred on 17
Romania, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South
September 1971, on the eastern border of the Republic,
Africa, Spain, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab
about which we have protested to the Government of the
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia;' United Kindgom.
Turkey, Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Republic of
224. The People's Democratic RepUblic of Yemen, which
Tanzania, United States of America, Upper Volta, Uruguay,
has brotherly relations with the people of the Arabian Gulf
Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Z!Ullbia.
and shares a common history and destiny with them,
cannot be convinced that this is a real independence.
Against: Cuba, People's Democratic Republic of Yemen.

Abstaining: Saudi Arabia.
The consensus was adopted by 115 votes to 2, with
1 abstention.
AGENDA ITEM 25
Admission of new Members to the United Nations
(continued) *
219. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council has
unaninlOusly recommended the admission of Oman to
membership in the United Nations {A/8449] and in this
connexion the General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution {A/L.636 and Add. I] .
220. Mr. AULAQI (people's Democratic Republic of
Yemen):6 Mr. President, may I congratulate you on behalf
of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen on yot\r
election as President of this Assembly. We consider this as a
tribute to yourself and to the friendly people of Indonesia
with whom the people of the People's Democratic Republic
ef Yemen have been linked by bonds of friendship and
co-operation for many centuries.
221. The delegation of the People's Democratic Republic
of Yemen explained its position regarding t.lie request for
the admission of Oman to the United Nations in the
Security Council at its 1587th meeting held on 30
September 1971.
222. Today my delegation wishes to explain the reason for
its opposition to the admission of Oman to the United
Nations.
223. The false declarations of independence of the Sultanates and Emirates in the Arabian Gulf do not change the
state of affairs existing in the area. It is a well-known fact
that those who have declared independence do not represent the people and their aspirations, and that they are
totally under the domination and influence of the British
advisers and the commanders of British military bases still
existing in various parts of the Gulf area. According to the
BBC, on 8 September 1971, a British company concluded a
contract for the construction of a new naval base in Muscat,
thereby making Oman a British military and naval base. In

* Resumed from the 1934th meeting.
6 Mr. Aulaqi spoke in Arabic. The English version of his statement
was supplied by the delegation.

225. Last year at its 1928th meeting the General Assembly adopted resolution 2702 (XXV), which emphasizes that
Oman is still a colony. Paragraph 6 of the resolution
requests the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the hnplementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to follow closely the developments regarding the
colonial situation in the Territory and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session.
226. May I inquire about this report? WJ.s it to be
submitted by the Special Committee? How is it that Oman
became an independent country so suddenly? To exchange
Said bin Taimur for his son does not necessarily transform
Oman from a colony to an independent country; and a
declaration of independence by an Omani Sultan does not
change the fact that Oman is a colony. Since the 1950s the
United Kingdom has claimed that Oman is an independent
State, but the United Nations has never accepted that
claim. It has c_ontinued to consider Oman a British colony.
What changes have now occurred to make Oman eligible to
join this international Organization?
227. The United Nations is, under the circumstances,
faced with two choices-either to stand by its principles and
resolutions and recognize the Omani people and their
revolution, or to stand against its values and objectives and
consider an application for membership by Qabus, who is
under British protection, ignoring the fact that he is not an
independent Sultan and does not rule an independent
nation. In the latter event the United Nations will be
recognizing the membership of Qabus and the British air
and naval bases.
228. The People's Democratic Republic of Yemen regrets
the recommendation of the Security Council to the General
Assembly and feels the disappointment of the peoples of
the area with regard to admitting Oman into this international Organization. We therefore urge the General··
Assembly to abide by the resolutions adopted in past years.

{The speaker continued in English.]
229. My delegation requests a recorded vote regarding this
issue.
.
230. The PRESIDENT: We shall now vote on draft
resolution A/L.636 and Add.!.

A recorded vote was taken.

LS'

a W

I t d ica

20
General Assembly - Twenty·sixth Session - Plenary Meetings
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Argentina, hopes and aspirations. The Omams have the indomitable
Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Bhutan,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Burundi, Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Cameroon, Canada, Central African
Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Chile, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Dahomey, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Khmer Republic, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Republic, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal,
Netherlan&, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, People's Republic of the
Congo, Peru, Philippines, Poland, P~...rtuga1, Qatar, Romania,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa,
Spain, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia.

spirit which braved the waters of the sea and carried the
humane message of Islam to the shores of Africa. I feel
confident that they \vill show the same high-mindedness
and tenacity in serving the cause of peace and international
security. I firmly beHeve that Oman will strive to promote
the principles enshrined in the Charter and to uphold the
rule of law. Its admission today will enhance the prestige of
the United Nations and b~ng closer to realization the goal
of universality of membership.

T
I
~.

236. Kuwait, which has the closest ties with Oman, would
like to proclaim on this happy occasion its fmn determination to co-operate fully with the delegation of Oman in a
manner worthy of our glorious history and the lofty ideals
to which we are dedicated. We shall not falter in our
common endeavour to make the United Nations the main
mstrument of peace, prosperity and justice.

sel
Ati
we

the
vig
go
24
tio

237. Today is a day of rejoicing in Kuwait. I should like to
express from this rostrum my heartfelt congratulations to
His Highness the Sultan of Oman, his Government and
people, and to wish them eternal success and prosperity.
Indeed, those who had the exuberance of the past will
unquestionably have the brightness of the future. The
Omanis, luckily, have both.

The draft resolution was adopted by 117votes to 1, with
2 abstentions {resolution 2754 (XXVI)]. *
231. The PRESIDENT: I declare Oman admitted to
membership in the United Nations.

The delegation of Oman was escorted to its place in the
General Assembly hall.
232. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General Assembly I take pleasure in welcomi.."lg Oman to membership in
the United Nations. I wish to extend to its Government and
people my sincere congratulations on this great occasion
and my personal wishes for their happiness and prosperity.
233. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): Only a few days ago my
Minister for Fo:eign Affairs welcomed from this rostrum
the admission of Bahrain, Qatar and Bhutan to the United
Nations {1934th meeting]. ItJ indeed a great occasion to
welcome today in the name ofthe Emir, the Government
and people of Kuwait, the sister State of Oman on the
occasion of its admission to the United Nations.
234. Oman and Kuwait have a common history, tradition
and culture. Side by side the Kuwaitis and the Omanis
sailed through the turbulent waters of the Indian Ocean to
the eastern coast of Africa and to the shores of Ceylon and
India. They also dived together, searching for pearls in the
deep waters of the sea.
235. The peoples of Oman and Kuwait share a common
~utlook, a homogenoUll way of life and entertain the same

* The delegation of China subsequently informed the Secretariat
that it wished to have its vQte recorded as having been in favour of
the draft resolution.

238. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania): On
behalf of the group of African States, over which I have the
honour to preside in the current month, it gives me great
pleasure to welcome the new State of Oman to membership
iL the United Nations, and to extend our most sincere
congratulations to the people of Oman on this occasion.
239. The admission of this new friendly Arab State is an
important development in the long struggle of the colonial
people for self-government and independence. As the 131st
Member of the United Nations, Oman is an invaluable
addition both to the family of nations and more particularly to the Afro-Asian family in this Organization, and we
are confident that Oman will join hands with all of us in
support of the great ideals and purposes for which this
Organization stands. Important among these are the
freedom and equality of all men, and hence we remain
convinced that Oman will not hesitate to join the struggle
in support of the full and complete liberation of all those
still languishing under colonial subjugation.
240. I do not wish in this short address to dwell at length
on the rich history of Oman. But I do wish to emphasize
the long ties of friendship and co-operation that have
always prevailed between the people of Oman and those of
our continent, and more particularly the eastern part of
Africa. We look forward to an era of greater co-operation
and amity both in bilateral ties as well as in international
forums such as this one. Like the admission of Bhutan,
Bahrain and Qatar a few days ago, the membership of
Oman in the community of nations today is ll. source of
great satisfaction to the African delegations, and we wish
our friends and brothers of Oman all success as they pursue
their new internationl'l responsibilities.
241. The admission of a new Member to our Organization
is always a solemn and happy occasion. But it is also an
ideal opportunity for somber reflection-reflection on wnat

12

I

si

the
the
of
24
an

Against: People's Democratic Republic of Yemen.
Abstaining: Cuba, Saudi Arabia.

L

tha

,"

24
Ru

SS
Pe
Po
Ro

19S7th meeting -7 October 1971
OUI Organization has been able to achieve and how much
remains to be done. I~ this particular case it is important to
bear in mind that, as we rejoice today over Oman's
membership in our Organization, millions of our fellow
men in Mozambique, Angola, Guinea (Bissau), Rhodesia,
Namibia, South Africa and elsewhere in the world are still
languishing under colonial and racist domination. It is also
important to reflect that the fact that this sad and
anachronistic state of affairs is possible is due in no small
measure to the inability of our Organization to act and act
firmly in support of the just struggle of people for
self·determination, independence and human dignity. The
African delegations, therefore, fervently hope that, as we
welcome the sister State of Oman to the United Nations,
the international community will rededicate itself to & more
vigorous pursuit of the goals which wc all hold dear, the
goals of freedom and human dignity for all mankind.

242. Mr. TRUONG CANG (Khmer Republic) (interpretation from French): I am particularly happy to have the
signal honour, as chairman of the group of Asian States for
the month of October and on behalf of the delegation of
the Khmer Republic, to bid a cordial welcome to the State
of Oman to our c.ommunity.
243. The admission of a new Member is always a happy
and memorable event. It is eloquent testimony to the fact
that the principle of self-determination a..,d accession to
independence are not mere words; it strengthens our
confidence in the principles of the Charter of our great
Organization, which in this way is proceeding towards
universality.
244. We hope that the State of Oman will take an
important place in the United Nations and will join its
efforts with those that are working for peace, justice and
progress.
245. Mr. CERNIK (Czechoslovakia) (translation from
Russian): On behalf of the delegations of the Byelorussian
SSR, the People's Republic of Bulgaria, the Hungarian
People's Republic, the Mongolian People's Republic, the
Polish People's Republic, the Socialist Republic of
Romania, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the
Ukrainian SSR, and my own country, the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic, I should like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the people of Oman on the admission ef their
country to United Nations membership. The membership
of Oman in the United Nations, after the League of Arab
States had decided to accept it as afull-fledged member of
the League, is the manifestation of a further step on the
part of the. peoples of the Arab peninsula towards selfdetermination.
246. The socialist States, on whose behalf I have the
honour to speak, are proud of the fact that they have
systematically supported the struggle of the people of
Oman for its liberation from colonial domination. We
therefore earnestly hope that, as a member of the League of
Arab States and a Member .of the United Nations, this brave
people wiU use its membership for the elimination of th(~
grievous consequences of its colonial past and for the
all-round consolidation "nd further strengthening of the
independence of Oma" in the interests of peace and
progress in the Arabian peninsula.

21

247. Mr. MOLINA (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spomish): Today a new nation has become a Member of this
Organization-Oman, which is to be found in the extreme
south-eastern PlUt of the Arabian Peninsula. Its 1.5 million
inhabitants from now on wiU be represented here and that
will constitute a new step towards the universality of the
United Nations.
248. In the midst of the arduous and serious problems we
are facing in the world today, it is a pleasant duty to
welcome those who, upon their entrance into this Organization in faithful adherence to the principles of its constituted Charter, are reaffirmitng their faith in the fundamental
t..gh.ts of men, the dignity and value of the human person,
the equality of rights of men and women and of small and
large nations, and conunit themselves to practise tolerance
and to live in peace as good neighbours at the same time as
they commit themselves to unite their efforts to achieve
lasting security among nations and to promote social
progress and to raise living standards within a wider concept
of freedom.
249. Oman is coming to this world parliament at a time
when we are reaffirming a need for dialogue to solve
conflicts. It is only suitable that we should hear new voices
to open new roads to us in the search for peaceful solutions
of problems which for some time have been debated here
and which we still hope can be solved peacefully.
250. On behalf of the Latin American group of States,
which have always advocated the free determination of
peoples, the elimination of all forms of discrimination, the
liqUidation of all forms of colonialism, the rule of law and
the achievement of justice, I extend the most cordial
welcome to Oman and send an affectionate greeting of
peace and prosperity to its noble people and its Government.
251. Mr. SCO'IT (New Zealand): It is New Zealand's
privilege, on behalf of the Western European and other
States, to congratulate Oman on its admission to United
Nations membership and to extend to our newest Member a
warm welcome.
252. With Oman's presence among us we have taken a
further step towards fulfilment' of the ideal of universality
of United Nations membership. It is also the third occasion
at this session that we have had the pleasure of admitting to
membership a State from the Arabian peninsula.
253. Oman, a nation with rich traditions of civilization
and culture, now stands at the threshold of a new and
exciting era. On his accession in July 1970, the Sultan of
Oman, His Highness Qabus bin Said, declared his intention
to establish a modem Government and to end Oman's
isolation. In accordance with these goals, the Sultanate is
now pursuing with vigour new programmes of economic
and social progress. The aim is to use Onllm's resources to
secure an improved and prosperous future for its people.
254. It is Oman's decision to take its place in the United
Nations which illustrates most graphically its,wish to end its
isolation and to seek the friendly co-operation of all
nations. We welcome this decision, we know we shall
benefit from Oman's presence here, and we 100~ fo~ard

I
[
f'
t
1

I

I
,

j

I
L
r

22

General Assembly - Twenty-sixth Session - Plenary Meetings

with pleasure to strengthening our present ties of friendship
at the United Nations with our new) one hundred and
thirty-first Member.
255. Mr.

EL-ZAYYAT

(Egypt):

Yesterday {1954th

meeting] our Deputy Prime Minister welcomed the new
Member States which have been admitted to the United
Nations at this session as another step towards universality
and equality among sovereign States. Today) speaking as
the Chairman-for-the-month of the group of Arab States in
the United Nations) my thoughts go back to the past) dwell
on the present and try to probe the future.

I
[

r

I
I
I
i

~

f·

i

1

I

1
1
i

;

I
1

I
t,

1

262. The PRESIDENT: I take pleasure in inviting the
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Mfairs of Oman)
His Excellency Said Tarik Alsaid) to address the General
Assembly.

256. In the past the question of Oman came to this
Organization as a colonial issue. Oman was then the subject
of repeated debates that were not too easy and at moments
seemed to yield little hope for immediate success. Today
we debate Oman not as a problem but as a State
independent and welcome to the family of free, independent nations. We have just adopted the report of our
Fourth Committee {A/8456], which yesterday decided to
conclude its consideration of the item called "The question
.of Oman" and to take note with pleasure and satisfaction
of the fact that the goals defmed by the Charter have been
fulfilled in this case.
257. Tomorrow is when the Omani people will have to
redouble their efforts to make their independence real,
meaningful and fruitful. Tomorrow is when the Omani
people will have to build their nation on the basis of unity
and harmony. Tomorrow is when the Omani people will
have to assume their duties towards their immediate area,
the greater family of the Arab world and all the world as
represented in this United Nations.
258. For their past struggle the people of Oman have our
deep appreciation. In their present moment of joy we are
happy with them; we welcome their distinguished delegation to this hall. For the future, we pray that their efforts
at nation-building will be crowned with success.
259. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): The United
States is very pleased to join with others in warmly
welcoming Oman to the United Nations. Our relations with
Oman date back to the early decades of our country, for it
was in 1833 that the first treaty between our two countries
was signed. The United States maintained a consulate in
Oman for 45 years prior to 1915, and in 1958 a new treaty
was signed providing for trade, friendship and the exercise
of consular rights. Our relations have been cordial, and, as
the actions I noted earlier signify, they have been based on
the recognition of Oman's independence, a position we
have always maintained in various forums within the United
Nations.
260. Our pleasure at Oman's entry into this august body is
enhanced by the knowledge that the Omani leadership is
devoting its resources to the progress and prosperity of its
country. The development of Oman's school, transportation and health facilities has been dramatic and bodes well
for the future.
261. And so we wish the people and the leaders and the
Omani representatives here at the United Nations every
success in their future endeavours.

263. Mr. Tarik ALSAID (Oman): All members of this
august Assembly who have made our membership in this
Organization possible: I thank you on behalf of His Majesty
the Sultan of Oman and on behalf of the people of my
country.
264. The Sultanate of Oman, although it today becomes
the youngest Member of this international body, has been
in existence for 14 centuries and has never during its long
history lost its sovereignty or independence. In becoming
the one hundred and thirty-first Member of the United
Nations, Oman has formally and permanently put an end to
decades of enforced isolation and oblivion.
265. I have come here with the hopes of my people in tillS
Organization and their belief that only through strict
adherence to its noble pr'1I1ciples can peace and friendliness
be achieved among the nations of this world.
266. We are a small country, but we shall endeavour to
contribute to the best of our abilities towards the realization of the principles and ideals of the United Nations. The
unique importance of the United Nations makes it imperative that every nation should have the right to join it
regardless of the nature of its system or its past. There can
be no acceptable grounds for excluding any nation for the
purpose of imposing the will of another upon it.
267. We have always closely followed the issues brought
before tillS Assembly for its consideration and resolution.
Often the effectiveness of the United Nations is minimized
and its purposes defeated through the rejection by certain
Member nations of its findings and their refusal to comply
with its decisions. Here lies the greatest danger to this
Organization and its very usefulness. We strongly believe
that no nation should be allowed to challenge the will of
the United Nations and that no nation should possess the
right to veto its resolutions.
268. We are an Arab nation, and we stand solidly with our
brethren in seeking justice for the Arab causes and
especially on the question of Palestine. We sincerely hope
that the shameful injustice that has been inflicted on the
Arab people of Palestine will not remain a blemish in the
annals of the United Nations.
269. In conclusion, let me assure you, Mr. President, of
the full and continuous support of the Omani delegation in
the execution of your duties.
AGENDA ITEM 9
General debate (continued)
270. The PRESIDENT: Before adjourning th.e meeting, I
shall call on those representatives who wish to exercise their
right of reply.
271. Mr. MAGHRIBI (Libya): Yesterday we heard the
statement by the Foreign Minister of Chad {1955th

~

S
L

..

"

i l L 1....2 dilL U ..

_

JL .. all.' A

. SI

111&

1957th meeting -7 October 1971

t·:

meeting]. We had prepared a detailed reply. However, a few
minutes ago an appeal was received through the OrgarJzation of African Unity from a distinguished African leader,
President Hamani Diori of our neighbouring country, Niger,
who wishes Libya to postpone its right of reply.
272. We have great respect for President Diori and
appreciate his good offices in this matter. We believe in the
principles of the United Nations and of the Organization of
African Unity. We strongly believe that the efforts of the
African States should be utilized and combined against the
most inhuman injustices inflicted upon our brothers in
Namibia and other parts of Africa. Our efforts should not
be diverted from defending our brothers in Guinea, Senegal
and Zambia against Portuguese aggression. We appreciate
President Diori's efforts, and we reserve our right to reply
at an appropriate time.
273. Mr. HOVEYDA (Iran) (interpretation from French):
'This morning [1956th meeting] the representative of Iraq
thought it necessary to repeat in this Assembly the views of
his Government on the question of Shatt-al-Arab. At the
same time, referring to the Persian Gulf, he chose to distort
a well-established geographical name.
274. The question of Shatt-al-Arab has often been discussed in this Assembly at other sessions. That is why we
did not want to abuse the patience of the members of the
Assembly by repeating the views of my Government in this
general debate. However.. the statement of the Permanent
Representative of Iraq makes it necessary for me briefly to
clarify our position once again.

23

agenda today and has every right to conclude its business
now, so I will try to be as brief as my Iranian colleague has
been.
280. I should like to make one point extremely clear
regarding the nature of the Boundary Treaty of 1937
between Iraq and Iran. That Treaty was concluded at
Teheran on 4 July 1937 to define the border between the
two neighbouring countries, and it has been in existence
since 1937.
281. The Treaty included certain provisions for the
regulation of navigation in Shatt-al-Arab-which is qUite a
different issue from defIning the borders between the two
countries.
282. Iran unilaterally abrogated that Treaty on some
pretext. If we accept the principle that countries can
unilaterally abrogate treaties defIning their bordexs-treaties
that have been duly ratified and in full force for a number
of years-then not only the Middle East but the whole
world will be thrown into the greatest crisis imagh'lable, and
it will pose the greatest threat to peace and security. And
what resulted from that act on the part of the Government
of Iran has been extremely serious.
283. The representative of Iran just referred to a letter
which was addressed to the President of the Security
Council. May I also refer to the fact that at one time some
very serious violations of Iraqi sovereignty took pIac?: there
was a massing of military forces which made us request the
intervention of the Secretary-General to investigate the
situation and determine the truth of the various allegations.
We invited him to send a special representative to see who
was massing the troops and who was carrying out acts of
violation of sovereignty and who was using extreme
self-restraint in t.'J.at very serious situation.

275. The representative of Iraq said this moming that Iran
had declared the 1937 Iraqi-Iranian Boundary Treaty null
and void; but he omitted to mention the fact that for 32
years the efforts of my country to persuade Iraq-to honour
its obligations flowing from that Treaty have remained
unsuccessful. By its refusal to apply substantial parts of the
1937 Treaty, it is in fact Iraq which has invalidated it.

284. Iran refused to comply with the request we had
made. That is the fIrst point.

276. With regard to the question of referring the matter to
the International Court of Justice, my Government has
repeated-particularly in a letter to the President of the
Security Council, dated 2 September 1969 7 -that Iran
would accept the decisions of the International Court of
Justice in accordance with the recognized principles of
international law and justice, and not on the basis of the
alleged validity of the 1937 Treaty.

285. Secondly, I was delighted to hear the representative
of Iran say, before this Assembly, that his country has no
territorial ambitions in the Gulf area. That statement, of
course, is greatly welcomed by us, and it is heartening that
it has been made in such an augUst Assembly and that it
will be in the records of the United Nations. As I say, we
welcome very much that statement by the representative of
Iran.

277. I must add that we have repeatedly offered to
negotiate on the subject of navigation in the Shatt-al-Arab
river. Unfortunately, the Government of Iraq has never
responded to our offers.

286. The third and last point which I should like to make
is this. This morning [1956th meeting] I explained very
briefly, and I hope moderately, the nature of the dispute
between Iraq and Iran. We called upon Iran to resort to the
International Court of Justice regarding any dispute over a
provision of the 1937 Treaty. That call was not ne:w:~
members of the Assembly have been hearing it from Iraq
for about three years; and it is the only logical, legal,
reasonable course for States to resort to when they have a
dispute. But to abolish border treaties unilaterally and
throw the whole question of borders between States into
critical confusion is a path that certainly will not lead to
normal or good-neighbourly relations.

278. May I finally assure the Permanent Representative of
Iraq that we have absolutely no territorial ambitions with
regard to anyone at all, but thatwe are defending and shall
defend firmly our legitimate rights.
279. Mr. EI,-SHIBIB (IraG; I am acutely aware of the
latenes's of the hour and that this Assembly has had a long
7 See Ufficial Records of thf. Security Council, Twenty-fourth
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1969, document
S{9425.
Litho in United Nations, New York

The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.
77001-December 1973-2,200
