UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIElS
. DEUXIEME ANNEE

. No. 54
151eme seance
3 juillet 1947

151st meeting

3 July 1947

Lake Success

,

TABLE OF. CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Hundred and fifty-first meeting

Cent-cinquante et unieme seance
Page

Pages

199. Provisional agenda
1203
200. Adoption of the agenda
.l203
201. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question
1203
202. Programme of work.
1212

199. Ordre du jour provisoire
1203
200. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
1203
201. Suite de la discussion de la question
grecque
1203
202. Programme de travail
1212

Document

Document

The following document, relevant to the hundred
and fifty-first meeting, appears as follows:

Le document se rapportant a la cent-cinquante et
unieme seance figure dans la publication suivante:
Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement special No 2
Rapport presente au Conseil de securite par
la Commission d'enquete sur les l:1cidents
survenus a la frontiere grecque (document
S/360)

Official records of the Security Council, Second
Tear, Special Supplement No. 2
Report of the Commission of Investigation
concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the
Security Council (document S/360)

NATIONS UNIES

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
CO U'N C I L

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

SECOND YEAR

No. 54

DEUXIEME ANNEE

HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FIRST MEETING

CENT-CINQUANTE ET UNIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Thursday, 3 July 1947, at 10.30 a.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le jeudi 3 juillet 1947, a 10 h. 30.

President: Mr. O. LANGE (Poland).

President: M. O. LANGE (Pologne).

Present: The representatives of the followiJlg
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

199. Provisional o'genda (document 5/398)

199. Ordre du jour provisoire (document
5/398)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The Greek question: report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Security Council (document S/360).1

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. La question grecque: rapport presente au
Conseil de securite par la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la frontiere
grecque (document S/360) 1.

200. Adoption of the agenda

200. Adoption de i' ,;.,.'dre du jour

The agenda was adopted.

L'ordre du jour est adopte.

201. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question

201. Suite de la discussion de la question
grecque

At the invitation of the President, Colonel
Kerenxhi, representative of Albania, Mr. Mevorah, representative of Bulgaria, Mr. Dendramis,
representative of Greece, and Mr. ViZfan, representative of Yugoslavia, took their seats at the
Council table.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) :
The documentation before us testifies to the careful and conscientious manner in which the Commission of Investigation has carried out the difficult task entrusted to it by the Security Council,
and I am sure all members of the Council appreciate very higWy the zeal and devotion of the
Commission.
The Commission heard a large number of witnesses and considered a number of depositions.
The evidence and counter-evidence given before

Sur l'invitation du President, le colonel Kerenxhi, representant de I'Albanie, M. M evorq.h,
representant de la Bulgarie, M. Dendramis,
representant de la Grece, et M. ViZfan, representant de la Y ougoslavie, prennent place a la
table du Conseil.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de I'anglais): Le document que nous
avons sous les yeux montre avec quel soin et
quelle ,conscience la Commission d'enquete s'est
acquittee de la tache difficile que lui avait confiee le Conseil de securite. Je suis sUr que tous
les membres du Conseil apprecient hautement le
zele et le devouement de cette Commission.
La Commission a entendu un grand nombre
de temoins et examine un grand nombre de
depositions. Les temoignages et contre-temoi-

y 1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
, .... ear, Special Supplement No. 2.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement special No 2.

~~~Py",{:,;;~,.;'_l-'"

_

4

the Commission has been submitted to us in a gnages qu'elle a recueilllis nous ontete soumis sous
. summary form. In this form it leaves us, not une forme resumee. Sous cette forme, il n'est pas
surprisingly, in a state of some ,confusion. Our etonnant qu'ils nous aient laisses dans une sorte
very object in sending a Commission to the spot de perplexite. Le but meme que nous nous prowas that this Commission should attempt to sift posions en envoyant une Commission sur place
and evaluate the conflicting testimony. Our rep- etait de lui faire. passer au crible et apprecier les
resentatives on the Commission have seen and temoignages contradictoires. Nos representants
heard the witnesses. We here cannot do that; au sein de la Commission ont vu et entendu les
and on the basis of the contradictory statements temoins. Nous-memes, nous ne pouvons pas le
presented to us in cold type, and of conflicting faire ici; et,en nous fondant sur les temoignages
statements made to the Security Council, we- contradictoires qu'on nous presente depouilles
or at least I-find difficulty in arriving at a di- dans la secheresse du tex~e, ainsi que sur les
rect personal judgment of the credibility of indi- exposes contradictoires qui ont ete faits devant
vidual witnesses. As I have said, that is why we le Conseil de securite, il nous est difIicile - du
.sent our representatives to the area in question. moins en ce qui me concerne - d'arriver a nou,s .
They have seen and heard the witnesses. They faire une opinion personnelle directe sur la crehave been able to form some judgment of their ante qu'il convient d'accorder aux declarations
reliability, and they have reported their own con- des differents temoins. C'est pour cela meme, je
clusions.
I'ai deja dit, que nous avons envoye des representants sur place. lis ont vu et entendu les
temoins. Ils ont pu, dans une certaine mesure, se
faire une idee de la confiance qu'on peut avoir
en eux et ils nous ont soumis leurs propres conclusions.
Parlant au nom de mon Gouvernement, je
Speaking for my Government, I may say that
it has complete confidence in its representative tiens a dire que nous avons la confiance la plus
~n the Commission. His view, which corresponds . complete en notre representant au sein de la
with that of a large majority of his colleagues, is Commission. Son opinion, qui correspond d'ailstated unequivocally in the report, and my Gov- leurs a celle de la grande majorite de ses colleernment accepts that view. We cannot possibly gues, est exprimee sans equivoque dans le rapreopen the whole hearing here and now, in the port; mon Gouvernement accepte cette opinion.
absence of witnesses.
n ne nous est pas possible de rouvrir ici tout le
debat, en l'absence de temoins.
Les conclusions de la Commission ont ete comThe Commission's conclusions were opposed
by the members of the Commission representing battues par les l'epresentants de I'Union des Rethe Union of ~oviet Socialist Republics and Po~ publiques socialistes sovietiques et de la Pologne,
land, who submitted a set of diametrically op- qui ont pre13ente pour leur compte une serie de
posed conclusions of their own. The Commis- conclusions diametralement opposees. Les conmission's conclusions have also been attacked on clusions de la Commission ont egalement ete atvarious grounds by the representatives of the taquees, pour divers motifs, par les representants
Albanian, Bulgarian and Yugoslav Governments. des Gouvernements de l'Albanie, de la Bulgarie
However, we must remember that not less than et de la Yougoslavie. Mais il ne faut pas oublier
eight of the eleven members of the Commission que pas moins de huit membres, sur les onze que
subscribed to those conclusions. It has been said, comptait la Commission, ont souscrit a ces connotably by the representative of Yugoslavia at clusions. On a pretendu - et cet argument a ete
our hundred and fifty-first meeting, l that the notamment invoque a notre cent-cinquantieme
conclusions were endorsed by only six of the seance1 par le representant de la Yougoslavie eleven members of the Commission. That is not que les conclusions n'avaientete acceptees que
tru~. On page 239 of volume I of the Commis- par six des onze membres de la Commission. Ce
sion's report (document S/360), the following n'est pas exact. A la page 248 du volume I du
is stated: "The delegations of Australia, Bel- rapport de la Commission (document S/360) , on
gium, Brazil, China, Colombia, Syria, United peut lire ceci: "Les delegations de l'Australie, qe
Kingdom and United States of America"-that la Belgique, du Bresil, de la Chine, de la Colommakes eight-"subscribed to the conclusions set bie, des Etats-Unis d'Amerique, du Royaumeout in chapter I."
Uni et de la Syrie" - c'est-a-dire huit delegations - "ont souscrit aux conclusions formuIees
au chapitre premier".
It is trtle that the representatives of Belgium
Il est vrai que les representants de la Be1gique
and Colombia expressed doubts as to whether it et de la Colombie ont exprlme des doutes sur le
.was for the Commission to give any decision re- point de savoir si c'etait a la Commission de
garding the possible responsibility of the Albani- decider de la responsabilite eventuelle des Gauan, Bulgarian or Yugoslav Governments, but vernements de l'Albapje, de la Bulgarie et de la
.they nevertheless were able to put their names Yougoslavie. Mais ces representants n'en ont pas
to the conclusions.
moins souscrit aux conclusions de la Commission.
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 53.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, '.
Deuxieme Annee, No 53.

,

J.l:

-

1205

The Yugoslav representative also said that
these conclusions were drawn before the countries most concerned were given the opportunity
to be heard. I ask the Security Council to look
at the voluminous record of the proceedings,
which shows clearly enough. that there is not the
faintest justification for that assertion.

Le representant de la Yougoslavie a dit egalement que ces conclusions avaient ete etablies
avant que les pays directement interesses eussent
pu se faire entendre. Je demande au Conseil de
securite d'examiner le volumineux compte rendu
des travaux de la Commission, qui montre bien
clairement que cette assertion n'est pas justifiee
le moins du monde.
Le representant de la Yougoslavie a dit d'autre
In alater passage of his speech the representative of Yugoslavia said that the investigation of part, au cours de son discours, que 1'enquete sur
the incidents had been carried out in accordance ces inciden~ avait ete menee en tenant compte
with the statements of only one side. Against des declarations d'une seule des parties interesthis I should like to quote some facts. In addi- sees. A l'encontre de cette assertion, j'aimerais
tion to the taking of evidence by the Commission citer quelques faits. Outre le travail accompli
itself, seven investigating teams .operated on the par la Commission elle-meme pour recueillir des
border and in other places. During sixteen weeks temoignages, il y a eu sept groupes d'enquete qui
the Commis&ion held eighty-seven meetings, in ont opere a la frontiere et ailleurs. Durant seize
addition to travelling very long distances. It is semaines, la Commission a· tenu quatre-vingtinteresting to note that visits paid by investigat- sept seances et, il faut le dire aussi, a parcouru
ing teams were distributed as follows: at the re- des distances considerables. n est interessant de
quest of Yugoslavia, thirteen; at the request of noter que les visites faites par les groupes d'enBulgaria, three; at the request of Albania, five; quete se repartissent ainsi: visites effectuees sur
at the request of Greece, fourteen; and, at the la demande de la Yougoslavie, treize; sur celle de
request of the representative of the Union of la Bulgarie, trois; sur celle de l'Albanie, cinq;
Soviet Socialist Republics, two.
sur celle de la Grece, quatorze; sur celle du representant de rUnion des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, deux.
Here are just a few further figures regarding
Voici quelques .autres chiffres' concernant les
witnesses presented by the four Governments: temoins presentes par les quatre Gouvemements:
Albania, twenty-two; Bulgaria, thirty-three; l'Albanie en a presente vingt-deux; la Bulgarie,
Greece, seventy-eight; Yugoslavia, sixty.
trente-trois; la Grece, soixante-dix-huit; la
Yougoslavie, soixante.
In the light of these figures, it seems difficult
A la lumiere de ces chiffres, il semble difficile
to claim that this was a one-sided hearing.
de pretendre que 1'audition des temoins ait eu
un caractere unilateral.
Je reviens aux conclusions du rapport. n est
To return to the conclusions in the report, it
is true that the French representative did not vrai que le representant de la France n'y a pas
subscribe to them. He did not, however, so far souscrit. Mais il n'a pas, autant que je sache,
as I know, oppose the conclusions. He merely fait opposition a ces conclusions. 11 a simpleurged the technical point that the Commission ment insiste sur un point technique; la Commiswas instructed only to "verify the facts and to sion, selon lui, aurait uniquement re~u pour insmake a report". It may be that the Commission, tructions de "verifier les faits" et de "faire un
instructed to "make a report," was not bound to rapport". 11 se peut que la Commission, qui
draw conclusions, but plainly it was not debarred avait re~u pour instructions de "faire un rapfrom doing so. In support of his argument the port", ne flit pas tenue de tirer des conclusions,
French representative on the Commission re- mais il est evident aussi que rien ne lui interdisait
ferred to the passage in the Security Council's de le faire. A l'appui de sa these, le representant
resolution of 19 December 1946, in which it is fran~ais a la Commission a rappele un passage
stated that the ". . . disturbed conditions . . . de la resolution du Conseil de securite en date du
should be investigated b~fore the Council at- 19 decembre 1946, disant que "la situation
tempts to reach any conclusions regarding the troublee ... devrait faire 1'objet d'une enquete,.
issues involved".l
avant que le Conseil ne tente d'amver a une
conclusion, quelle qu'elle soit, sur les faits en
question!».
Of course, it is the Council's conclusions that
Bien entendu, c'est le Conseil qui conclura
would be finally decisive, but no commission or definitivement en dernier ressort, mais il n'est
committee on that account is debarred from sub- pas interdit pour autant a une commission ou a
mitting conclusions of its own to assist the Coun- un comite de presenter ses conclusions propres,
cil in its deliberations.
afin d'aider le Conseil dans ses deliberations.
I, myself, think however that the CommisQuant a moi, j'estime que la Commission a
sion was actually asked to draw conclusions. effectivement ete chargee de tirer des concluOtherwise, what would have been the purpose sions. Autrement, a quoi aurait servi d'envoyer
of the Security Council in authorizing the Com- une Commission enqueter sur place en Grece,
1 See Official Records of the S.curity Council, First
Year, Second Series, No. 28, 87th meeting~ page 700.

1 Voir les Proces-v.rbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Premiere Annee, Deuxieme Serie, No 28, 87eme seance,
page 700.

12tJ5
mission to go into certain places in Greece, Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia "in order to
ducidate the causes and nature of the ... border
violations and disturbances," as stated in the
resolution of 19 December?
I could weary the Council with any number
of instances of commissions and committees sub~
mitting conclusions for the consideration of the
Council, but I harPJy think I need do that.
The French representative on the Commission
finally emphasized the difficulty of establishing
a body of "evidence in the juridicial sense of the
word". The difficulty is undeniable, but it was
overcome by eight of hiscolleages.
We shall take the actual objections to the
conclusions.
The representatives on the Commisison of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and Poland
found, firstly, that the accusations, in their words,
"are without foundation", owing to, the insufficient and contradictory evidence. The only comment on this is that eight members-not sixfound differently.
Secondly, the representatives of the USSR and
Poland found that what they call the "civil war"
and the "abnormal internal political situation"
in Greece constitute the principal causes of disorders in northern Greece; but eight members, not
six, found that there was no state of civil war and
although they agreed-those eight membersthat "in so far as it might constitute a factor contributing to the disturbed conditions in northern
Greece along the Greek frontier, the Greek internal situation could not be ignored", they found
that that "in no way relieves the three northern
neighbours of their duty under international law
to prevent and suppress subversive activity on
their territory aimed against another Government, nor does it relieve them of direct responsibility for their support of the Greek guerrillas".

I oftenwonder whether it has occurred to those
who give such prominence to the argument
about what they call the "state of civil war in
Greece" that their attitude inevitably gives the
impression that they are seeking to justify intervention that has taken place rather than to prove
that it never did take place.
Thirdly, the representatives of the USSR and
Poland found that what they called the "jingoist
propaganda" of Greece is linked with frontier incidents directed against the three neighbouring
countries. But it must be observed that Greek
"jingoism" takes the form of presenting territorial claims in the proper form to the proper
quarter.
Therefore, in the absence of any valid ground
for these objections, it seems that the conclusions
of the eight members are soundly based, and my
Government subscribes to them.

en Albanie; en Bulgarie, en Y()ugoslavie, "pour
elucider les causes et la nature, des violations de
frontieres et des troubles", comme il est dit dans
la resolution du 19 decembre?
.

Je lasserais.Ie Conseil si j'enumerais le nombre
de commissions et de comites qui ont presente
des conclusions a son examen; mais je pense
qu~ll n'est guere besoin de le faire.
. Le representant rfan~ais a la Commission a
souligne enfin la difficulte qu'il y a a constituer
un faisceau de "preuves, au semi juridique du
mot". Cette difficulte n'est certes pas niable,
mais huit deses collegues en sont venus a bout.
J'en viens maintenant aux objections faites a
proprement parler contre les conclusion de la
Commission.
Les representants de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques et de la Pologne a
la Commission ont declare tout d'abord que les
accusations etaient, pour reprendre leurs propres
termes, "sans fcmdement",.en raison du caractere
insuffisant et contradictoire des temoignages. Le
seu! commentaire que je ferai a ce sujet, c'est
que huit membres de la Commission, et non six,
en ont juge autrement.
En second lieu, les representants de l'URSS et
de la Pologne ont declare que ce qu'ils appellent
"la guerre civile" et "la situation politique interieure anormale" de la Greee constituent les
causes principales des desordres qui regnent dans
le nord du pays. Or huit membres de la Commission, et non six, ont constate qu'il n'y avait
pas de guerre civile; certes ces huit membres ont
reconnu qu'on ne pouvait pas "ne pas tenir
compte de la situation interieure de la Grece,
car elle pouvait etre une des causes de la situation troubIee qui regne dans le nord de la Grece,
le long de la frontiere", mais ils ont conclu que
ceIa ne "dispense ilUll~ment les trois pays li.lT.itrophes du nord de l'obligation que leur impose
le droitinternational,d'empecher ou de reprimer,
sur leur territoire, toute activite subversive dirigee contre un autre Gouvernement, et ne les
decharge pas de la responsabilite directe qu'ils
encourent du fait de l'appui qu'ils ont dbnne aux
francs-tireurs grecs".
Je me suis souvent demande si les personnes
qui font teIlement etat de l'argument de ce
qu'elIes appelIent elIes-memes "l'etat de guerre
civile en Grece" se rendent compte qu'eIles donnent fatalement l'impression de chercher a justifier une intervention qui a eu lieu, plutot qu'a
prouver qu'elIe n'a jamais eu lieu.
Troisieme point: les representants de l'URSS
et de la Pologne ont declare que ce qu'ils appellent la "propagande jingolste" de la Grece est
lie aux incidents de frontiere diriges contre les
trois pays voisins de la Grece. Mais on doit
observer que ce "jingolsme" grec se traduit par
la presentation en bonne forme de revendications
territoriales devant les organes competents.
C'est pourquoi, comme ces objections n'ont
aucune base valable, j'estime que les conclusions
des huit membres de la Commission sont solidement fondees et mon Gouvernement y souscrit.

2

1207
Mais ce n'est pas la, me semble-t-il, la partie
la plus importante du rapport. On y traite du
passe; mais, s'il est necessaire d'essa~7er d'etablir
les faits, il serait plus utile de pouvoir trouver
pour l'avenir un remede a la situation, et d'eviter
que le dangereux etat de choses actuel ne se prolonge ou ne se renouvelle.
De quelque cote que soient la justice ou les
torts, dans cette affaire, et quelles que soient les
causes auxquelles on puisse attribuer la situation
actuelle, il n'y a pas, si j'ai bien lu le rapport, un
seul membre de la Commission qui n'ait reconnu
que la presente situation est loin d'etre satisfaisante, au point de constituer un danger pour le
maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales.
Dans le dernier paragraphe de la resolution du
In the last paragraph of the Security Council's
resolution of 19 December last, the Commission Conseil de securite du 19 decembre 1946, nous
was asked, in these words, "to make any pro- avons demande a la Commission de "faire toute
posals that it may deem wise for averting a repe- proposition qu'elle jugera susceptible d'empecher
tition of border violations and disturbances in le renouvellement de violations de frontieres -et
these areas". The Commission has done so. de troubles dans ces regions". La Commission
Nine, this time, out of the eleven members have s'est acquittee de cette tache. Neuf, cette fois-ci,
made interesting and what looked liked hopeful des onze membres qui la composaient ont fait des
proposals for the' maintenance in the area in propositions interessantes et, semble-t-il, enquestion of a commissioner or commission with courageantes; iIs ont reclame le maintien, dans
certain definite functions of observation and con- cette region, d'un commissaire ou d'une comciliation.
mission qui serait chargee de certaines fonctions
precises d'observation et de conciliation.
These proposals are all before the Council, and
Toutes ces propositions sont maintenant souhave, in fact, been summarized in the d;-aft reso- mises au Conseil; elles se trouvent d'ailleurs
lution submitted by the United States represen- resumees dans le projet de resolution soumis par
tative. 1
le representant des Etats-Unisl •
Two members of the Comission, representaDeux membres de la Commission, representing the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and tant respectivement I'Union des Republiques soPoland, opposed these recommendations. Let us cialistes sovietiques et la Pologne, n'ont pas
look at their objections.
souscrit aces recommandations. Voyons leurs
objections.
The USSR representative on the Commission
Le representant de I'URSS a la Commission
said that they were based "merely on unfounded a dit que ces recomma~dations etaient fondees
assertions of the Greek Government regarding "uniquement sur les assertions non fondees du
aid to the guerrillas". But they are not. They are Gouvernement grec quant a une aide fournie
based on the admitted existence of a dangerous aux francs-tireurs". Mais cela n'est pas exact:
state of affairs. I have read 'them through again ces recommandations sont fondees sur l' existence
and again, and I have been unable to find one reconnue d'un etat de choses dangereux. Je les
word that imputes blame to one side or to the ai lues et relues, et j'ai ete incapable d'y trouver
other, and I challenge the representatives of the un seul mot qui comporte un blame a l'adresse
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and Poland d'aucune des parties, et je defie les representants
to point out to me one single passage that does so. de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques
et de la Pologne de me signaler un seul passage
ou 1'0n en puisse trouver.
The USSR representative's second objection
La seconde objection du representant de
was J!1at. "J:!1e proposals admit the possibility of l'URSS est que "les propositions admettent que
frontIer mCldents . . . although the Commission des incidents de frontihe ... peuvent se produire
has no grounds whatever for proposals of such uIterieurement ... bien que la Commission n'ait
a nature". If that assertion was based on the aucun motif pour formuler des propositions de
belief that on the departure of the Commission cette nature". Si cette assertion se fondait sur
all trouble would die down, I am afraid that it la conviction que les troubles cesseraient des le
has been belied by events.
depart de la Commission, je crains fort que les
evenements ne lui aient apporte un dementi.
Thirdly, the USSR representativc objected
En troisieme lieu, le representant de I'URSS
that the disorders in Greece are due to in- a pretendu que les desordres en Grece etaient

But that, it seems to me, is not the most important part of the report. It deals with the past,
and although it is necessary to try to ascertain
facts, it would be more useful if we could provide a remedy for the situation in the future and
avert the possibility of a continuance or a renewal of a daIlgerous state of affairs.
Whatever the rights or wrongs of the situation
may be and to whatever causes the existence of
the present conditions may be attributed, there
is not, as I read the report, a single member of
the Commission who does not recognize that the
-present situation is unsatisfactory to the point
of endangering the maintenance of international
peace and-security.

y 1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
ear, No. 51.
-

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux offiaiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 51.

-_._..

.--_.__ ..
Iao'l,

3

w

ternal causes. This point has already been dealt
with.
Finally, he said that the proposals were "tantamount to a limitation of the sovereign rights of
these States in settling their relations among
themselves".
In these days, as the representative of Belgium
pointed out at our hundred and fiftieth meeting,
sovereign rights do 'not retain their pristine inviolability.l In the course of time many international conventions have been entered into, and
each one of these detracts, in lesser or greater
degree, from national sovereignty. The Charter,
itself makes very considerable inroads on the
theory of national sovereignty. Article 36, and
perhaps still more Article 25, are instances of
this. If it was desired to maintain sovereign
rights inviolate, that ought to have been thought
of at S~n Francisco. If we cannot apply proposals such as those submitted by the Commission, and now in the United States resolution,
w~ had better tear up the Charter, and pack up.

_----....,..

dus a des causes internes. J'ai deja traite ce
point:
Enfin, il a dit que les propositions "equivalent
a limiter la souverainete de ces Etats en etablissant leurs relatio~s reciproques".

As regards the proposal for a commission, the
Polish representative was of the opinion that it
would be "inadequate", because it "would prejudice . . . sovereign rights". I have already dealt
with his argument about sovereign rights, but
even if it were valid, it might render the proposals improper in the Polish view, but it need
not render them "inadequate". He further said
it would constitute a "measure of coercion towards Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia". But

De nos jours, comme 1'a signale le representant de la Belgique a la cent-cinquantieme
seance, les droits souverains des Etats ne sont plus
inviolables comme jadisl . Dans le cours des
temps il'a ete passe bien des conventions internationales, dont chacune restreint plus ou moins la
souverainete nationale. La Charte elle-meme
en'tame largement la theorie de la souverainete
nationale. L'Article 36, et plus encore peut-etre
1'Article 25, en sont des exemples. Si 1'on avait
voulu maintenir inviolables les droits souverains
des Etats, il aurait fallu le faire a San-Francisco.
Si nous ne pouvons pas mettre en Ceuvre des propositions comme celles qu'a presentees la Commission et qui ont ete reprises dans la resolution
des Etats-Unis, nous ferions mieux de dechirer
la Charte et de plier bagages.
Le representant de la Pologne a la Commission a pretendu que ces propositions etaien~
"sans efficacite" et qu'elles tenaient compte seulement des symptomes de la maladie, et non de ses
causes. I1 a poursuivi en disant que "le fait que
les mesures proposees sont sans efficacite pourrait
facilement nuire au prestige de 1'Organisation
des Nations Unies". Non seulement je n'accepte
pas la critique qu'il fait du manque d'efficacite
de ces propositions, mais je ne peux m'empecher
.de deplorer cette auxieuse sollicitude que l'on
montre pour le prestige des Nations U nies.
J'espere toujours que mon medecin pense plus a
ma sante qu'a son prestige. Et le Conseil n'accroltra point son prestige en se derobant a son
simple devoir.
Le representant de la Pologne a pretendu
egalement que certaines des mesures proposees
par la Commission "ne semblent pas tenir
compte du fait qu'il n'existe pas de relations
diplomatiques entre la Grece d'une part, la Bulgarie et 1'Albanie d'autre part". De que1que
cote que soient la justice ou les torts dans cette
affaire, et quelles qu'en soient pratiquement les
consequences, nous pouvons esperer que si les
recommandations de la Commission sont adoptees et mises en reuvre par le ConseiI, ce fait
meme amenera la reprise de relations normales
et amicales.
En ce qui concerne la proposition tendant a
la creation d'une commission, le representant de
la Pologne a estime que cette mesure paraissait
"inadequate", parce qu'elle "porterait atteinte
a la souverainete de ...". J'ai deja traite de cet
argument tire des droits souverains. Mais meme
s'il etait valable, il pourrait permettre de trouver
ces propositions deplacees, aux yeux de la Pologne: il ne les rendrait pas necessairement "inadequates". Le representant de la Pologne a dit

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 53.
.

1 Voir Ies Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 53.

The Polish representative on the Commission
claimed that the proposals were "ineffectual", as
they took into account only the symptoms of the
disease, and not the causes. He went on to say
that "the fact that the measures ... are ineffectual could easily prejudice the prestige of the
United Nations". While not accepting his stricture on the ineffectiveness of the proposals, I
cannot help deploring his timid solicitude for the
prestige of the United Nations. I always hope
that my doctor is thinking more of me than of his
prestige. And the Council will not gain prestige
by shirking its plain duty.

The Polish representative also argued that
some of the measures proposed by the Commission do not "take into account the fact that
diplomatic relations do not exist between Greece
on the one hand and Bulgaria and Albania on
the other". Whatever may be the rights or
wrongs of that situation, and whatever may be
the technical result of it, we may hope that if
the Commission's recommendations are adopted
by the Council and implemented, that in itself
will lead to the resumption of normal and friendly relations.

a

.X

344,.

1209

egalement que ce serait "une mesme de contrainte envers l'Albanie, la Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie". Mais il n'en serait rien, evidemment, a
moins que ces Etats ne soient coupables d'agression.
Le Conseil de securite doit, a mon sens, e~re
The Security Council must, I am sure, be
profondement
reconnaissant envers la Commisgreatly indebted to ~e Co~sion for the m~­
ner in which it has discharged Its extremely diffi- sion pour la maniere dont elle s'est acquittee de
cult and laborious task. The most valuable part sa tache, si difficile et si penible. La partie la
of its report is that which submits recommenda- plus precieuse de son rapport est celle qui protions for the future, and I sincerely hope that the pose des recommandations pour l'avenir, et
Council will adopt the United States resolution j'espere sincerement que le Conseil adoptera la
resolution des Etats Unis, qui donne effet a ces
that would give effect to them.
propositions.
It seems to me that here we have a danger
Il me semble que nous nous trouvons ici depoint. It is just such a case as the United ~~a­ vant une situation dangereuse. Or, c'est justetions was designed to meet. We have pracncal ment pour faire face a de telles situations que
proposals, which can, perhaps, be perfected and rOrganisation a ete creee. Nous avons devant
elaborated. We must tlY them. If they succeed, nous des propositions pratiques, qui peuvent sans
that will add enormously to the prestige of this doute etre ameliorees et Inises au point. Nous
body, which doubtless is the aim of all of us. devons essayer de les appliquer. Si nous reussisSuccess might avert disaster, but I should dare sons, nous aurons enormement accru le prestige
to hope for even more-that success might show de ce Conseil, ce qui sans aucun doute est notre
the way to a better order of friendly co-operation but a tous. Si nous reussissons, nous pourrons
between the four countries whose mutual rela- eviter un desastre. J'ose meme esperer davantions are at present daIkened and disturbed, but tage encore: le succes pourrait tracer la voie vers
who might be able to lo~k f~rwar~ to an era of un ordre meilleur de collaboration amicale entre
friendship and co-operatIOn. ill which these bad les quatre pays dont les relations reciproques sont
times would be only an evil memory.
actuellement assombries et troublees; ces pays
pourraient alors envisager une ere d'amitie et de
cooperation, ou les troubles d'aujourd'hui ne
seraient plus qu'un mauvais souvenir.
this would not be' so, of course, unless those
States were guilty of aggression.

Mr. MUNIZ (Brazil): The prevention of disputes, whether it be effected through their pacific
solution as envisaged in Chapter VI of the
Charter; or by measures of enforcement in a~­
cordance with the provisions of Chapter VII, 18
considered a function of security which is mc.inly
under the responsibility of the Security Council.

M. M UNIZ (Bresil) (traduit de f anglais) :
Eviter les differends, que ce soit par une solution
pacifique, comme l'envisage le Chapitre VI de
la Charte, ou par des mesures de contrainte
comme le prevoit le Chapitre VII, est considere
comme une fonction relevant du domaine de la
securite, qui incombe essentiellement au Conseil
de securite.

The entire structure of the United Nations
rests on this function, on the assumption that
only after international peace and security are
ensmed can the United Nations achieve its other
aiIns.

Toute la structure de l'Organisation repose sur
cette fonction, etant admis comme postulat que
c'est seulement apres que la paix et la securite
internationales auront ete assurees que 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies pourra realiser les
autres buts qu'elle se propose.

This function of security is of such paramount
importance that Chapter VII of the Charter
endows the Security Council with broad faculties to determine whEther a particular situation
constitutes a threat to the peace or a breach of
the peace, and to take the· most drastic measures
against any State with the aim of restoring international peace.
I
During the discussion at San Francisco over
the text of this Chapter, all the criticisms directed at the exceptional powers conferred upon
the Council were dispelled by the recognized
need to place at the disposal of the Council all
means capable of preventing war, through the
correction, at the proper time, of situations or
disputes ~pt to degenerate into war. In fact, it
is easier to prevent war than to repress it
after its outbreak; hence the justification for

Cette fonction de securite est d'une importance tellement capitale que le Chapitre VII de
la Charte a dote le Conseil de securite de pouvoirs etendus pour determiner si une situation.
particuliere constitue une menace pour la paix,
ou une rupture de la paix, et pour prendre les
mesures les plus energiques contre tout Etat en
vue de retablir la paix intemationale.
Au cours des discussions qui ont eu lieu a SanFrancisco sur le texte de ce Chapitre, toutes les
critiques qui s'elevaient conti"e les pouvoirs
exceptionnels conferes au Conseil ont ete reduites
au silence, les representants ayant reconnu la
necessite de mettre a la disposition du Conseil
tous les moyens propres a empecher la guerre, en
portant remede en temps voulu a des situations
ou a des differends susceptibles de degenerer en
conflit arme. Il est effectivement plus facile

1210
the great latitude allowed the Council in its exercise of the function of security.

•

d'empecher une guerre que d'y mettre :fin apres
qu'elle a eclate, d'ou la justification des pouvoirs
tres etendus accordes au Conseil dans I'exercice
de la fonction de securite.
The efficacy" of future action by the Security
L'efficacite de I'action future du Conseil de
Council, and therefore the good functioning of securite et, par voie de consequence, le bon foncthe entire system of the United Nations, will de- tionnement de tout le systeme des Nations Unies,
pend to a certain extent on the manner in which dependront dans un~ certaine mesure de la mathe Council will adjudkate and decide questions mere dont le Conseil jugera et decider~ des quesrelating to security. Ifthe Security Council fails tions touchant a la securite. Si le Conseil n'asto take up in this matter the heavy responsibili- . sume pas, dans ce domaine, les lourdes responties vested in it by the United Nations, there will sabilites que lui ont assignees les Nations Unies,
set in a process of weakening Cif the international nous verrons peu a peus'affaiblir la fonction
Organization in its most essential feature, which essentielle de notre organisation internationale,
is'the organization of security. Questions involv- qui est d'organiser la securite. Les questions ining the security' of States deserve, therefore, an teressant la securite des Etats meritent donc de la
energetic and courageous treatment on the part part du Conseil une action energique et couraof the Council, in order that the confilence of geuse, afin que soit maintenue la tonfiance des
peoples in the system of the United Nations peuples dans le systeme des Nations Unies. L'idee
should be maintained. The idea of security ex- de securite exprime le legitime desir de toutes les
presses the righteous desire of all nations to feel nations de se sentir protegees, a l'interieur de
safe within their frontiers against the risks of leurs frontieres, contre tout risque d'agression, et
aggression, and ?'3sured of prompt· and efficient assurees d'une aide r~pide et efficace des autres
help from other nations in the event of attack. nations, en ~as d'agression.
Tne matter submitted for our consideration at
La question qui est actuellement soumise a
this moment is related to the peaceful solution notre examen se re£ere au reglement pacifique
of disputes as dealt with in Chapter VI of the de differends internationaux prevu au Chapitre
Charter. The Security Council, acting under the VI de la Charte. Le Conseil de securite, s'approvisions of Article 34 of the Charter, ordered f'lyant sur les dispositions de I'Article 34 de la
an investigation of a situation which, in the Charte, a ordonne u.lle enquete sur une situation
opinion of the Greek Government, appeared qui, de I'avis du Gouvernement grec, semblait de
capable of leading to international friction or to nature a mener a un desaccord ou a un diffea dispute. The results of this investigation, con- rend international. Les resultats de I'enquete,
tained in the report of the Commission ap- consignes dans le rapport de la Commission depointed for the purpose, are now before the signee a cet effet, sont maintenant devant le
Council, which, in the light of the facts therein Conseil; a la lumihe des faits exposes, nous
submitted, is to determine whether the continua- devons decider si la prolongation·de la situation
tion of t.'he situation is liable to endanger the est de nature a· compromettre le maintien de la
maintenance of international peace and security. paix et de la sectrrite interna1;ionales.
L'enquete n~a eu d'autre but que de mettre
The investigation has no other purpose than
that of enabling this Council to decide whether le Conseil en mesure de decider si,· en fait, la
the continuation of this situation is liable to en- continuation de cette situation est de nature a
danger peace and security. It is the determina- compromettre la paix et la securite. C'est la detion of this fact that establishes the jurisdiction termination de ce fait qui etablit la competence
of the Council in the matter and creates for the du Conseil en la matiere et qui cree pour les
parties concerned the obligation of settling the partiesinteressees I'obligation de regler leur dif- .
dispute or of doing away with the dangerous ferend ou de mettre :fin a cette situation dangereuse.
situation.
Vne fois ce premier point decide, le Conseil
Once this initial fact is determined, the Council will be able to make recommendations or sera en mesure de faire les recommandations ou
suggestions air,led at the suppression of the situa- propositions tendant a mettre fin a cette situation, even if the parties concerned resort to tion, meme si les parties interessees ont recours a
peaceful mean~ of solution other than those des moyens de reglement pacifiques autres que
rc::.omm· nded by the Council. They cannot, in ceux que recommande le Conseil de securite. Les
this phase of the proceedings, elude the responsi- paities ne peuvent pas, a ce stade de la procebility of arriving at a peaceful solution, under dure, eluder la responsabilite qui leur incombe
penalty of intervention by the Council, which d'aboutir a une solution pacifique, sous peine
can then consider the situation in question as d'une intervention du Conseil,qui pourra alors
constituting a breach of the peace and justifying considerer que la situation en question constitue
une rupture de la paix et justifie I'usage de methe use of enforcement measures.
sures de contrainte.
'Ihe report of the Commission of InvestigaLe rapport de la Commission d'enquete doit
tion should be considered, therefore, in the light donc etre examine a la IU'''liere de l'ArticIe 34
of the terms of Article 34 of the Charter. The de la Charte. La question posee a chacun des
question before each member of this Council is membres du Conseil est la suivante: les faits

Uiiii\l

..

1211

the following: ,U"e the facts \.:1;- l,.. -e Leen
brought to the knowled.ge of t; . .....lcil of such
a. nature as to give rise 1.0 the convictit:!!l that the
continuation of the situauvn in the northern part
of Greece is liable to endanger 'peace aLJ.d securit'.? If the reply is in the affirmative, then
the Council cannot ignore these occurrences, but
on the contrary, it will have to make a recommendation to the parties concemed with a view
to the suppression of the situation. .
As far as the Brazilian delegation is concerned,
and after examining ~arefully the long list of
occurrences and the extensive investigations conducted by the Commission, we do not have the
least hesitation in saying that we are confronted
with a dangerous situation which fits perfectly
into the definitioll contained in the latter part
of Article 34.
. As regards the allegations made against the
proced.ure adopted by the Commission in bringing out the facts, as well as the criticism that the
Commission exceeded its authority in offering
suggestions amounting to a judgment of the attitude of the three countries bordering on
Greece, even if such allegation"1 and criticisms
were substantiated-which they are not-they
could in no way affect the conviction that there
exists, in the north of Greece, a dangerous situation imposing on the Council the duty of contribuTh'g towards clearing it and dispelling it.
The recommendations made by the Commission of Investigation, the substance of which has
been incorporated in the resolution submitted
by the representative of the United States, are
part of a process of conciliation and should be
received as such by the States to which they are
directed. As has been pointed out by Mr. van
Langenhove, these recommendations do not involve any derogation from the sovereignty of the
States in question. 1 The measures recommended
appear to me to be capable of preventing new
friction and of leading those States to a gradual
elimination of frontier disturbances.
I feel all the more .disposed to support the
recommendations since I represent a country
which is proud of a long and invariably peaceful
tradition and which figures in the history of international law as one' of the most vigorous advocates of arbitration and other methods for the
peaceful solution of disputes.
In that connexion, the United Nations would
do .well to keep in mind the inspiration and the
frUItful example of the inter-American regional
syste~, ~eveloped through many years of the
practlce of good-neighbourliness, of non-interventio~ and ofrespect for ~he territorial integrity
of nat.lons. All thes~ principles are natural conseque~ces of the broader principle of the judicial
equ~ty of States, an essentially American conceptlOn, which, embodied in the federations on
Our continent, constitutes the primary reason for
y 1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second I.

ear, No. 53.

. , .

_

.

I

portesa la connaissance du Conseil sont-ill! de
nature a convaincre le Conseil que la continuation de l'etat de choses actuel dans le nord de la
Grece est susceptible de mettre en danger la paix
et la securite? Si la reponse est affirmative, le
Conseil ne peut pas se desinteresser de tels faits~
mais doit au contraire faire aux parties interessees
des recommandations en vue de mettre fin a cette
situation.
La delegation bresilienne, apres avoir attentivement etqdie la longue liste de faits qui se sont
produits et les enquetes approfondies qu'a conduites la Commission, declare, sans la moindre
hesitation, qu'il s'agit la d'une situation dangereuse, repondant parfaitement a la definition
donnee a la fin de l'Article 34.
En ce qui concerne les assertions formulees
contre la maniere· dont la' Commission a etabli
les faits, ainsi que la critique reprochant a la
Commission d'avoir depasse ses pouvoirs en presentant des propositions qui equivalent a porter
un jugement sur l'attitude des trois pays voisins
de la Greee, je dois direceci: meme si ces allegationset critiques etaient justifiees - et elles ne le
sont pas - ce1a ne modifierait en rien la conviction que nous avons qu'il existe, au nord de la
Grece, une situation dangereuse qui impose au
Conseil le devoir de faire de son mieux pour
l'eclaircir et la dissiper.
Les recommandations de la Commission d'enquete, dont l'essentiel a ete incorpor';; dans la
resolution soumise par le representant des EtatsUnis, appartiennent a la procedure de conciliation et devraient ette acceptees comme telles par
les Etats a qui elles s'adressent. Comme l'a bien
marque M. van Langenhove, ces recommandations n'irnpliquent aucune derogation a la. sou..
verainete des Etats en question1 • Les mesures
recommandees me semplent susceptibles d'empecher de nouveaux desaccords et d'amener ces
Etats' a eliminer grac1uellement les incidents de
frontiere.
Je suis d'autant plus dispose a soutenir ces
recommandations que je represente un pays qui
est fier d'une tradition pacifique longtie et ininterrompue et qui, dans l'histoire du droit international, s'est toujours montre l'un d€',s partisans les plus fesolus de l'arbitrage et des autres
methodes propres a resoudre paci:fiquement les
differends. .
A cet egard, l'Organisation des Nations Unies
feraitbien de s'inspirer de l'esprit et de l'exemple
frnctueux du systeme regional interamericain,
elabore au cours de nombreUses annes de pratique de boD. voisinage, de non-intervention et de
respect de l'integrite territoriale des autres pays.
Tous ces principes sont des consequences nature!les du principe plus large de l'egalite juridique
des Etats, conception essentiellement americaine,
qui a ete inseree dans les constitutions federales
des pays americains et constitue la raison pri1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels dv. Conseilde secflriM,
D eUXlt:me
."
An'
.
nee, N0 53 •
.

....

1212
their unbreakable union. It is the earnest desire
of America that this principle should be incorporated also into the community of peoples, for
it is the fountainhead of brotherhood, of solidarity, and of the realization of the common
destiny of nations.

mordiale de leurindissoluble union. L'Arnerique
formule ardemment le souhait que ce principe
soit etendu a toute la communaute des peuples,
parce qu'il est la source de la fraternite et de la
solidarite humaines et parce qu'il doit permettre
aux peuples d'accomplir !eur commune destinee.

202. Programme of work

202. Programme de travail

The PRESIDENT: As there are no other
speakers on the question on our agenda, I shall
adourn the meeting.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Puisqu'il n'y a pas d'autres orateurs inscrits sur la
question portee a I'ordre du jour, je vais ajourner
la seance.
Mais je voudrais auparavant, en peu de mots,
informer le Conseil du programme de la semaine
prochaine. Nous devons coordonner nos travaux
avec ceuX des comites de I'energie atomique. Je
propose done que le Conseil tienne deux reunions
mardi prochain, une le matin et une I'apresmidi, deux reunions jeudi, matin et apres-mi(li,
et une reunion ven<1redi matin: au total cinq
seances. Je propose de mettre a l'ordre du jour
de la seance de mardi matin le rapport de la
Commission des armements de type cl2.ssique,
qui vient de nous parvenir. S~il n'y a pas d'opposition, je mettrai la question grecque a I'ordre
du jour de la seance de mardi apres-midi, et
j'airnerais que quelques orateurs se fissent inscrire
sur ma liste.
Jeudi, nous pourrions discuter le rapport du
Comite d'etat-major1 • Nous aurons aussi a consacrer une seance a la designation du gouverneur
de Trieste. Vendredi, nous pourrions discuter de
nouveau la question grecque, ou, si vous le preferez, nous pourrions discuter la question grecque
jeudi, et I'autre questi<?n vendredi.

Before doing so, however, I should like to
inform the Council briefly concerning the programme for next week. We have to co-ordinate
our programme with that of the Atomic Energy
committees. I therefore propose that the Council
should have two meetings on Tuesday, morning
and afternoon; two meetings on Thursday,
morning and afternoon; and one meeting on
Friday morning: a total of five meetings. I propose to put on the agenda of the morning meeting on Tuesday the report of the Commission for
Conventional Armaments, which has been presented to us; unless there is some objection, I
shall put the Greek question on Tuesday afternoon, and I should like to have some speakers
on my list.
On Thursday we would have a discussion of
the report of the Military Staff Committee;l we
also have to hold a meeting on the appointment
of the governor of Trieste. On Friday we might
discuss the Greek question again, or we might
have the Greek Question on Thursday and the
other subject on "Friday.
Mi". PAROD! (France) (translated from
French): Personally, I think that it would perhaps be better for us not to consider the Greek
question before Thursday, and to devote Tuesday afternoon's meeting rather to a discussion of
the report of the Military Staff Committee. We
shall be held up for several days by the long
holiday weekend, and I feel that before the
Greek question is put back on the agenda of
one of our meetings, it would be desirable that
the members of the Council should have an opportunity to discuss it among themselves.
I do not press the point but, in my opinion,
it would be better not to put the Greek question
on the agenda before Thursday.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United; Kingdom):
I am rather anxious that this question on which
we are engaged this morning should not drag 011
too long. It is, as has been remarked this morning, a dangerous situation. Apart from that, we
have special representatives here, members of
LIte Commission, who cannot stay indefinitely,
and I do feel that if we cannot have at least two
meetings next week to deal with this subject, we
really shall be i.-rldulging in rather undue delay.

1 See Official Records ~f the Security Council, Second
Year, Special Supplement No. 1.

M. PAROD! (France): n me semble, compte
tenu de mes preferences personnelles, qu'il vaudrait peut-etre mieux ne nous occuper de la
question grecque que jeudi et consacrer plutot la
seance de mardi apres-midi a la discussion du
rapport du Comite d'etat-major. Nous allons, en
efIet, etre immobilises par les fetes pendant quelques jours, et je crois qu'il serait utile que nous
puissions avoir des conversations sur la question
grecque avant qu'elle ne soit remise a I'ordre du
jour d'une de nos seances.
Je n'insiste pas, mais j1indique qu'il vaudrait
mieux, selon moi, que la question grecque ne ffit
pas portee a l' ordre du jour avant jeudi.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l'anglais): l'aimerais assez que
l'examen de la question qui nous occupe ce
matin ne tra1n~t pas trop en longueur. Comme
on I'a dit ce matin, il s'agit la d'une situation
dangereuse. D'ailleurs, il y a parrni nous des
membres de la Commission d'enquete, venus
specialement pour la representer dans cette discussion, et qui ne peuvent rester ici indefiniment.
Je suis persuade que si nous ne consacrons pas
au moins deux seances la semaine nrochaine a
nous occuper de cette question, not;e discussion
va se prolonger indefiniment.
1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite.
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement Special No 1.

..

1213
I quite recognize what the representative of
France has said, that it may be necessary and
desirable for members of the Council to have
private dis~ussions and so o~, but ~ shoul~ think
that if we are not to contmue this questlon on
Tue~day, we ought at le'ast to try and, fit in a
minimum of two meetings next week.

Je reconnais parfaitement, comme l'a dit le
representant de la France, qu'il peut ctre necessaire et souhaitable que les membres du Conseil
discutent sur cette question en seance privee,
mais je pense que, meme si nous ne discutons
pas cette question mardi, nous devrions au moins
essayer de lui consacrer deux seances la semaine
prochaine.

I think the President's suggestion was that on
Thursday the Council should meet in the morning to discuss the report of the Military Staff
Comrpittee, and in the afternoon to discuss the
appointment of the governor of Trieste. That
latter discussion would be a private discussion;
it might not be very long. I think we shall have
to have one other preliminary exchange of views
before we can expect to arrive at a decision. I
wonder whether that private meeting could not
somehow be arranged at some other hour. I
wonder whether the Council, would agree to put
the Greek question provisionally on the agenda
for Thursday afternoon. That would mean that
the Greek question would be discUssed Thursday
afternoon and Friday morning, and that means
we coud probably arrange, in the course of the
week somehow, to discuss at a further stage the
appointment of the governor of Trieste.
I should like to ask for three meetings on the
Greek question next week, if it is possible. We
have some time for private discussions among
representatives, and if we could have three meetings on this qm: ion in the latter part of next
week, it would be very desirable. It is going to
take a number of meetings to settle the question
now before us, but I do think that two meetings
on the question are the absolute minimum.

Le President a propose, je crois, que le Conseil se reullit jeudi matin pour discuter du rapport du Comite d'et;l.t-major, et qu'il discutat
jeudi apres-midi de la designation du gouverneur
de Trieste. Cette derniere discussion aura lieu
en seance privee; il se peut qu'elle ne soit pas
tres longue. Je pense qu'il faudra avoir un del'nier echange de vues preliminaire avant de pouvoir arriver a une decision. J e me demande si
cette reunion privee ne pourrait pas avoir lieu a
un autre moment. Peut-etre le Conseil pourrait-il, provisoirement, mettre la question grecque
a l'ordre du jour de jeudi apres-midi. La question grecque serait ainsi discutee jeudi apres-midi
et vendredi matin, ce qui nous permettrait sans
doute de nous arranger pour discuter a un autre
moment, au cours de la semaine, la designation
du gouverneur de Trieste.
.
'"
J'aimerais, s'il etait possible, que l'on consacrat trois seances a la question grecque au cours
de la semaine prochaine. Nous avons le temps de
discuter privement entre representants au Conseil; si nous pouvions' consacrer trois seances a
cette question a la fin de la semaine prochaine,
ce serait une excellente chose. n faudra bien des
seances encore pour arriver a 'un reglement de la
question; je pense que lui consacrer deux seances
est un strict minimum.

The PRESIDENT: I fully agree with the representative of the U::Jited Kingdom that we must
have at least two meetings on the Greek question. I see that there are enough speakers on this
question. Consequently, unless there is some objection, we shall have the Greek question on
Tuesday afternoon. I propose to put on the
agenda for Tuesday morning the report of the
Commission for Conventional Armaments, and
the Greek question on Tuesday afternoon. I do
not think that at this stage we need bind oUrselves as to the programme for next week.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je suis
parfaitement d'accord avec le representant du
Royaume-Uni pour penser que nous devons consacrer au moins deux seances
la question
grecque. Je vois qu'il y a suffisamment d'orateurs inscrits. Ainsi, s'il n'y a pas d'objection,
nous discuterons de la question grecque mardi
apres-midi. Je propose de mettre a l'ordre du
jour de mardi matin le rapport de la Commission des armements de type classique, et de mettre la question grecque a l'ordre du jour de
mardi apres-midi. Je ne crois pas qu'il soit necessaire de nous Her d~ maintenant en ce qui
concerne le programme de nos travaux pour la
semaine prochaine.
Il est entendu qu'il yaura deux seances jeudi,
et une seance vendredi matin, mais nous pouvons
attendre jusqu'a mardi pour decider definitivement de l'ordre du jour de chacune de ces
seances.

What I wish to make clear is that there will
be two meetings on Thursday and one on Friday
morning. We can wait until Tuesday to decide
finally what we shall put on the agenda for each
particular meeting.

a

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) :
Is all of Wednesday required for the Atomic
Energy Commission?

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l'anglais): Est-ce que toute la journee du mercredi est necessaire a la Commission
de l'energie atomique?

The PRESIDENT: There is only one meeting

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Il n'y a
de seance que mercredi matin sur la question de
l'energie atomique.

Oh ~ ednesday morning on the atomic energy

_. question.

~""-""""""L

-

1214
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): I suggest that
we include the Greek question on the agenda for
Tuesday morning in case we are able to get to
it, because our only work on the report of the
Commission for Conventional Armaments is, I
hope, to adopt the report without having a
wearisome repetition of the case which we have
fully gone through in the Commission for Conventional Armaments. That being the case, we
should therefore hope to be able to proceed very
quickly to the next item on the agenda, and
though we may not reach the Greek question on
Tuesday morning-but I hop we shall-I suggest the inclusion of both items on the agenda.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
l'anglais): Je propose d'inscrire la question
grecque a l'ordre du jour de la seance de mardi
matill; pOUf le c<'tS Ou.-nolls pourrions entamer la
discussion sur cette question. En effet, en ce qui
conceme le rapport de la Commission des armements de type classique, le seul travail que nous
ayons a faire - j'espere - est l'adoption du rapport, car nous n'allons pas repeter a satiete tout
ce qui a ete dit et redit a la Commission des
armements de type classique. Cela etant, nous
pourrons - je l'espere - passer tres vite au
point suivant de l'ordre du jour. Il est possible
que nous ne puissions pas arriver a discuter la
question grecque mardi matin; roais je l'espere
quand meme, et c'est pourquoi je propose d'inscrire les deux points a l'ordre du jour.

The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the
Security Council that we are getting one additional point to consider; that is the question of
the examination of five membership applications
on which there has been a resolution of the General Assembly.l Unless there is some objection,
I shall put the report of the Commission for
Conventional Armaments and this last-mentioned question on the agenda for Tuesday
morning. If we should finish quickly with t 1,le
report of the Commission for Conventional
Armaments, we should then have another question to occupy the rest of our meeting. We could
then start in the afternoon with the Greek question and be sure that we have speaker.> on it.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je voudrais faire connaitre au Conseil de securite que
nous alIonsavoir un point supplt~mentaire a
examiner; il s'agit de l'examen des cinq candidatures qui ont fait l'objet d'une resolution de
I'Assemblee generale1 • S'il n'y a pas d'objection,
j'inscrirai a l' ordre du jour de la seance de mardi
matin le rapport de la Commission des armements de type classique, ainsi que la question que
je viens de vous signaler. Si nous arrivions a
achever rapidement l'examen du rapport de la
Commision des armements de type classique,
nous aurions ainsi une autre question pour occuper le reste de la seance. Nous pourrions alors,
mardi apres-midi, commencer avec la question
grecque en etant sUrs qu'il y aura des orateurs
pour prendre la parole.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): It is not
clear to me which question about the admission
of Members is at issue here. It 'seems to me that
this question is not yet ready for consideration,
still less for consideration next week. In my
opinion this question does not yet arise; in any
event it is not ready for a meeting on it next
week. It is therefore not clear to me what we
can discuss at that meeting in connexion with
the admission of new Members. It is true that
this question will have to be dealt with later, but
I think it will be difficult to discuss it next week.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je ne vois
pas tres bien quelIe est la question qu'on pose en
ce qui concerne I'adinission de nouveaux Membres. Il me semble que cette question n'est pas encore prete a etre examinee et surtout qu'il serait
premature de l'examiner des la semaine prochaine. A mon avis, cette question ne se pose pas
encore; en tout cas elle n'est pas assez mure pour
que DOUS y consacrions une seance la semaine
prochaine. C'est pourquoi je ne vois pas tres bien
de quoi nous pourrions parler si nous voulions
discuter a cette seance de l' admission de nouveaux Membres. Il est exact que nous aurons
a nous occuper de cette question un peu plus
tard, mais, a mon avis, il serait difficile de le
faire des la semaine prochaine.

The PRESIDENT: We have a resolution of the
General Assembly asking us to re-examine five
membership applications. Of course this problem has to be decided upon by us before the next
General Assembly. We have a Committee on
the Admission of New Members. The usual procedure-and it is also in our rules regarding the
admission of new Members-is that we send all
questions of admission of new Members to the
Committee on the Admission of New Members.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Il y a
une resolution de l'AssembIee generale qui nous
demande d'examiner a nouveau cinq candidatures. Nous devons naturelIement prendre une
decision sur ce point avant la prochaine assembIee generale.. Nous avons un Comite des demandes d'admission de nouveaux Membres. La
procedure habituelle - et c'est aussi la regIe
qui figure dans notre reglement interieur - en
ce qui conceme l'admission de nouveaux Mem-

2 See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
during the second part of its first session, resolution No.
35 (I), page 61.

2 Voir les Resolutions adoptees par l'AssemblBe generale
pendant la deuxieme partie de sa premiere session, resolution No 35 (I), page 61.

Si

1215

This Committee cannot discuss the matter without instructions from the Security Council.
Therefore, I propose that we put t.his question
on the agenda of our next meeting; I propose
that we decide at that time to refer the question
to the Committee on the Admission of New
Members. That Committee will then spend
some time in dealing with the' question, after
which it will come back to the Security Council,
where we shall discuss it.

bres consiste a renvoyer au Comite des demandes
d'admission de nouveaux Membres toutes les
questions concemant de nouvelles admissions. Ce
Comite ne peutpas discuter de cette question sans
avoir re~u d'instructions du Conseil de securite.
C'est pourquoi je propose d'inscrire cette question a l'ordre du jour de notre prochaine seance
et je propose que nous decidions a ce moment-la
de renvoyer la question au Comite des demandes
d'admission de nouveaux Membres. pe Comite
etudiera a loisir la question qui reviendra ensuite
pour discussion au Conseil de securitee.

·Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
If, as I hope, any discussion on new Members
the Council may have in the first instance would
merely mean a prompt reference of the entire
matter to the Committee on the Admission of
New Members, then it might not take more than
two or three minutes. I therefore venture to
suggest that we could have that item on the
agenda and perhaps perform this useful and
brief piece of business, thereby gaining what information is available from the. Secretary-Gen~
eral, after which we can continue with the Greek
question. Since we are discussing the Greek
question in ':he afternoon, why can we not have
three items on the agenda for the morning session? We might have a half-hour or an hour's
discussion on the Greek question before we adjourn for lunch, and we can then continue in
the afternoon.

M. JOHNSON (Et"'.t;:;.!.Tnis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Si, comme je l'espere, la
discussion pour l'admission de nouveaux Membres doit se limiter au sein du Conseil de securite a un renvoi rapide de la question au
Comite des demandes d'admission de nouveaux
Membres, cela ne nous prendra pas plus de
deux ou trois minutes. Je veus proposerais
done d'inscrire cette question a l'ordre du jour
pour nous acquitter de cette tache, utile bien que
breve, ce qui nous permettra de recevoir du
Secretaire generalles renseignements qui lui sont
parvenus; apres quoi naus pourrons continuer
l'examen de la question grecque. Puisque naus
discutons la question grecque dans l'apres-midi,
pourquoi ne pas inscrire trois points a l'ordre du
jour de la .>eance du matin? ~ous pourrions discuter pendant une demi-heure ou une heure sur
la question grecque avant d'ajourner la seance
pour le dejeuner, et continuer l'apres-midi.

The PRESIDENT: I have no objection to that
procedure, although I doubt whether we shall
really get to the Greek question. Secondly, I am
not sure that we have any speakers who prefer
to speak in the morning. We may have some, and
there is no reason why we should not add this
third point to the agenda. Consequently, the
agenda for Tuesday morning will include the
report of the Comm:ssion for Conventional
Armaments, the question of the re-examination
of applications for membership, and the Greek
question.
The representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics has just enquired as to whether
we are approving the agenda at this time. In
answer to his inquiry, I wish to state that this
~ just an announcement by the President, nothmg more.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je n'ai
pas d'objection a cette procedure, bien que je
doute que nous puissions vraiment aborder la
question grecque. D'autre part, je ne suis pas
certain qu'il y ait des orateurs qui desirent pader
le matin. Il est possible cependant que nous en
ayons, et il n'y a aucune raison de ne pas ajouter
ce troisieme point a l'ordre du jour. En consequence l'ordre du jour de mardi matin comprendra le rapport de la Commission des armements de type classique, le nouvel examen des
demandes d'admission aux Nations Unies, et la
question grecque.
Le representant de l'Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques vient de me demander si
nous sommes en train d'approuver l'ordre du
jour. En reponse a sa demande, je tiens a dire
qu'il s'agit uniquement d'une communication du
President, rien de plus.

Our next meeting will be held on Tuesday, 8
July 1947, at 10.30 a.m.

Notre prochaine seance aura lieu mardi
8 juillet 1947, a 10 h. 30.

The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

La seance est levee a 12 h. 15.

SALES AGENTS OF UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS

DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIOIVS UNIE~
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE
.Editorial Sudamericana

S. A.
Calle Alsina 500
Buenos Aires

AUSTRALIA-AUSTRALIE
H. A. Godda~d Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
Sydney

BELGIUM-BELGIQUE
Agence et Messageries de la
. Presse
14-22 rue du Persil
Bruxelles

BOLIVIA-BOLIVIE
Lihreria Cientffica y
Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LaPaz

CANADA-CANADA
The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
Toronto

CHILE-CHILI
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
Santiago

CHINA-CHINE
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
Shanghai
COSTARICA

COSTA-RICA
Trejos Hermano8
Apartado 1313
San Jose

CUBA-CUBA
La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
La Hahana
CZECHOSLOVAKIA

TCHECOSLOVAQUIE
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
Prahal

DENMARK-DANEMARK.
Einar Munskgaard
Norregade6
Kjohenhavn

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

NETHERLANDS

REPUBLIQUE
DOMINICAINE

PAYS·BAS

Lihreria Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartado 656
Ciudad .Trujillo

ECUADOR-EQUATEUR
Muiioz Hermanos y Cia.
Nueve de Octuhre 70r.
Casilla 10-24
Guayaquil

FINLAND-FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskauskatu
Helsinki

FRANCE-FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue SoufHot
Paris Ve
GREECE-GRECE
"Eleftheroudakis"
Lihrairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
Athtmes
GUATEMALA

GUATEMALA
Jose Gouhaud
.Gouhaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
Guatemala

HAITI-HAITI
Max Bouchereau
Lihrairie "A la CaravelIe"
BOlte postale 111-B
Port-au-Prince

INDIA-INDE
Oxford Book & Stationery
Co.
Scindia House
New Delhi

IRAN-IRAN
Bangahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
Teheran

IRAQ-IRAK
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
.
Baghdad

LEBANON-LIBAN
Lihrairie universelle
Beirut

N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
s'Gravenhage
NEW ZEALAND

NOUVELLE-ZELANDE
Gordon & Gotch
Waring Taylor Street
Wellington

NORWAY-NORVEGE
Norsk Bokimport A/S
Edv. Storms Gate 1
Oslo

SWEDEN-8UEDE
C. E. Fritze's Kungl.
. Hofhokhandel A.-B.
Fredsgatan 2
Stockholm

SWITZERLAND-SUISSE
Lihrairie Payot S. A.
Lausanne
•••••••••••••

Cl

•••••••

Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
Zurich 1

SYRIA-SYRIE
Lihrairie universelle
Damascus
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA

UNION SUD-AFRICAINE
Central News Agency Ltd.
Commissioner & Rissik St8.
J~hanneshurg

UNITED KINGDOM

ROYAUME-UNI
H.M. Stationery Office
P.O. Box 569
London, S.E. 1
UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA

ETATS-UNIS D'AMERIQUE
International Documents
Service
Columhia University Press
2960 Broadway
NewYork27,N. Y.
YUGOSLAVIA

YOUGOSLAVIE
Drzavno Preduzece
Jugoslov'enska Knjiga
Moskovska Ul. 36
Belgrade
