UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
(J&j [*.f!J$’ w
THIRTIETH

1820’”

NOV 18 IS83

YEAR-

U.$q/$, b.&.;T;Te; ,&-‘:‘.?
”a
MEETING: 12 MARCH 1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1820/Rev.2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1625) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV .1820

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a’
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and,
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1820th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 12 March 1975, at 3.30 p.m.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Grozev
(Bulgaria), Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) and Mr. Datcu
(Romania) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

President: Mr. Fernando SALAZXR (Costa Rica).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byeiorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.

3 . tie PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
Members of the Council have before them a draft
resolution which has been issued as document
S/11657. As all members know, this draft resolution
has been prepared in the course of protracted
consultations. In my capacity as President, I am now
submitting this draft resolution, which is the fruit of
prolonged efforts, to the Council. The members of
the Council agreed at our consultations that statements
would be made after the adoption of the draft
resolution. Accordingly, I now propose to the Council
that it adopt this draft resolution without a vote. If I
hear no objections, I shall consider that the draft
resolution is adopted without vote.

Provisional agenda (SfAgendajl820fRev.2)
1.

Adoption of the agenda

2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1625)
The meeting was called to order at 4.I5 p.m.

The draft resolution was adopted.’
4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
Before calling on the first speaker, I should like to
make a statement in my capacity as President of the
Security Coundil.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent
representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11625)

5 . In the resolution just adopted, the Council requests
the Secretary-General to report to it whenever he
considers it appropriate, and taking account of Ihe
views of the parties concerned, on additional new
elements which he believes might facilitate the early
and successful conclusion of the negotiations in fulfilment of the provisions of the resolution.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish).In accordance with the decision taken at the 1813th
meeting, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey
and Greece to participate in the debate without the
right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Clerides
(Cyprus), Mr. Olcay (Turkey) and Mr. Carayannis
(Greece) took places at the Security Council table.

6. I believe I speak also for the Council in noting
that the most practical arrangement would be if the
talks between the parties were normally to take place
at the Headquarters of the United Nations. I understand that it is the Secretary-General’s intention to
consult with the barties on all the modalities of the
talks.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 1815th
to 1817th meetings, and with the consent of the
Council, I invite the representatives of Bulgaria,
Saudi Arabia and Romania to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber in order
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote.

7. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(interpretation from Russian): The Security Council
is now completing its consideration of the question
of the situation in Cyprus, brought before the Council
by the Government of the Republic of Cyprus. Today,
in view of the Council’s adoption of the resolution
on this question, my delegation considers it necessary
to make a statement in explanation of its vote and, at
1

the same time, to tie stock, as it were, of the discussion of this item in the Council.

independence and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Cyprus. They contain a demand that foreign
troops be immediately withdrawn and that the people
of Cyprus be given an opportunity to solve the
questions of the Republic’s internal structure
themselves.

8. All the members of the Council, the parties
concerned, other States Members of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General took an active
part in the discussion of this question. In their
statements, the members of the Council, the SecretaryGeneral, and the majority of the speakers from other
countries emphasized the gravity of the Cyprus crisis,
which was engendered by foreign military intervention,
by flagrant foreign political interference in the domestic
a&irs of Cyprus, by the failure to comply with the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly on the question of Cyprus and by the
unilateral actions of the Turkish mmmunity.

1 2 . During the discussion, members of the Council
and representatives of other States rea.Ermed their
recognition of a sole Government in Cyprus: the
lawful Government of the Republic of Cyprus, headed
by President Makarios. As was rightly noted in tie
statement by the President of the Council in the
statement he made as representative of Costa Rica
[1819th meeting], there is a consensus among the
members of the Council that the Government of
Cyprus headed by President Makarios is the only
lawful Government of the Republic of Cyprus. The
Security Council really cannot seriously talk about or
take a decision concerning the sovereignty, independence and territorid integrity of the Republic of
Cyprus without recognizing the 1awfuJ Government of
Cyprus, even though it is not to the liking of some.

9. As almost all the speakers noted, the situation
in and around Cyprus remains tense indeed and
fraught with the danger of a further explosion, thus
representing a direct threat to peace and security
in the eastern Mediterranean. Contrary to the clear
and unambiguous decisions on this matter by the
Security Council and the General Assembly, foreign
military intervention against the Republic of Cyprus
continues. Cyprus is a full-fledged Member of the
United Nations and an active participant in the nonalignment movement. Vet foreign troops continue to
be present on the territory of the Republic of
Cyprus, to flout its sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity and to violate the recognized
rules of international law and the fundamental purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
FJagrant external interference in the domestic affairs
of the RepubJic of Cyprus continues. The United
Nations, and in particular the Security Council,
are kept out of direct participation in the settlement
of the question.

13. All the members of the Council and other
speakers, and particularly the parties concerned
-Cyprus, Greece and Turkey-have firmly declared
the need to protect the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and
the inadmissibility of any acts aimed at partitioning
Cyprus or uniting it with any other State.
1 4 . The present discussion of the question of Cyprus
in the Security Council has again shown and reaffirmed
the urgent necessity for a settlement of the Cyprus
crisis on the basis of the earliest possible effective
implementation of the United Nations decisions on
the question. It has also shown the necessity for
participation by the United Nations through its
principal organ for the maintenance of international
peace and security-the Security Council-in negotiations regarding Cyprus. The negotiations, as has been
noted in statements by members of the Council, must
be carried on in an atmosphere free from external
pressure and diktat .

10. At the same time, almost all the members of
the Security Council and other speakers noted that the
unilateral action by the leadership of the Turkish
community in setting up a separate State structure on
the part of the territory of the Republic of Cyprus
occupied by Turkish troops has led to an even more
dangerous situation in and around Cyprus. It is not
difficult to see that all of this was aimed at consolidating
the state of affairs resulting from the external interference in the affairs of the Republic of Cyprus.

15. Most of the Council’s members have unambiguously condemned the practice of unilateral and
separate actions, as a result of which the talks have
been deadlocked and undermined. As has been rightly
noted here by members of the Council-and, first
of all, by the representatives of the non-aligned
countries, the United Republic of Cameroon, Guyana
and the United Republic of Tanzania-an important
and essential prerequisite for a solution of the Cyprus
question based on the lofty principles of the Charter
must be the earliest possible withdrawal of all foreign
troops from the territory of Cyprus and an end to
all foreign interference in the domestic affairs of the
people of Cyprus.

1 1 . Almost all the members of the Council and others
who participated in the discussion noted that the
action by the leadership of the Turkish community
has jeopardized the process of intercommunal ta&s
in conditions free from external interference and
diktat, conditions envisaged in General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX). A majority of speakers
described that action as a violation of that resolution
and of the Council’s own resolutions on Cyprus.
Those United Nations resolutions, as everyone knows
express support for the lawfui Government of Cyprus
and emphasize the need to ensure the sovereignty,

16. One cannot but agree with the view of the
Secretary-General that the whole world expects
2

“that the United Nations can and should shoulder its
responsibilities in this matter. Indeed, the Cyprus
problem represents a crucial test of the effectiveness
and credibility of the Organization” [181&h meeting,
para. 81.

23. The initiative was therefore seized by the Western
countries. The draft resolution which was mainly
prepared by them is, for obvious reasons, even
weaker than the text of non-aligned countries would
have been, particularly with regard to the question
of negotiations concerning Cyprus.

17. The Soviet delegation is still firmly convinced
that a genuine and lasting settlement of the Cyprus
crisis is possible only in a broad and representative
international forum within the framework of the United
Nations.

24. The resolution we have adopted naturally gives
due credit to the positive elements, such as, for
example: the reaffirmation of the recognition of
the Government of Cyprus as the sole lawful Govemment of the Republic of Cyprus; the provision
concerning the inadmissibility of any acts detrimental
to the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity
and non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus; and
the inadmissibility of any attempts to partition the
island, to merge or unite it with any other country.
It also contains-if only in the form of a regret-a
virtual condemnation of the unilateral act by the
leadership of the Turkish community in Cyprus in
proclaiming a separate state structure in the part of
the island occupied by the Turkish troops. There is
also a provision to the effect that that separatist
action must not prejudge any final political settlement in Cyprus, and an appeal for urgent and effective
implementation of General Assembly resolution 3212
(XXIX), which was endorsed by the Security Council.

1 8 . With regard to the resolution just adopted by the
Council, my delegation considers it necessary to make
the following statement.
19. We would unquestionably have preferred the
draft resolution which was drafted and circulated by
the delegation of Cyprus. If that text had been adopted
by the Council, it could have served as a useful
basis for a rapid and just settlement of the Cyprus
question in accordance with the principles of the
Charter and the decisions of the Council and the
Assembly on Cyprus.
20. The preliminary draft resolution prepared by the
group of members of the Council from the non-aligned
countries was, however, weaker, although it preserved
a sound basis for a just settlement of the Cyprus crisis
with direct participation of the Security Council on
the basis of its well known resolutions.

25. My delegation notes these important provisions
of principle which correspond to the position taken
by the USSR on the Cyprus question. At the
same time, however, this resolution has a number of
serious failings that considerably weaken it. We are
referring mainly to the provision relating to the
question of the resumption of talks on Cyprus. As
I have already noted, my delegation continues in its
deep conviction that a settlement of the Cyprus
probIem can and must be achieved only in a broad,
representative international forum within the framework of the United Nations, with the participation
of all members of the Security Council and a group of
the non-aligned States. Only such an international
forum within the framework of the United Nations
can ensure an objective, effective and fair resolution
of this question in the interests of the people of
Cyprus. We regret that this just proposal of the
USSR has encountered such stubborn resistance from
the countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and from China.

21. The delegation of the USSR and other delegations in the Security Council and in the United Nations
as a whole naturally expected-and not without
reason-that there would have been a more active
and purposeful initiative from the sponsors of that
draft resolution, an initiative that would have really
helped towards a solution to the dangerous and critical
situation in Cyprus and that would have protected
the Republic of Cyprus, an active participant in the
non-aligned movement, from the continuing foreign,
military intervention and the flagrant external interference in its domestic affairs.
22. We listened with great interest to the closely
argued and substantial statements by the representatives of non-aligned States members of the Council.
Those statements stressed the deep concern felt by
the non-aligned countries at the continuing external
interference and the force being brought to bear
against the defenceless Republic of Cyprus. Everyone
was entitled to expect from the Security Council
some concrete ideas and steps towards resolving the
Cyprus crisis that would come from the substantial
force in the United Nations which is now represented
by the non-aligned movement, in which the Republic
of Cyprus is an active participant. Unfortunately,
however, these did not materialize. The draft resolution of the non-aligned countries did not even officially
see the light of day-and that is something which
we cannot but regret.

26. The discussion in the Security Council, as has
become obvious to us all, revealed an understanding
among members of the Council of the necessity for
a search for a new procedure for the resumption
and continuation of the Cyprus talks. An overwhelming
majority of the members of the Council gave direct
support to the view and the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the need to seek a new procedure
for the negotiations. And, as has already been noted,
the talks cannot be continued or lead to any positive
results on the previous footing, that is to say, one to
one between the representatives of the two com3

munities. And even if representatives of Greece and
Turkey were to join these two parties, the character
of the procedure and the substance of the negotiations
would in no way be changed. Everything would remain
as before, and a second collapse of such negotiations
would be inevitable.
27. The resolution provides for the participation in
the talks of the Secretary-General, although it does
not make this sufficiently clear. We regard that as a
serious weakness in the resolution. However, the
Secretary-General, in accordance with the formula
adopted, is, on instructions from the Security Council,
to direct these negotiations. Thus, despite the general
terms and the weakness of the formulation, through
the Secretary-General, who has been empowered by
the Security Council, the United Nations will play
an important role in the resumed negotiations on

32. All of this fully reaflirms the correctness of the
view concerning the situation in and around Cyprus
which was presented at the very beginning by the
Soviet Union. There is still a desire to resolve the
problem of Cyprus, not within the framework of the
United Nations, nor with the participation of the
Security Council, but in the narrow circle of NATO,
behind dosed doors, behind the back of the United
Nations and to the detriment of the interests of the
Republic of Cyprus and of its people.
33. The Soviet delegation, in conclusion, considers
it appropriate, to stress once again that the USSR
is fhmly convinced that a genuine, just and lasting
settlement of the Cyp~s crisis can and must be found
only in a broad and representative international forum
within the framework of the United Nations, and not
in the narrow circle of NATO.

CyPNS.

28. The President of the Security Council, the Foreign
Minister of Costa Rica, in summing up the discussion
of the question of Cyprus here, rightly noted the
agreement which emerged among members of the
Council to the effect that it shouid not only- help to
create an auspicious atmosphere for the resumption
and the progress of negotiations, but also “has the
duty to superintend their progress and in so far as
possible ensure that the parties will find new ways
to reach a peaceful settlement*‘. [l819rh meeting,
pm-u. 251.
29. The participation of the S&retaryGeneral in the
talks and his obligation under the resolution to
report to the Security Council on the progress of the
negotiations will give the Council a chance to follow
the negotiations and Co take any necessary steps in
good time.
30. It must be noted here that the NATO countries
excluded from the original draft resolution of the
nonaligned countries a provision for the creation of a
group of members of the Council to take part in
the Cyprus negotiations. What does this tell us? This
is further vivid testimony to the fact that certain
NATO circles are continuing their attempts to exclude
the United Nations and its main organ for the
maintenance of international peace and security, .
the Security Council, from participation in the settlement of the Cyprus question, despite the fact that the
Council has been discussing the Cyprus question for
many years now.. This question has been continually
on the Council’s agenda.

34. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): Mr. President, when I addressed the Council on 4 March,
I said that this had then been a long debate. It is today
.12 March, and I do not think anyone could describe
me as extreme if I were now to categorise our
discussions as having been protracted. But perhaps
unlike some delegations, I do not believe that the
last three weeks have been wasted. They have been
devoted to exhaustive and sometimes exhausting
consultations between the parties, the members of the
Council, and the Secretary-General, to discuss how
much common ground there actually was on which
a draft resolution might be based. The Council’s
primary responsibility in this matter remains exactly
the same, namely, to do its utmost to ensure the
resumption of the intercommunal talks under the best
possible conditions, which I believe is reflected in the
resolution that we have just adopted.
35. Unfortunately, as members of the Council are
well aware, it has not been possible to agree on a
text which commands the full assent of all the parties.
But three weeks’ debate and the tireless efforts
of so many are surely an indication of how we in
the Council have tried to be fair and to produce a
draft resolution which does not jeopardize the essential
interests of any of the parties.
36. My delegation supported this resolution
because, in our view, it succeeds in this primary
aim; even if the parties still have difficulties with
some parts of it. Moreover, my delegation supported
this resolution because we believed that these
difficulties do not and should not be regarded as
jeopardizing the vital interests of any of the parties
most direetly concerned.

31. One gets the impression that these circles are
so afraid of United Nations involvement in. the 37. With regard to paragraph 6 of the draft resoluCyprus question that they are intimidated by even a
tion which, as we know, has been the main point of
modest proposal suggesting that the Security Council
disagreement among the parties, I regret that in spite
resolution should include a direct provision to the
of all our efforts,- we have not been able to find a
formula acceptable to all. Nevertheless, the final text
effect that the Secretary-General should personally
preside over the Cyprus talks.
does meet the main requirement for a new negotiating

framework permitting the direct involvement of the
Secretary-General, while at the same time it does not
in our view detract from the principal role which
only the representatives of the two communities
can fulfil. It is after all they alone who can and
must agree upon a constitutional settlement for
Cyprus.

4% I.wish to address my last word to the parties
to the dispute. The last few days have been a testing
time for Council members and for the parties alike.
Sometimes it may have appeared that while with every
passing day the problems of Cyprus became more
urgent, we here in New York .have been wasting
our time debating the finer points of the English
language. If this is so, we must all share that
responsibility, for I do not believe the world would
have easily understood if, over a question of
semantics, the principal body of the United Nations
concerned with world security had failed to reach an
agreement. That is why I appeal to the parties today
to look beyond the mere language of this resolution
and to consider instead the realities behind it. I think
we should all now put our dictionaries away. Perhaps
they have had too much use rather than too little in the
last week or so. The responsibility of those most
directly involved is indeed a very heavy one, but in
so far as the international community is capable of
speaking with one voice, I believe that it is today
asking those who are to negotiate to do so seriousiy
and urgently. That is surely the message of the resolution we have just adopted, and it is in that sense
that I commend it.

38. As for the venue of these talks, it is clear
from your statement, Mr. President, that it appears
to the Council that the most practical arrangement
would be if the talks were normally to take place at
the Headquarters of the United Nations, and it is
right that we should draw specific attention to this
fact. But we must recognize also that there are other
matters which have to be resolved in the holding of
these talks, and we therefore believe that it is right
that the Secretary-General should consult the parties
on the venue and on the other modalities, as we
understand he has undertaken to do.
39. All the members of the Council have made
their distinctive contribution to the achievement of his
resolution. The three members here of the European
Economic Community (EEC) have together been
active. We have thereby tried to refIect the continuing
concern of the heads of Government of the nine
countries of the Community, expressed again as
recently as yesterday in Dublin. But I do think that
some special tributes are required.

44. Mr. SAITO (Japan): Mr. President, I should like
to begin- by expressing my great satisfaction at
seeing you preside over the Council this month.
The decision of the Government of Costa Rica that
its Minister for External Relations should hold the
presidency during the first week of Costa Rica’s
tenure did honour to the Council. My delegation
wishes to extend its congratulations to you, Mr. President, for continuing the distinguished role played by
your Minister for External Relations in helping to
formulate the resolution adopted by the Council.

40. First, I should like to say that, in the view of
my delegation, the non-aligned members of the
Council have played a major role in a co-operative
endeavour which led to the adoption of the draft,
and for our part we are grateful. I believe, too, that
our joint activity at these first meetings of the Council
in 1975 has set a happy precedent.

45. I wish to express my admiration for the SecretaryGeneral, who has devoted so much effort to narrowing
down the differences between the parties concerned.

41. Secondly, 1 wish to pay a tribute to the SecretaryGeneral who, in the tireless manner to which we have
become accustomed, has sought -vigorously and
skilfully to narrow the differences-between the parties.
If he failed to bridge the gap entirely, I believe none
the less that he succeeded in reducing it to a point
where we could see clearly what was and what was
not essential to the two sides, and as a result he
enabled those who formally drafted the resolution
to be confident that the final text took proper account
of the views of the two sides.

46. ‘.-I wish. to take this ODDDrtunitv to thank
Mr. Huang Hua of China for p&siding ‘so ably over
our deliberations in February.’
47. The delegation of Japan is most .&&fled with
the adoption of the resolution by consensus, since
it has been carefully drafted, in a balanced manner,
to accommodate as much as possible the views of
the parties .concemed and since the .members of the
Council have made exhaustive efforts to achieve
a break-through in the complex situation resulting
from the present crisis in Cyprus. We had some
hesitation as a result. of the fact that some of the
parties directly concerned were not fully satisfied.
However, we Sincerely hope that all the parties
concerned will be co-operative and that our decision
today will lead to the resumption of talks between
representatives of the two communities, under the
auspices and with the direction, as appropriate, of
the
Secretary-General.

42. Finally, Mr. President, I address myself to you.
It is uncommon indeed for a Council member to make
available to our deliberations the talents of its Minister
for External Relations. On this occasion my delegation
beiieves that by coming to New York, Mr. Facie made
an important contribution to our endeavours. He was
able to bring a fresh and imaginative approach to the
conduct of the presidency as well as a dedication
which greatly helped the efforts to achieve a generally
acceptable resolution.
5

48. We feel that this increased role for the SecretaryGeneral, and the resolution as a whole, will help
create the new atmosphere that is certainly necessary
if the intractable obstacles to a fair and lasting
settlement are to be overcome.

Government of the Republic of Cyprus concerning the
unilateral declaration of a *Turkish Federated State
of Cyprus by the leadership of that community
on 13 February 1975. In considering this specific
complaint of Cyprus, the Council has been obliged
to undertake a review of progress made towards the
implementation of its resolution 365 (1974), by which
it endorsed resolution 3212 (XXIX) adopted unanimously on 1 November 1974 by the Assembly at
its twenty-ninth session.

49. Whatever the result, my delegation believes
that all the authors of the draft resolution, in particular
those who took active roles in its formulation
deserve the gratitude of the other members for
their unremitting efforts to devise the new approach
that has at last been accepted by the Council.

55. The discussions in the Council, both formal
and informal, have confirmed the fact that resolution 3212 (XXIX), which was sponsored by nonaligned countries and which involved much patient
and arduous negotiation, remains a valid basis for
constructive efforts in the search for a solution to
the difficult and complex question of Cyprus. The.
review also confirmed-and this is acknowledged
in the resolution just adopted-that no progress has
been made towards the implementation of the provisions of those resolutions. Foreign armed forces and
foreign military presence and personnel have not
withdrawn from the Republic. Foreign interference
in the affairs of the Republic continues. The refugees
are no nearer to returning to their homes in safety,
and bi-communal negotiations towards reaching a
mutually acceptable political solution have broken
down.

SO. Members may recall that in my statement to the
Council on 25 February I stated that “it may be worth
while to explore the reactivation of the negotiating
process at a place outside Cyprus, in a different
atmosphere” [181&h meeting, para. 201.
51. It has to be conceded, of course, that the
unfortunate events which led to the present situation
in Cyprus took place last July, and that the last
meeting of the negotiators between the two communities was held nearly one month ago. Since the
Council’s first meeting on this new phase of the
problem took place on 20 February, there was a
feeling that the time for a decision was nmning
out. We note that the Secretary-General and the
President of the Council, and other members of the
Council as well, have done their utmost, under
heavy schedules, to conduct efficient deliberations
in the Council to help defuse the tense situation on
the island of Cyprus.

56. The essential prescriptions of the resolution
just adopted by the Council are twofold. First,
General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXDQ and
Security Council resolution 365 (1974) must be urgently
and effectively implemented. Secondly, new efforts
and new measures are required for the resumption
of the negotiations in a climate which would be
compatible with the freely expressed will, not only
of the Council, but also of the General Assembly,
that such negotiations should be conducted on an
equal footing.

52. My delegation, as the representative of a peaceloving State and a loyal member of the Council,
entertains the hope that the resolution adopted today
will put us back on the road to the confirmation
of the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Cyprus. But I think we should bear in
mind the necessity to take the time required for
fuller consideration of the fundamental aspects of
the question of Cyprus. Needless to say, under
the resolution the Council will remain actively seized
of the Cyprus question.

57. For the achievement of these objectives, my
delegation would have preferred the Council to have
agreed upon measures which would have made the
resolution just adopted less unclear in its terms and
more specific in its provisions.

53. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): The resolution we have
just adopted comes after three weeks of lively and
informed debates and after three weeks of intensive
and protracted negotiations. During this period the
Council’s activities were guided by Mr. Huang Hua,
who was President during the month of February,
and by your own Minister for External Relations
and yourself, Mr. President, during the current
month. My delegation wishes to express its admiration
of the skilful manner in which Mr. Huang Hua guided
the Council and of the determined and patient efforts
of your Minister for External Relations and yourself
in an effective and efficient discharge of the responsibilities of the office of President.

58. Speaking in the debate of 24 February 11815th
meeting], we indicated that we would not be averse
to the institution of a reasonable time-frame within
which the implementation of the provisions of resolution 3212 (XXIX) could be expected. My delegation
still holds this view. However, in the light of the
situation which the Council now faces, my delegation
expects that those of the parties on whom special
responsibilities devolve in this regard, wilI begin to
take action which will convince the Council and the
international community that the implementation of
the relevant resolutions will be pursued with
seriousness and with a sense of urgency. In our
earlier statement as well, we had expressed our

54. As is well known, the Council was called into
session as a result of the complaint made by the
6

readiness to have recourse to the provisions of
paragraph 6 of resolution 3212 (eIX), which
anticipated the possible need for a more active and
direct involvement of the United Nations in finding
a solution to the problems of Cyprus. In the view of
my delegation, it is indeed unfortunate that agree,ment could not be reached on the utilization of the
opportunities which that paragraph afforded the
Council for constructive action.

63. The fate of Cyprus, and the way in which the
Council responds to it in its prolonged anguish, are
matters of deep interest to all non-aligned countries,
and Guyana cannot be indifferent to them.
64. We look forward to receiving a report from
the Secretary-General, whenever he considers it
appropriate, on the progress made in his new mission.
However, should the decisions we have taken today
make it necessary in the future to turn to additional
specific measures, including those I cited earlier, my
delegation hopes that the Council will not hesitate
to shoulder its responsibilities and will take the
appropriate steps which would then be required.

59. The Council has recognized that new efforts
under new agreed procedures are now required to
assist the resumption of negotiations between the two
communities and has, towards this end, given an
important new mandate to the Secretary-General to
assist in the advancing of this process. In order
to ensure that the required degree of urgency be
maintained, the Council has asked the SecretaryGeneral to report to it on his discharge of this new
mandate whenever he considers it appropriate and,
in any case, before 15 June 1975; and in the meantime,
to remain actively seized of the matter. Here again,
my delegation would have preferred some more
clarity and precision with regard to the role of the
Secretary-General.

65. Mr. BOOH BOOH (United Republic of
Cameroon) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, allow me first of all to extend to you the warm
congratulations of my delegation on your accession
to the presidency of the Security Council. Your
wealth of experience of United Nations problems,
the effectiveness and impartiality with which your
Minister for Foreign Relations and you have carried
out your functions will, in our view, be valuable
assets conducing to smooth progress in our work
this month. You may be sure of the complete cooperation of my delegation in promoting the successful
accomplishment of your important mission.

60. Despite our reservations, we nevertheless
supported the resolution. For, confident as we are
of the Secretary-General’s abiding dedication to the
cause of peace, we believe that he will spare no
effort to make a success of his new mission. Furthermore, my delegation trusts, and expects, that the
parties concerned will not place any hindrance in the
way of the Secretary-General as he carries out this
new mission, and that they will co-operate with him
actively and positively.

66. I should also like at this time to congratulate
Mr. Huang Hua of China, who presided with great
skill over the work of the Council last month.
.67. In supporting the draft resolution which the
Council has just adopted, my delegation wished to
indicate once again the importance that it attaches to
the return of peace to Cyprus so as to enable the
entire Cypriot people to devote itself to the task of
the reconstruction and development of its country.

61. My delegation, working- together with other
non-aligned countries and other members of the
Security Council, has sought to make a positive
contribution to the outcome of our deliberations and
consultations. It is not my intention here to engage
in polemics on the role of the non-aligned countries
in the outcome of the resolution we adopted. The
consideration of that role is not within the jurisdiction of the Council. It is a matter for us, the
non-aligned countries, to discuss and decide upon.
We shall not be deflected from our chosen principles.
We shall continue to act in a manner which is
consistent with those principles and in accordance
with our own independent judgement.

68. It is clear that such a result can be attained
only if the Greek and Turkish communities on the
island agree to resume negotiations without delay
so as to resolve the difficult constitutional problem
before their country. It is the duty of the Council
to encourage by every means in its power the
resumption and continuation of such negotiations in
an atmosphere of freedom, equality and mutual
respect between the parties concerned. Any delay in
resuming negotiations can only have harmful effects,
because, as the Secretary-General clearly stated before
the Council on 21 February last, the recent developments which have taken place on the island “have
created a new and tense situation, because there is
now a vacuum which can all too easily be filled
by renewed violence” [181&h meeting, para. 91.

62. Speaking for Guyana, I should be less than
candid if I did not express my Government’s
disappointment that more effective measures for a
solution to the question of Cyprus could not have
been agreed upon in our collective search for a way
out for the people of Cyprus. I should be less than
candid as well if I did not express my delegation’s
concern at the intrusion of interests alien to those
of the people of Cyprus in the determination of the
Security Council’s decisions on this matter.

69. It was in that constructive spirit that during the
first days of our consultations my delegation and
other delegations from non-aligned countries that
share our views on the question of Cyprus drafted
a working document that would be an adequate
7

response to the distress and anguish of the people of
Cyprus. It was a matter of actively and closely
associating the Council and the highest official of the
Organization, who enjoys the confidence of all States,
with the quest for effective means of implementing
the resolutions adopted by the two main organs of
the United Nations.

in this matter, it was appropriate for our Council
to request him, as the highest official of the Organization, once again to continue his peace efforts by making
himself personally .availabIe to the parties so as to
facilitate the resumption, intensification and progress
of the negotiations. Paragraph 6 of the resolution,
which was the subject of protracted debate, seems
to us acceptable in its final wording. My delegation
interprets it as making the Secretary-General an
active figure in the negotiations between the two
communities, because, in being personally available.
to the two parties, he will invite them to resume
negotiations as soon as possible under his personal
auspices and under his direction, whenever necessary.

70. In that undertaking, the position of my delegation was always inspired by those principles of
objectivity and independence and a free assessment
of the international situation that are the permanent
basis of the foreign policy of the United Republic
of Cameroon, and by our constant solidarity with the
people of the Republic of Cyprus who have in the
last few months been the undeserving -victims, in
succession, of a coup d’e’rat plotted abroad and .a
foreign military invasion.

75. My. delegation continues to believe that, while
the Security %ouncil and the Secretary-General can
create propitious conditions for the resumption of
negotiations, it is up to the Greek and Turkish
Cypriot communities to play a crucial role in the final
solution of their problems. No resoIution of the
Council, however perfect, can be an effective
substitute for good will and a spirit of compromise
on the part of those concerned, attributes that seem
to us essential to the success of any negotiations.

71. The hesitations that the initiative taken by the
non-aligned countries arousedand thelong and difZcu!t
consultations which the members of the Council
have been engaged in for three weeks should not
give rise to bitter statements or to an erroneous
judgement of the action of the non-aligned countries
but should rather strengthen the conviction of all of
us that the Cyprus question cannot be finally and
peacefully solved save at the cost of substantial
concessions, patience and extreme tolerance on the
part of all the parties concerned. It is difficult
completely to satisfy everyone in this complex affair,
in which the often contradictory yet legitimate
interests of the parties deserve equal consideration
and in which the basic principIes of the Charter
to which the small countries attach particular
importance, are also at stake.

76. That is why my delegation once again makes
a friendly appeal to the Greek and Turkish Cypriots
to refrain at this stage from aggravating the suspicions
and recriminations of the past and rather to approach
the negotiations in a constructive spirit and in an
atmosphere of confidence in the independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-alignment of
the Republic of Cyprus.
77. Mr. LECOMPT (France) (inrerpreru?ion from
French): Having actively participated in the drafting
of the resolution the Council has just adopted, my
delegation appreciates the resolution’s merits while
being fully aware of the constraints that long hampered
its final drafting. We had to take into account the
situation that led to the convening of the Security
Council, and at the same time to avoid any initiative
that might have caused either party to reject out-ofhand any formuIa that might, in their opinion,
jeopardize their essential interests. In order best to
meet those two requirements it was necessary, on the
one hand, to have a rather large and diverse group
of Security Council members prepare the draft
resolution, and on the other to maintain permanent
contact with the parties concerned. It seems to me
that these two conditions were fulfilled. No doubt the
results of the efforts we made over more than
three weeks could not fully respond to the expectations of’ either of the parties concerned. Everyone
here knows that very well. Nevertheless, as the
consensus of members of the Council shows, those
results do offer a reasonable and practical basis for
the resumption of negotiations, giving a better
guarantee of a free and equal quest by the two communities for a mutually acceptable political and
constitutional settlement. That guarantee is essentially

72. Thus, mindful of the difficulties whose magnitude
we have al1 fully appreciated in these last few days,
my delegation thinks that the draft resolution that
has just been adopted, which takes into account
certain ideas cherished by the non-aligned countries,
constitutes a reasonable and acceptable compromise.
Faithful observance of it by the parties cou1d give a
new impetus to the intercommunal talks, which we all
sincerely hope will be resumed shortly and will be
brought to a successful conclusion as soon as possible.
73. My delegation is extremely pleased that iri
paragraph 1 of the resolution the Security Council
calls upon all States to respect the sovereignty,
independence,- territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus. It is of the utmost
importance that the inhabitants of-Cyprus be protected
from external military interference-and faits accomplis
so that the resolutions of the Security Council and
the General Assembly on the’ subject may be implemented effectively.
_’
74. Once the members of the Security Council had
acknowledged the competence and devotion with
which the Secretary-General has lent his good offices
8
._

:

representatives of the two communities. I would
urgently appeaI to -those communities to facilitate to
the maximum the task of the Secretary-General, as
defined, in particular, in paragraph 6 of the resolution
we have just adopted.

contained in the new mission entrusted to the
Secretary-General, who, as we know, enjoys the full
confidence of the parties and -will thus be able to
exercise the authority given him by the Council.
We would like to think that the parties will co-operate
with him and will become convinced that the formulas
‘approved by the Council in no way jeopardize their
essential concerns.

83. This resolution provides them with specific
indications of the framework and atmosphere in which
the negotiations should be resumed with the participation of the .Secretary-General. The terms “the intensification and the progress of comprehensive negotiations”, ‘.‘reciprocal
spirit of understanding”, and
“high priority” to be given by the parties all cover
what we consider should be the realities of the
future negotiations, constituting the psychological
basis for the new approach for which the SecretaryGeneral appealed in the statement he made before
the Council at the outset of our work.

78. As the Council is aware, Italy, the, United
Kingdom and France have been determined to do their
duty in recent weeks. Together with the delegations
of five other countries, the three. delegations have
attempted to hit on a wording that would cover certain
of the most essential points. We are most gratified
at the co-operation we achieved. Even though the
three and the five came from diierent regions, the
eight of us were able to propose procedures that we
hope will assist an island under duress, and a population for which the United Nations should have all
the more care since it belongs to a small country.
I also wish to pay a tribute to the other delegations
which proposed useful additions to the text drafted
by the eight of us.

84. Mr. President, this evening we are coming to
the end -of a difftcult undertaking which the skill
and devotion of your predecessor, Mr. Huaug Hua,
effectively charted for us. In patiently allowing the
question which has been before us for more than
three weeks to follow its normal course, Mr. Huang
demonstrated great wisdom. Mr. Facie, the minister
for External Relations of your country, Mr. President,
and you yourself were no less welJ advised in calling
on us to accelerate our work a little. The French
delegation would like you to convey to Mr. Facie
its gratitude and appreciation of his contribution to
the presidency of the Council. We hope that after
having guided us so skilfully to the close of this series
of meetings, you will be less burdened and will give
us less to do for the rest of the month.

79. Moreover, I wish to emphasize that the three
delegations I have mentioned worked in harmony
with the nine members of EEC. In the course of the
meeting of heads of Government of the Community
in Dublin, Ireland, yesterday and the day before, the
wish was unanimously expressed that the efforts of
the Council should be crowned with success. That is
yet another indication of the great attention with
which the nine members of EEC are following the
situation in Cyprus and their hope that within a short
time they shall witness the resumption of negotiations
on the Cyprus problem within the framework of the
discussions that have been held in the United Nations.

85. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from
Chinese): At the meeting of the Security Council
on 27 February ,[1827th meeting], the Ct;inese
delegation further expounded its stand on the questiop
of Cyprus. In view of the fact that the draft resolution just adopted by the Council is basically in
accord with General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX)
and the consistent stand of the Chinese delegation,
we supported it.

80. Mav I once again express our regret -that the
many duties of the Secretary-General have prevented
him from being with us today. He has very closely
followed the efforts of the Council, and in recent
days has played a most helpful role. Now he will
have to determine, together with the parties,: the
necessary arrangements so that the negotiations may
resume without delay and in conditions which are
convenient to each of the participants. ’

86. We have also noted that in order to achieve
-its expansionist aim, one super-Power did not hesitate
to exert gross pressure on many third world Member
States in an attempt to obstruct the resumption of
. -he intercommunal -talks and to meddle further and
intervene in Cyprus, and that its scheme has failed
and has been seen through by the great majority
of -member States .of the Council more and more
clearly. It is our sincere hope that the parties concerned+ firmly doing away with super-Power meddling
-sind intervention; will‘ resume negotiations speedily
and arrive at a reasonable settlement of the Cyprus
question through .consultations on an equal footing
and in a spirit of mutual understanding and mutual
accommodation.

81. The French delegation has taken note of the
statement which you, Mr. President, made on behalf
of the entire Council, to the effect that, for practical
reasons, negotiations should normally take place at
United Nations Headquarters [see para. 6 above].
That would certainly ensure the personal participation
of the Secretary-General in the new efforts.’ to be
undertaken.
.’
82. I would add that the Secretary&eneral’s vast
personal knowledge of the Cyprus problem will enable
him to discharge his duties while respecting the
legitimate concerns of the negotiators-namely, the
9

87. Finally, I should like to express sincere thanks
to the representatives of some friendly countries for
the sentiments of friendship towards the People’s
Republic of China they expressed in their statements.

92. In fact, in my opinion- the resolution has
revealed some basic elements for the solution of the
Cyprus crisis.
93. Fiit, there is the reaffirmation that a peaceful
solution of the Cyprus question must respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Cyprus.

88. Mr. PLA.TA (Italy): The debate we are concluding
today has been a very long one indeed. The dtaft
resolution we have just adopted has required timeconsuming efforts, diplomatic skills, and patience on
the part of all members of the Council, through
consultations among themselves, with ah the parties
and with the Secretary-General. In paying a tribute
to those who have contributed to the result, I
should like to refer, in the first place, to the Chair.
Mr. Huang Hua presided with his well-known
ability and courtesy over the beginning of our debates.
Then the Council was able to take advantage, in
its deliberations, of the most able guidance of the
Minister for External Relations of your country,
Mr. President, Mr. Facie, to whom my delegation
wants to address a special expression of gratitude and
appreciation; and now your personal action has made
a most important and conclusive contribution to our
endeavours.

94. Then comes the renewed appeal for the full
implementation of previous Council resolutions and,
in particular, of General Assembly resolution 3212
(XXDQ, endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 365 (1974). This is a comprehensive document
which takes in to -account both political and
humanitarian aspects of the situation. The Italian
delegation wishes to express the hope that Ihis
renewed appeal of the Council will be heeded in all
good faith and earnestness by ah the parties concerned.
95. Finally there is the request of the Council for
a fresh attempt to find a solution to the fundamental
problems of Cyprus through negotiations freely
conducted between the representatives of the two
communities, with the objective of reaching a
mutuaIly acceptable political settlement not prejudged
by past attitudes or decisions. The Security Council
has, in our opinion, provided this new opportunity
and has asked the Secretary-General to undertake a
new mission of good offices. We know that we have
thus put a heavy burden on Mr. Waldheim. But
the Italian delegation is sure that he will carry out
his new responsibilities to the best of his wellknown ability and with his well-known dedication
-which he has shown again in the course of the
consultations during our debate-and therefore is
confident that positive results will soon ensue from
his efforts. As for the modalities of the talks, my
.delegation wishes to place on record its agreement
with the statement you made at the beginning of this
meeting, Mr. President.

89. As you know, my delegation had, since the
very outset, been involved in the elaboration of the
text we have just adopted, together with a number of
friendly delegations. If I may be permitted to make
a personal remark, this is my first experience in the
Council, and I wish to express my gratification at
the co-operation which it has been possible to
develop between my delegation, together with the
other delegations of States members of the EEC,
and the friendly delegations of the non-aligned
members of the Council in the search for what we
believe to be a constructive conclusion to our debates.
90. My delegation, in participating in the elaboration
of the text we have just adopted on the Cyprus
question, was guided by its desire to contribute to
the maintenance of the peace in the area and to the
fulfilment of the paramount interests of the Cypriot
people. My delegation has kept in mind, to the best
of its ability, and with all objectivity, the points of
view and the positions of all the parties concerned,
as well as the responsibilities which the Charter
entrusts to the Security Council.

96. The Italian delegation remains firmly convinced
that the only way to restore peace and tranquillity
to the people of Cyprus is through the negotiating
process. The heads of Government and Foreign
Ministers of the nine countries members of the
EEC again stressed this view only yesterday, in
concluding their meeting in Dublin, and recalled the
statement of the nine countries issued on 13 February
[12629].

91. of course, I realize that a compromise text such
as the one we have adopted has parts which are
not fully satisfactory to all the parties concerned,
and that therefore they maintain reservations. Still,
I am sincerely confident that our efforts have not been
in vain and that the decision we have adopted will
consistently contribute to putting the search for a
solution to the Cyprus crisis on the right path. As
a matter of fact, my delegation is convinced that
we have managed to draft a document which is fair
and does not jeopardize any fundamental position
or interest of the parties concerned.

97. However difficult may be the issues at stake,
no goal is beyond the scope of negotiators ready to
engage, in good faith and in a spirit of mutual
understanding and accommodation, in talks aimed at
a ‘settlement based upon the real interests of the
populations involved. What is of the essence now for
the two communities in Cyprus is to look to the future
and .draw from the past the conclusion that nobody
can really take their place in the search for an agreed
solution to the problems of their country.
10

9& Mr. RYDBECK (Sweden): First of all, I wish to
pay a sincere tribute to the President of the Council
for this month-that is, to Mr. Facie, the Minister
for External Relations of Costa Rica and to you,
Sir, personally. I wish at the same time to express
my warm thanks to the President for the month
of February, Mr. Huang Hua. The Presidents for
these two months have had to shoulder a very
diflicult and important burden, and it has been
fulfilled in a manner that has made a vital contribution
to the fulfilment of our task.

103. All through the deliberations of the Council
there has been a wide measure of agreement that the
new procedure for negotiations would give a larger
role to the Secretary-General personally. The Secretary-General enjoys the full confidence not only of
the Council but also of the parties. Thus, my delegation
expresses the sincere conviction that his new mission
of good offrces will provide the new procedure needed
to bring the parties together and to promote progress
in their resumed talks. In this context my delegation
wants to pay a warm tribute to the SecretaryGeneral for his untiring efforts during these past
weeks to help find a new starting point for talks
between the parties in Cyprus. The extent to which
there has been a narrowing of positions is in no little
degree attributable to him.

99. In speaking at this stage of our debate, I
perhaps cannot contribute much that is new. However,
my delegation can, and is very anxious to, give
added emphasis to some of the vital points already
touched upon by others.

104. After long deliberations and taking into account
to the maximum extent possible the views of the
parties, the Council has carried out its duty and has
taken a new decision on the Cyprus question. As a
friend of the Cypriot people, Sweden urgently appeals
to the parties now to make use of the procedure
adopted in order to safeguard a just and stable
peace and harmonious relations in Cyprus.

100. The decision on the question of Cyprus just
taken without a vote by the Council marks, as many
speakers have noted, the end of a long and arduous
process of negotiations and informal consultations,
both multilateral and bilateral. This process has
certainly been slow. However, in the view of the
Swedish delegation it was necessary for the Council to
proceed as it has done. The parties had to be carefully
sounded out in order to give the Council as complete
and detailed a picture as possible of their respective
positions. This was so since, in the view of most
delegations-and certainly, as I stated on 24 February
[1815fh meeting], in the view of the Swedish delegation-a main task of the Security Council was to try
to provide a new procedure that would lead to the
resumption of the talks between the parties in Cyprus.
To find a solution that would be acceptable to all
parties that are involved in the Cyprus problem was
therefore the natural aim of the Council It was to
that end that it carefully investigated a great number
of solutions with a view to finding one that would
command the support both of the’ members of the
Council and of the parties.

105. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): My
delegation joined in adopting the draft resolution
because from the outset we firmly believed that the
primary goal of the Security Council should be to
encourage the resumption of taIks between the two
communities in Cyprus. Along with members of the
Council, other Governments and the SecretaryGeneral, Secretary of State Kissinger devoted his
personal efforts to contribute to this objective.

101. Yesterday it became clear that it was not possible
to find a solution to which the parties were prepared
to give their support, at least not in advance. The
obvious duty of the Council then became to take a
decision which was acceptable to its members and
which would best further the resumption of talks
between the parties.

106. Nearly a month ago, when our deliberations
began, a broad chasm separated the parties. In the
course of these strenuous consultations this chasm
has narrowed, but has not-been bridged completely.
However, when this was clear, eight delegations
representing a broad spectrum of the Council
membership, acting in co-operation with the SecretaryGeneral, worked out a constructive compromise. We
all owe a deep debt of gratitude to those eight
delegations for their imaginative, constructive and
courageous drafting of yesterday, which produced the
positive result before us.

102. The draft resolution just adopted is thus a
compromise product, where elements are lacking that
in the view of some daegations should have been
included-this applies to my delegation, for
instance+d where other elements are included
which some delegations would have wished to delete.
The resolution has, however, been adopted without
a vote by the Council, and its is my delegation’s
hope that the parties wili look and act upon the
resolution in the construction spirit in which it was
drafted, a spirit of co-operation and understanding.

107. All of us at this table can take satisfaction
in the seriousness and the sense of responsibility
which have generally characterized the Council’s
efforts in the weeks just past. The outcome, I believe,
is a victory of patience, reason and compromise
over confrontation. As is frequently the case when
an attempt is made to bridge the gap between
strongly held views of contending parties, none of
the parties may be entirely satisfied with our
result. This is natural. At the same time, no one has
suffered a defeat.
11

108. We urge the parties to respond positively and
co-operatively to the initiatives the SecretaryGeneral must take in pursuance of today’s resolution.

115. immediately following its accession to independence, Mauritania initiated fruitful relations with
Greece that my Government wishes to see strengthened to the benefit of our two countries.

109. It now becomes the duty of each of us and of
the Governments we represent to do our utmost to
help realize the progress which is represented in
the resolution we have adopted. We shall fulfil this
duty by doing whatever we can to promote the
resumption of talks between the communities-talks
looking. to a peaceful resolution of the conflicts that
have tiicted the people of Cyprus during this
generation.

116. What could be more normal therefore than
for the people and the Government of Mauritania
to feel concern about the drama now being played
out in Cyprus and in the subregion?
117. Before I conclude, I should like to pay a well
deserved tribute to you, Mr. President,- for your
work, whose results are now visible. While your
Minister for External Relations outlined the framework in which our debate might go forward in the
best possible conditions, you yourself, thanks to
your qualities as a diplomat and statesman, have
succeeded in bringing the work of the Council to
a successful conclusion, and I would ask you to
accept my delegation’s congratulations for the valuable
work you have done, not only for the benefit of
the Security Council but also for the benefit of the
international community at large.

110. Mr. KANE (Mauritania) (inrerpreazfion
fium
French): After several weeks of meetings and patient
search for a solution, we are now coming to the
close of our work. The draft resolution which has
just been adopted. by the Council by consensus will
unquestionably have a decisive impact not only on the
resumption of negotiations but also, and above all,
on the political future of the Republic of Cyprus.
111. We would, of course, have liked to achieve
perfection by adopting a resolution which would have
reflected the feelings and the concerns of each of
the parties. But we found that such a solution, no
matter how ardently desired, was virtually impossible
given the present state of affairs in Cyprus. The
time devoted by the Security Council to the consideration of the new situation in Cyprus is eloquent
testimony of that. However, despite the positions of
the parties involved, hope remains.

118. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO (Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from
Russian): After many weeks’ work the Security
Council has adopted a new resolution on the question
of Cyprus and my delegation, like other members
of the Council, considers it necessary to make a
statement in explanation of its vote.
119. Our delegation has already had an opportunity
to set forth its views on the question. We should
just like to reiterate that the serious crisis in Cyprus
fust arose and has since continued mainly because
of external interference in the domestic affairs of the
Republic of Cyprus. The further exacerbation of the
circumstances was brought about. by the unilateral
actions of the Turkish community’s leadership in
setting up a separate State structure in the part of the
territory of Cyprus occupied by Turkish troops.

112. It is because they are convinced that there
is hope that the members of the Council agreed to
entrust to the SecretaryGeneral a further mission
which has as its main objective the bringing of
the parties to meet across the table once again.
My delegation, in lending its support to this new
mission fot the Secretary-General, is firmly convinced
that it is through candid and genuine dialogue that
the parties will be able to remove the obstacles
that now impede the path to peace. The problems
of Cyprus continue to be a main concern of my
Government, because the situation in that country
cannot but be of concern to any peace-loving and
justice-loving country. The people of Cyprus have
suffered too much for there to be any let-up in the
search for peace in that part of the world.

120. The situation in an around Cyprus continues
not only to be serious but also to represent a threat,
visible to all, to peace and security in the eastern
Mediterranean. In this connexion, one cannot but
agree with the concern about this expressed by the
representatives of non-aligned countries.
121. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR is
firmly convinced that a solution of the problem of
Cyprus must be sought through the immediate and
full implementation of all provisions of previous
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
on Cyprus, that we must press for strict respect
for the independence, the territorial integrity and the
non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus. Nothing
must be allowed which would lead to the partition
of Cyprus. We believe that support should be given
to the lawfully elected Government of the Republic
of Cyprus.

113. I should also, like to refer to the friendly
relations and fruitful- co-operation that exist between
my own country and the two countries concerned,
Turkey and Greece.
114. With respect to Turkey, let me recall the visit
by the President of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania to Turkey, a visit in the course of which
many ties of co-operation were strengthened. I might
also say that we have many ties with Turkey, the
most important of which is the Islamic bond that
is a fundamental feature of our countries’ culture.
12

the very nature, the very essence, of the problem is
already international, and surely its consideration
has long since ceased to be a matter of concern
solely to the two communities in Cyprus, that is,
the Greek and Turkish parties.

122. Our delegation continues to favour further
steps by the Security Council aimed at halting all
foreign interference in the affairs of the State of
Cyprus. We continue to favour the immediate withdrawal of all armed forces and foreign military
personnel from the territory of Cyprus. There still
remains the urgent problem of preventing any further
action which may lead to the partition of Cyprus,
the more so as the press is filled with talk about
a “political partition in Cyprus”, and this at a time
when there is a unanimous view in the Security
Council about the need for strict respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Cyprus, the inadmissibility of any
partition, and the need to recognize the lawfully
elected Government of Cyprus. In pointing this out
to the Security Council, my delegation would like
once again to stress that it regards as inadmissible
any acts leading to the partition of Cyprus.

127. It must be said that all of this has to be regarded
as merely the latest attempt on the part of certain
forces to conceal their wish to exclude the United
Nations, and the .Security Council in particular,
from the solution to this question and, as before, to
have it settled in the narrow behind-closed-doors
circle of NATO, and-to the detriment X the people
of Cyprus.
12X In the course of the discussion much has been
said about a new negotiating procedure, about a
new approach, but with what result? As now drafted,
paragraph 6 of the resolution, in our opinion, will
not give the necessary impetus to these negotiations
and will not inject the necessary new element. This
paragraph is so drafted that it weakens the resolution.
At the same time, one cannot help seeing that, even
if couched in very weak terms, paragraph 6 did reflect
the generally recognized fact that the negotiations
cannot now be resumed on the previous basis and
be expected to produce any results. The paragraph
provides, although in insufficiently clear form, for
a mission of good offrces for the Secretary-General
and for his direction of_ the negotiations..- _

123. Our delegation notes that the resolution adopted
today reflects provisions the importance of which we
have mentioned earlier. These provisions, as everyone
knows, underlay General Assembly resolution 3212
(XXIX) and the pertinent decisions of the Security
Council. Their importance lies in the fact that they
represent a basis for a political settlement in Cyprus.
No less important is the fact that the resolution
that we have just. adopted envisages the urgent and
effective implementation of resolution 3212 (XXIX),
as endorsed by the Council in its resolution 365
(1974).

129. We realize that this is a complex and responsible mission entrusted to the Secretary-General by the
Council and would like once again to express our
respect for him, our trust and our support. The
participation of the Secretary-General in these negotiations, on instructions from the Council, will unquestionably enable him to follow the progress of
the negotiations and to inform the Council of the
progress of implementation of resolution 365 (1974)
and of the resolution which we have just adopted.
Thanks to the participation of the Secretary-General,
the Council will thereby be enabled to play an important
and positive role in the negotiations. The Council
will also be enabled, if necessary, to take appropriate
measures in the interests of overcoming obstacles to
a just and lasting settlement of the problem.

124. But there is another aspect of the matter too,
which is, how and by what means may this just
settlement be brought about. This aspect of the case
now becomes of very great importance. My delegation
has already spoken in favour of a new approach to
the settlement of the Cyprus question by having it
considered in a broad international forum, because
this would do most to speed a solution of the
problem in the interests of the people of Cyprus and
of both communities in Cyprus, Greek and Turkish.
125. At the same time, one cannot but note that in
the course of the Council’s discussion an overwhelming
majority spoke in favour of having a new negotiating
procedure so as to get the inter-communal talks
moving again, to create auspicious conditions for those
talks and to help bring about positive results. In this
connexion, the non-aligned States put forward the
idea that, a group of members of the Council,
however small, should take part in the talks.

130. Although we have noted certain positive
provisions in the draft resolution just adopted, and
some opportunities, albeit weak ones but nevertheless
positive, our delegation would like to stress that the
quickest and the most genuinely fair and lasting
solution to the problem of Cyprus can unquestionably
be found in a broad international forum within the
framework of the United Nations.

126. -Finally,- when this provision too met with no
support, the idea was put forward that the negotiations should take place under the direct chairmanship
of the Secretary-General. But all those proposals
met with objections on the part of certain forces and
did not receive fair treatment. The opponents of
the proposals say that they are opposed to any “internationalization” of the problem of Cyprus. But surely

131. Our delegation strongly sides with the people
of Cyprus in wishing to see the problem of Cyprus
solved in the interest of both communities-Greek
and Turkish-and it favours the elimination of tension
in the region and the strengthening of peace and
security in the eastern Mediterranean.
13

132. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania):
After a prolonged series of meetings characterized
by protracted and at times strenuous consultations,
the Security Council has just adopted a draft resolution on the question of Cyprus pursuant to the complaint submitted to it by the Government of Cyprus.

concern at the interruptibn of the intercommunal
talks and the circumstances which led to that
interruption. We believed then-as we do now-that
it is of imperative urgency that these talks be resumed
and that the necessary atmosphere be created to
facilitate their resumption. In short, a fresh approach
is needed, and it is satisfying to my delegation that
this new approach is clearly reflected in the resolution
that we have adopted. Paragraphs 5 and 6 specifically
relate to this matter.

133. The adoption of this resolution has not been
an easy exercise. For almost a month members of
the Council have been actively considering this
question. Consultations have been comprehensive
-both within the Council membership and between
members of the Council and the parties concerned.
My delegation, in concert with our colleagues, the
non-aligned members of the Council, has been very
much involved in the negotiations which possible
made the drafting of the resolution adopted today.
Those who wish objectively to recognize realities
will not fail to see that the present text contains a
number of important provisions which were originally
contained in the informal working paper prepared by
the non-aligned members of the Council. Naturally,
it does not contain all the important elements of
the non-aligned text. But then it is obvious that the
resolution which has been adopted is a Security
Council resolution and not a non-aligned document.

137. It is our hope-indeed our confident hope-that
armed with this new and important mandate the
Secretary-General will convene the parties to the
negotiating table and under his direction as appropriate,
given the co-operation of all the parties concerned,
the present impasse may be broken and a new road
carved out towards peace and justice. My delegation
solemnly appeals to all the parties to extend their
full co-operation to the Secretary-General as he undertakes this new and important mission of good offices
so that peace and justice, which we all desire to
see prevail in Cyprus, can be achieved by strict
observance of and respect for the island’s sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and policy of nonalignment.

134. I should perhaps add that this is not the first
time-nor, for that matter, will it be the last-in
the Council or in other forums of the United Nations
that the efforts of the non-aligned movement have
not met with total and absolute success. Gf course,
difficulties have been forthcoming from one or another
quarter. But then, is it really possible to expect
any country or group of countries to have everything
it wants in an organization of such diversity as our
own? Yet, despite such difficulties, we have never
been deterred from pursuing initiatives which in our
own collective and independent judgement serve
the best interests of peace and security. And I might
add that we have throughout recognized that whatever
contribution we can make-either individually or
collectively-in the cause of peace, we can make it
by not insisting on imposing our own way.

138. In my statement on 27 February I expressed
my Government’s support for the idea of a time-frame
within which the provisions of resolution 3212 (XXIX)
should be implemented. The resolution we have
adopted does not specifically address itself to this
question. We note with some satisfaction, however,
that the Secretary-General has been requested to
submit progress reports whenever he considers it
appropriate and that at any rate the Council will
have his comprehensive report on the implementation
of resolution 365 (1974), as well as on that of the
current resolution in about three months’ time. This,
in our opinion, is a positive approach to the problem,
because it reflects the Security Council’s determination
to follow closely the implementation of its resolutions.
139. I stated earlier that this resolution has been a
product of prolonged consultations and negotiations.
We are gratified to have taken part in the process
leading to this result. It should therefore not be
surprising to any one-whether in the Council or
outside it-that the resolution represents a compromise and, in my opinion, the best possible
compromise under the circumstances. My delegation
would have preferred a clearer text devoid of
unnecessary ambiguities. We would have preferred
stronger language in some of its provisions. And,
most certainly, we would have been much happier
with a more explicit elaboration of the role of the
Secretary-General in facilitating and carrying out the
negotiations between the parties concerned.

135. The same consideration has guided our role
in the question currently before the Security Council.
Throughout the consideration of the complaint submitted by the Government of Cyprus and all through
the protracted private consultations my delegation’s
overriding consideration has been to find a way in
which the present tragedy in Cyprus can be brought
to an end. As I said in my statement before the
Council on 27 Febraury {1817th meeting] , the only
effective way to do this is through the scrupulous
and speedy implementation of General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX), which was endorsed by the
Security Council in resolution 365 (1974). We are
glad to note that the current resolution affirms this
position.

140. Yet at all times we have borne in mind the
importance of taking into consideration the legitimate
positions of all the parties concerned. This is only

136. Like almost all other delegations that have taken
part in our proceedings, we expressed our serious
14

natural since in the final analysis the success or
failure of the negotiations depends squarely on the
degree of co-operation and understanding the two
communities can show each other as well as on the
co-operation which all the parties concerned can
extend to the Secretary-General. Taking these factors
into consideration, my delegation believes that the
resolution adopted by the -Council represents an
important step forward in the efforts of the United
Nations, and in particular of the Council, to promote
Pea-, justice and understanding in Cypl-US.
Accordingly, the Tanzanian delegation associated
itself with its adoption.

146. My delegation was among the last to speak in
the debate on the present item, and it was only last
week [1819rh meeting] that we stated our views on the
subject. I can therefore be brief in making the following
comments on the results of our deliberations.
147. My delegation, as a member of the non-aligned
group in the Council, had tried in good faith and in
a genuine effort to find the right formula that would
facilitate the resumption of negotiations between the
parties. We were ready to consider all practical and
feasible proposals and try to incorporate them into a
working paper, if necessary a draft resolution, which
would achieve the desired outcome. We were willing,
inter alia, to consider the establishment of a group-not
necessarily a non-aligned group, as some members
seemed to believe, but a group for a mission of good
offrces-if the parties concerned agreed that the
formation of such a group would indeed be useful
and would meet with the co-operation of the parties.
That ides was discarded when it became obvious that
the formation of the group was considered to be
premature at the present stage.

141. I should like to observe that in the course of
the consultations a number of proposals and ideas
were put forward. My own delegation in co-ordination
with others had concrete ideas relating to the framework in which the new initiative for the resumption
of inter-communal talks was to take place. Many
of these proposals were not pressed so as to make
way for the present compromise. Naturally, my
delegation, as a non-aligned member of the Council,
reserves its right to revive some of these proposals
should circumstances so necessitate.

148. Thereafter my delegation, again along with the
other members of the non-aligned group, was ready
to co-operate with the other members of the Council
in order to find a way out of the deadlock. No
matter what outsiders may think or imagine, the nonaligned group continued to act in good faith and in
absolute freedom in trying to determine what was the
best possible formula according to their own individual
and collective judgements.

142. I cannot end my statement without paying a
tribute to the important role played by the President,
both in the personality of the Minister for External
Relations and the representative, in the achievement of
the decision which the Council has just adopted.
The President’s patience, initiative and drive have
certainly enabled the members of the Council to
pursue their consultations with determination and
optimism even when the situation appeared to be
rather frustrating, to put it mildly.

149. We hope that the present resolution will
genuinely contribute to the improvement of the situation in Cyprus and will alleviate the sufferings of
the people of the island.

143. I should also like to place on record our
greatest appreciation for the untiring efforts made by
the Secretary-General during the whole period of
the Security Council’s consideration of this question.
His personal and close involvement in the search for
an acceptabre solution reinforces our confidence
that under his direction the talks between the parties
concerned, when resumed, wilI have an invaluable
asset militating in favour of their success.

150. Mr. President, my delegation already had the
opportunity to extend its welcome to your Minister
for External Relations. I should like now, before
concluding my statement, to commend your own
outstanding contribution to the arduous consultations
which took place before we arrived at the draft
rseolution adopted by the Council today.

144. Finally, I wish to join those of my colleagues
who have paid a welldeserved tribute to Mr. Huang
Hua of China, the President of the Council last
month.

151. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The members of the Council whose names were
on the list of speakers have addressed the Council,
and I should like now to make a statement as representative of COSTA RICA.

145. Mr. ZAHAWIE (Iraq): My delegation did not
intend to ask to speak today. We were indeed trying
to urge other members of the Council to refrain
from speaking in explanation of their votes, since
the draft resolution was adopted by the Council
without being put to the vote. It was not the first
time that my delegation had tried to cut down the
number of statements to a minimum. Obviously,
we have failed in our efforts so far.

152. With the adoption of the draft resolution that
was before us, the Security Council has concluded
the consideration of an item which, in public meetings_
and in private consultations, absorbed the attention
of the members of the Council for several weeks, an
action which is the best proof of the concern and
the efforts of this body in connexion with the uncertain fate of a small nation in the eastern Mediterranean.
15

.

153. While it is true that the United Nations had
been dealing with the stormy events which had
shaken Cyprus even before that country attained its
independence, we must point out that there was a
comparatively long period when it was possible to
lessen the conflict between the-two communities which
inhabit the island. Regrettably, that period was
interrupted as a result of the event-s which took place
beginning in July 1974, and since then my delegation
has devoted considerable attention to the tragic events
afflicting Cyprus.

between the two parties.to the conflict so that they
themselves might agree on the future status of the
country.
160. The resolutions of the Council met with
unanimous support in the General Assembly, which
endorsed the validity of those procedures in resoiution 3212 (XXIX), adopted on 5 November 1974.
161. A break in the talks which were barely
getting started, resulted from the unilateral deciaration which proclaimed the existence of the Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus on 13 February 1975, and
the matter was brought before the Council again on
the initiative of one of the parties.

154. Our position in the Council has enabled us to
make known our points of view, which had always
been in accord with the feelings of the people of
Costa Rica atid the conduct observed by their representatives internationally.

162. Although the Turkish Cypriot side made it clear
that its action was not intended to jeopardize the
independence, sovereignty or territorial integrity of
Cyprus, or to prejudge the final result of future
negotiations, the fact is that the debate between the
parties, which in no way contributed to calming the
situation, has been going on in the Council for the
last three weeks.

155. We have repeatedly affirmed our solidarity
with the entire Cypriot people against any attempt to
undermine its independence, as well as its sovereignty
and territorial integrity. We have been deeply worried
about the consequences which the war has brought
to thousands of human beings and which have taken
the form of loss of life, people being incapacitated
as a result of military action, people being uprooted
from their homes and land, and the existence of
thousands of refugees who are a human problem that
has not yet been resolved.

163. My delegation can fully bear witness to the great
efforts made by the Council to find texts that
would take the interests of the parties into account.
After patient consultations, though it did not satisfy
all the aspirations of the parties concerned, it drew
up a text the essential aim of which is the intensification of negotiations within a new procedural framework that will assign a more active role to the
Secretary-General. On this occasion we must recognixe
his profound interest and his strenuous endeavours
to find a satisfactory solution to the Cyprus question.

156. But, together with the reaffirmation of the
genuine national values of Cyprus and our concern
for the human suffering of its inhabitants, my deiegation has charted its unswervmg dourse in support of
any effort that might be undertaken, in the Security
Council, to find constructive solutions, starting from
the point of view that any action agreed upon by the
Council must respect the sovereignty of the Cypriot
people.

164. My delegation fully supported the draft resoiution that has now been adopted in the certainty
that a new mission of good offices by the SecretaryGeneral would lead the Cypriot parties to determine
the future of their country in the new framework
in which negotiations are to be undertaken. The
international community trusts that this new opportunity will remove old rancour and will usher in the
dawn of a new Cyprus.

157. We have maintained, accordingly, that it is
primarily the Cypriot parties themselves which must
resolve their differences.
158. It is a fact that the treaties whereby independence was achieved for the island involved other
Powers as guarantors. And it is also true that one
cannot fail to assign some responsibility to two of
those Powers-Greece and Turkey-for a major part
of the causes which broke the precarious peace on
Cyprus in July 1974.

165. Finally, my delegation wishes to express its
sincere gratitutude for the words of praise of the
members of the Council for the participation of
Mr. Gonzalo Facie, the Minister for External Relations
of Costa Rica, during the first week of the meetings
of the Council under the presidency of Costa Rica
this month. His presence in guiding the debates,
as the Minister for External Relations himself said in
his statement of 5 March [ibid.], was in recognition
of the paramount importance Costa Rica attaches to
the presidency of the Council and particularly to the
problem of Cyprus which was being debated then and
has today closed with the resolution we have adopted.

159. My delegation has adhered to all appeals to the
effect that foreign interference should not hamper
possible arrangements which the international community hopes will be carried out directly and through
negotiations by the two communities which inhabit
the island. As soon as the events which occurred
in July 1974 were placed on record, the Security
Council endeavoured to ensure that, together with the
cease-tire and the withdrawal of all foreign troops
from the island, direct negotiations would be started

166. I also wish to express my gratitude for the kind
words which members of the Council have addressed
1

6

to me, now that-1 have the honour of presiding over
this important body of the United Nations.

174; Our deep appreciation and gratitude also~go to
Mr. Huang Hua, the representative of the People’s
Republic of China; and to Mr. Facie, the Minister for
External Relations of Costa Rica, who preceded you,
as President of the Security Council, and ,to the
Secretary-General, for their untiring efforts and their.
invaluable contributions in this regard.

167. Speaking again as PRESIDENT, I call on the
representative of Greece.
168. Mr. CARAYANNIS (Greece): The meetings
of the Security Council on Cyprus have been particularly difficult and long. They have lasted for
more than three weeks, and in their protracted and
tiring consultations Council members have been
confronted with problems some of which were sensible
and logical and others less so.

175. I will not elaborate on each and every paragraph of this resolution. The first preambular paragraph makes reference to the so-called Government
of Cyprus, which we do not recognize and which in
fact does not exist. That reference alone makes the
resolution unacceptable to us. How can a community
which is a party to a conflict in a bi-communal
State come here to the Security Council, where
the very conflict itself is being discussed, and
pretend to be the Government of Cyprus as a whole,
and pretend to represent us, the Turkish Cypriot
community, which is the second party to the conflict?
That is contradictory, it is paradoxical, it is unrealistic,
and therefore it is unacceptable.

169. ‘I%e meetings and consultations were presided
over by three consecutive Presidents, which in itself
is a record. I wish to pay a tribute to all three of
them, as well as to the Secretary-General, who from
the height of the 38th floor has worked more than
anybody else on this subject.
170. We appreciated the perfect objectivity of the
representative of China, the human approach and
dedication to international duty of the Minister for
External Relations of Costa. Rica, Mr. Facie, and
your own patience and ski& Mr. President. My
Government is especially grateful to your Minister for
External Relations for his unsual gesture of coming
to New York and presiding personally over our
meetings.

176. We cannot, then, accept any resoiution which
refers to the Greek Cypriot administration as the
Government of Cyprus. Nevertheless I should like to
confirm once more that we remain faithful to General
Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX). We also find the
basic principles embodied in the present resolution
acceptable. In view of that, and out of respect for
the Security Council, we are ready and willing to
continue negotiations with the Greek Cypriot cornmunity under the new procedures that will be mutually
agreed upon by the two sides with the good offices
of the Secretary-General.

171. If, after all that has been said around this table
during the last three weeks, I am now to express the
opinion of my Government on the resolution just
adopted, I shall be very brief and confine myself
to saying that we have no difIiculty whatsoever in
accepting everything contained in that resolution.
However, we regret what has been left out. In its
wisdom, the Council has decided that this much is
sufficient for progress and eventual solution of the
Cyprus problem. We only hope it is right. As far as
the Greek Government is concerned, it will do
everything in its power to prove the Council right.

177. In fact, we have never left the negotiating
table. Our mziin objective is to create a new constitutional basis for the Republic of Cyprus which will
bring peace and prosperity to the island.
178. As regards the suggestion that United Nations
Headquarters in New York should be the new venue
of the talks, I should like to state that, for the
Turkish Cypriot side, Nicosia is, for practical as
well as political reasons, the most appropriate venue.
But, as all the new procedures and modalities
will have to be negotiated and mutually agreed upon
by both sides, this question also will be taken up and
settled within that framework.

172. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spun-.
ish): I should like to inform the Council that Mr. Celik
has asked to be allowed to make a further statement.
In conformity with the Council’s decision taken at the
1813th meeting to extend an invitation under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Celik,
I now invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement.
173. Mr. CELIK:

179. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The next speaker is the representative of Saudi
Arabia, whom I invite to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement.

Mr. President, I have asked to

be allowed to speak in order to express the views

of the Turkish Cypriot side regarding the resolution
just adopted. But before I do so I should like to
express gratltilde to you and to every member of the
Security Council, for the Council’s arduous efforts
and contributions which have culminated in the adoption of the present resolution.

180. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): The Council is
to be applauded for A consensus resolution which is
notable for its well-ordered phrases and precise
wording, on the one hand, and its noble purposes
on the other. But I am aftid that you shifted %he
responsibility for &ding a soldor~ to the Secretary17

General, who should not have been sorely burdened,
as it looks to me, with the task without your setting
up for him the proper machinery for obtaining practical
results.

at least we knew where we stood when there was a
veto. But no one outside the Council, nor inside
it for that matter, is fooled-least of all the people
of Cyprus and the other parties directly concerned.

181. Some of you may be thiimg that it is unfair
on my part to engage in any criticism of your
endeavours, which from my humble experience, I must
say, may prolong the plight of the people of Cyprus,
regardless of their national origin or political
persuasions.

188: Should we allow ourselves to drift here in
the United Nations, to make ourselves the laughingstock of the peoples of the world? We must not
forget that the peoples of the world are becoming
more and more cynical about the Organization. No,
we cannot afford to let the United Nations drift
on the turbulent ocean of conflict and dissent, lest
inadvertently or aimlessly it should hit the rocks that
will destroy it. That is what happened to the League
of Nations, for the simple reason-and the same reason
applies today-that its members served their own
petty national interests.

182. I do sincerely hope that my remarks will not
be misconstrued, but I must be frank with you. After
three weeks of intensive deliberations and unflagging
consultations, you produced a well-worded document, but one that will not quench the thirst of the
people of Cyprus for genuine peace, or allay their
fears about future communal eruptions or political
conflicts.

189. Is this a homily, a sermon? No, it is a warning.
How can we get out of this impasse?

183. I am certain that the representatives of members
of NATO in the Council tried their best to compose
the cardinal differences between the parties concerned,
no doubt within the framework of the instructions
that each of those NATO representatives had received
from his Government. But I suspect that those instructions were not well-orchestrated on account of the
divergent views of the policy-makers. So you chose
the lowest common denominator and worked out a
consensus which, iu spite of simulated verbal harmony,
is, in fact, cacophonous, thereby reflecting the lack
of determination on the part of the NATO members
to fmd a drastic solution which would benefit the
people of Cyprus.

190. Let us admit that the members of NATO+md
two of the parties concerned in this question are
members of NATO-have failed so far to come up
with a satisfactory solution, despite the fact that,
so far as I know, both Greece and Turkey have been
staunch members of that alliance. What is the
alternative? The representative of the Soviet Union
made a suggestion. I believe that in part it was that
the permanent members of the Security Council
should try to save the situation. I was not surprised
that others did not agree with him. I am talking
objectively. This is nothing new. Indeed, as the
hackneyed saying goes, most often we agree to
disagree.

184. Of course, we do not expect the Council to
produce a panacea, but the draft resolution adopted
today may be likened to a multi-coloured quilt to
which each has contributed his patch; but this cover
is so thin as to bring no warmth to the people of
Cyprus, who are left in the cold.

191. Let us go a little deeper into the situation.
Why have the members of NATO failed to compose
the differences? Because those who formulate the
policies in their respective Governments are like the
representatives in the League of Nations-d I
observed them ex of3cio in the late twenties and
thirties: they served their petty national interests
without due regard for the interests of the other
member States. How can we get out of the difficulty?

185. These are the facts. Why am I excited? I am
excited because of the plight of the people. I do not
care about our Governments: they come and go-and
I have seen them come and go, everywhere. I am
concerned about the people, and we should be
concerned about the people if we go by the old adage,
“The leaders of a people are their servants.‘*
186. The small States represented in the Council,
finding that they were politely listened to but ignored
by those who actually sewed the quilt, had finally
to agree to the consensus resolution because they
must have been persuaded that the flimsy quilt was
better than no cover whatsoever. These are the facts;
shall we fool ourselves?

192, There are only three months between now and
15 June. Three months of 1.975 have already passed,
and yet it seems that 1975 began only yesterday.
What will the people of Cyprus, whether of Greek
or of Turkish origin, think of us? Three months will
pass like nothing. Why should you encumber the
Secretary-General with this thankless task without,
as I have said, establishing the proper machinery
or giving him, as we say here, precise terms of
reference? You leave the whole thing floating in this
draft resolution-and I am talking in technical terms
now.

187. At least the resolution enabled the Council
to save face, in that it finally produced a consensus.
I who decried the veto have a nostalgia for it nowadays:

193. Even our colleague and brother from China,
Mr. Huang Hua, said that he had no alternative but
to agree to this text because it refers to General
18

Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX); and. he said, as the
representative of a responsible Government, “Well,
if those people in the area cannot. solve the problem,
how can we solve it by remote control from China?“.
So you cannot blame, Mr. Huang Hua. Nor can you
blame Mr. Malik. That does not mean that I blame the
others-although they do have a special responsibility, and this is true particularly of the United
Kingdom. I am sure that not only Mr. Richard
but also his aides have tried, and that our good
friend Mr. Scali and his aides have tried-and we
should not leave out the others: the representative
of France and the representative of Italy. But the
result is zero. Shall we settle for zero after three
weeks of deliberations here? I did not go away last
weekend; I was watching the members of the Council
going in and out, shuttling like a weaver-but weaving
nothing, no thread, no cloth.

198. Can you give the Secretary-General terms of
reference so that he may explore the possibility of
devising with the experts I mentioned in the first
point a plan for neutralizing Cyprus by a pact
signed by the major Powers which have had special
interests and perhaps still have strategic and other
interests in the area? We people of Asia will not be
fooled. Cyprus is part of western Asia. You cannot
play havoc with our destiny any more. Not we
Governments-we do not wield power; we are
weak. The people will topple us, all Governments.
Who are we? And, since I have been given the right
to speak, I must give a warning because it is
“irrelevant’*. I think there was somebody who saidthe newspapers published it: “Now, if those certain
people in the Middle East”-you know who they
are-“do not behave and try to strangle us, we have
plans.” It is in one of the magazines-l[iarper’s
magazine. The Governments may not be able to
resist, but every interest of that Power will be
destroyed by the peoples of Africa and Asia. They
will destroy the Governments to boot. And if I am
one of the Governments and they destroy me, I will
say: “Hosannab, I’ll die for the sake of the people.‘*
So, you major Powers, do not play with fire-and
Cyprus is part of the “fire”.

194. I suppose that all of you want to go to dinner.
We are well fed and well dressed here. But the people
of Cyprus are suffering. We are representatives of
Governments; we are the extensions of the rulers in
our respective countries.
195. I believe that we should help the SecretaryGeneral by providing him with experts, not the classical
-and I am not speaking in musical terms-or
antiquated experts in the chancelleries, but experts
on Cyprus and on the Mediterranean, experts from
among the permanent members of the Council who
are above politics. Is that possible? Of course it is.
When there is a will on the part of our Governments,
everything is possible; when there is no will, nothing
is possible. Let us ask such experts to look deeply
into this question and help the Secretary-General in
the task with which you have entrusted him in this
paper. That was my first point.

199. You dismembered the Ottoman Empire during
the First World War. Where are your empires now? t
They are gone. Anyone who may be drunk with
power and has no empire, on the same pattern of
the old empires, will totter and fall. So, not only for
our sake do not think we shall be happy if you
empire-builders or empire-worshipers totter and
fall-but also because we shall feel sorry for the
people of those who wield power; they would pay
as stiff a price as we would.
200. For my last point I will go back to the
concluding appeal I made to both my Greek and
my Turkish brothers. Please, until we do something
else here in the United Nations, do not be too rigid.
I must congratulate you both on how calmly and
dispassionately you have treated this question here
in the Council. You have acted like brothers who have
a difference. I could never see any hatred in your.
faces, and that is laudable. That has made me feel
that 1 should say this. So project, please, this good
attitude to one another, this good rapport, because
you are not each one party but several parties.

1 % . The second point is to try and work out what
I might call a “neutralization of Cyprus” by a pact
signed not only by the parties directly concerned,
but also by the major Powers and all the Powers in
that area. To make it valid it would have to .be
registered here at the United Nations, so that no one
could pull the strings.
197. When, in my first statement, I gave the Council
the historical background it was to show how strings
have been pulled with regard to Cyprus since 1878, the
‘year of the Berlin Congress. The dramatis personae
have changed, but still somebody is pulling the strings.
I do. not know to what extent the British have
been pulling the strings in our modem day. They have
responsibilities there and that .is the reason they are
still there, in accordance with the Zurich agreement.
But who are pulling the strings now? And who are
pt;5tching those who are pulling the strings so that
they can perhaps have a couple of strings to pull?
I do not want to mention names. What for? It would
be embarrassing. They are sitting around here, they
are my good friends, despite their ideologies and
political persuasions.

201. I hope that with those suggestions-whether
they are acted upon or cast by the wayside-three
-months from now we shall see peace reign in that
island and amity finally triumph between our Greek
and Turkish brothers.
202. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The representative of Cyprus has asked to be
allowed to speak and I now call on him.
203. Mr. CLERIDES (Cyprus): I noted that on the
list of speakers there was the name of the represen19

,

tative of Turkey, who had asked to be allowed to
have the last word. When he saw that I had placed
my name after his on the list of speakers, he withdrew
his name-obviously bent on his intention of having
the last word. It seems to me that it is a Turkish
habit to demand to have the last word. But I will
accommodate him this time, because to me it is not
important who speaks last bat who will say what is
necessary to save Cyprus.

of two autonomous communities, without an intemational personality, and thus pat the seal on the
death of the independence of Cyprus+i&spite this
elaborate effort, it is gratifying to see that in the
resolution of the Security Council it is clearly stated
that there is a-Govevment of the RepubIic of C-s
and that its recognition is maintamed in &eauncil.
208. It is equally gratifying to establish the fact
that, despite the efforts which have been made to
show that there has been no reason for this recourse
to the Security Council, it is the unanimous consensus
of the Council that resolution 3212 (XXIX), which
provided for the withdrawal of foreign forces from
the territory of the RepabIic and for the return of
the refugees, has not been implemented.

204. Twenty days ago my delegation and I came
before the Security Council anxious about the independence of our country, its territorial integrity, its
non-alignment-indeed, anxious about its very
existence. The representative of Turkey would have
us believe that there was no reason for a ‘meeting
of the Council, that there was no reason for a resolution; that the arbitrary, unilateral act undertaken by
the Turkish side reaiIy did not alter the situation;
and that we should go back to negotiate under the
pressure of a Turkish occupation of 40,000 troops,
under the pressure of 200,000destitate refugees and
under the pressure of the Tarkish will to impose
its own solution. For me and my delegation, these
long deliberations of the Council have been a time of
anxiety because during that time the very existence
of my country has been at stake.

209. It is further gratifying to note that the SecretaryGeneral has been given the responsibility, within a
fixed time, to report to the Council on what progress
is being made or wili be made in the:imp!ementation
of resolution 3212 (XXIX). Despite this we still feel
anxious about the security, the indepe&& &i&t&
very existence of oar country.
210. We are, however, intending to be cons.tructive
and,in the spirit of this constructiveness, I declare
here, and deciare it’officialiy that we wiII co-operate
with the Secretary-General in his effort isl this new
procedure to give a new impetus, a new momentum,
to free negotiations for the solution of the Cyprus
problem.

205. We believed that the situation was’ such that
certain urgent measures had to be taken to protect
the existence of Cyprus as an independent State. We
regret that despite the fact that we have outlined
with clarity the measures which we considered
necessary, they have not been adopted by the
Security Council. The Security Council, in its wisdom,
has adopted measures which are less effective in our
opinion. We bow to the wisdom of the Council.
We however point oat that the Council, in its desire
to compromise, to take measures which would offend
nobody, may have compromised the very existence
of the Republic of Cyprus. We hope and we earnestly
pray that we may be proved wrong.

211. We believe that the Secretary-General, in, the
wording of the resolution as drafted and as adopted
has now an increased responsibility. He has a du-ect
involvement. He has the responsibility of directing
and participating in the negotiations, because to us it
is unthinkable that such direct involvement should
be, as some people would have us think, by remote
control. We believe that his very presence in the talks,
and his chairmanship of the talks, are the necessary
elements which can give a new momentum to the
effort On which all of us place so much impomce,
the effort to solve the Cyprus problem, through a
freely agreed soiution between the parties.

204. But at the same time we wish emphatically
to state that if these measures--taken after your long
deliberations and in your attempt to offend nobodyprove inadequate, an increased responsibility lies on
the shoulders of the Council for what may follow.
The destruction of the independence of a non-aligned
country will be the entire responsibility of the Securit);
Council.

212. I have said that I wouid not speak last. I
should have added equally that I would ndt speak
for long, for this indeed has been a very exhaustive
deliberation. Despite the results achieved-and I have
already stated that so far as the concrete measures
are concerned to preserve the independence of Cypras,
I consider them unsatisfactory-despite all this, I wish
to express my sincere thanks to all the members
of the Security Council for the attention with which’
they have listened to the problem of Cyprus, and
for their many and long deliberations. I wouid hike
also to express my thanks to ail those who presided
so ably over these deliberations.

207. At this stage we are willing to follow the
consensus which has been established here without

in any way believing that the measures which have
been taken are effective or sufficient to protect the
independence of Cyprus. These measures have certain
points, which of course we do not overlook. Despite
the efXort of the representative of Tarkey to establish
here that there is no Govemmenr of the Republic
of Cyprus-an effort which, as I have explained,
was merely intended. to reduce. Cyprus to a State

213. This debate is over, but it is on&. 59; a-: $0
far as a draft resolution has been.@bptedi and giafn
20

particularly gratijied that in the last paragraph the
Security Council “‘Decides to remain. actively seized
of the matter”. I believe that the Security Council
should keep the situation in Cyprus under permanent
observation. I trust that the Secretary-General will
find an equal co-operation in his effort to bring about
a solution of the Cyprus problem from the representative of Turkey and from his Government.

221. During the long debate and the lengthy informal
consultations we made our views clear on the
modalities that could be considered as the beginning
of a successful series of negotiations.
222. May I, with your indulgence, Mr. President,
despite the appeal made by the representative of the
United Kingdom, draw the Council’s attention to the
fact that my understanding of the text differs
somewhat from the French version where there is
a refqrence to “nouvelles proce’dures agre’e’es” i n
paragraph 6. Having taken part in all the phases of
the negotiations, I think that the Secretary-General’s
next step should be to see to it that “new procedures
are agreed upon”.

214. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Turkey.
215. Mr. GLCAY (Turkey): I prefer to be the last
s aker so that I can hear the representatives of
tre two communities before expressmg my Govemment’s views. We had heard Mr. Celik and it was
or& natural that we should hear Mr. Clerides. I
considered it a manifestation of courtesy to yield tc
the parties. All those familiar with Security Councn
debates know that it has always been almost
impossible for me to have the last word when
my counterpart occupying the Cypriot seat was
Mr. Rossides. Therefore, I am not personally in the
habit of having the last word. I repeat that this is
just a matter of courtesy.

!23. We also made our views regarding the venue of
the talks known to all. Suffice it for me to say at
this stage that we maintain these views as well as
the views which were repeatedly explained to the
Secretary-General himself and the members who
drafted the various texts, when there was time enough
to consult with us. I need not repeat what whose
views are, but I suppose that the representative of
the Turkish Federated State of the Republic of Cyprus,
Mr. Celik, has indicated what would be the preference
of their side, as they are the negotiatiors. None of
us around the table, except for the representative
of the Greek Cypriot community, is at this stage.

216. The Council has now heard how this was
received. It has also heard the tone and the style.
They reflect the tone and the style of the Greek
Cypriots and their leaders and their press. Despite
this, we hope to be able to negotiate with them.

224. We are ready and willing to submit all our
views concerning the other matters referred to in
paragraph 6 to the Secretary-General-who, I must
say, enjoys the full confidence of the Turkish Govemment-so that his task of finding an agreed basis
for the talks may be facilitated.

2l7. My intention in asking for the floor was to
make certain remarks which are essential from the
point of view of my Government’s policy regarding
the problem of Cyprus. These I have to make, with
your permission, Mr. President. But I shall be very
brief.

225. In conclusion, I should like to express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and through you
to your predecessors, the representative of China
and your own Minister for External Relations, as well
as to all the representatives of the member countries,
who worked so hard and so effectively, with such
patience and understanding, to reach an acceptable
solution. My country for its part will spare no
effort to ensure the achievement of this aim.

218. Much has been said during these three long
weeks on the subject of the “Government of Cyprus”.
The Turkish Government’s view continues to be that
there has been a Government of Cyprus in the
past and that no effort should be spared to establish
one in future. This is, I understand and I believe,
one of the aims of the intercommunal talks.
219. As the resolution stands now with a reference
to a Government of Cyprus, it is unacceptable to
Turkey, as I had occasion to say previously.

226. I should like now to say a few words to my
colleague from Mauritania.
[The speaker continued in French.]

220. My Government views the present resolution
of the Security Council as a renewed appeal by the
members of this body to the parties concerned to
solve the problem of Cyprus in the only logical way,
by means of negotiations between the parties. The
%kish side stands ready to discuss with the
Secretary-General, who is asked by the Council to
undertake a new mission of good offices to facilitate
the resumption and progress of the talks by the most
appropriate ways and means which would be
acceptable to all the parties concerned.

227. I would not wish to conclude my statement
without reciprocating the friendly sentiments just
expressed by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania. They are inspired by cultural
and historical ties to which the visit of President
Moktar Ould Daddah last year gave renewed vigour
and they are dear to the heart of all Turks.
228. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Greece.
21

229. Mr. CARAYANNIS (Greece): I hate to have the
last word over my Turkish colleague, but I must make
a comment on what the representative of Turkey
said.

today-by the forces of the country of my coheague
across the table.
233. The PRESIDENT (inferpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Cyprus.

230. He told us that he found it better before
speaking to wait and hear what the two parties in the
234. Mr. CLERIDES (Cyprus): Perhaps the dispute
between the representative of Turkey and.the repredispute would have to say. Well, I have to remind
Mr. Olcay that throughout all these deliberations
sentative of Greece about who is in occupation in
he has been the principal party in the dispute in so Cyprus could be easily solved by the removal of
far as he is the representative of a country occupying
their forces from Cyprus.
foreign territory.
235. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Span231. The PRESIDENT (interpreration from Spanish): I call on the representative of Turkey.
ish): The representative of Turkey has asked to
236. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): May I say that Turkey
speak again. I call on him.
is and wiI1 be faithful to the terms of resolution 3212
232. Mr. OLCAY(Turkey): Much as I hate to have
(XXIX) when all its terms are applied.
to speak after my colleague from Greece, I should
like to say that his qualification about the occupation
The meeting rose at 7.25 p.m.
of Cyprus by a Turkish force compels me to remind
the Councilthat I have always said that there has been
a state of permanent occupation of Cyprus for the
’ See resolution 367 (1975).
past I5 years-not ended, as far as I know, even

Lifho in United Nations, New York

82-61202-October 1983-2,200
