A/66/PV.2

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

2

nd plenary meeting
Friday, 16 September 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Programme of work
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before we
proceed, I wish to refer to the organizational
arrangements for the high-level meetings to be held
during the week of 19 September, as described in
document A/INF/66/4, supplemented by the letters of
the President of the General Assembly dated
9 September. In that connection, I wish to inform the
Assembly of the following changes, as noted in the
Journal.
First, in connection with the High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the Prevention and Control
of Non-communicable Diseases, to be held from 19 to
20 September, the plenary meetings will be held on
Monday, 19 September, from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from
3 p.m. to 9 p.m., and on Tuesday, 20 September, from
10.15 a.m. — immediately following the adjournment
of the opening plenary of the High-level Meeting on
the
theme
“Addressing
desertification,
land
degradation and drought in the context of sustainable
development and poverty eradication” — to 1 p.m. and
from 3 p.m. to 5.45 p.m. The adoption of the outcome
document will take place during the morning meeting
on Monday, 19 September, immediately following
opening statements by the President of the Assembly,
the Secretary-General, the Director-General of the
World Health Organization and a representative of civil
society.

At 3 p.m. on Tuesday, 20 September, the
presentation of summaries of the round tables and a
statement by the Mayor of New York City will take
place, followed by the continuation of the list of
speakers. The time for round table 3 will remain from
10 a.m. to 1 p.m. on Tuesday, 20 September.
Delegations are kindly reminded that statements should
not exceed three minutes when representatives are
speaking in their national capacity, and five minutes
when they are speaking on behalf of a group.
Secondly, with respect to the High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the theme “Addressing
desertification, land degradation and drought in the
context of sustainable development and poverty
eradication”, to be held on 20 September, the opening
plenary meeting will be held from 9.30 a.m. to
10.15 a.m. instead of at 10 a.m., as announced earlier.
The morning interactive panel will be held from
10.30 a.m. to 1 p.m. in Conference Room 4.
Item 7 of the provisional agenda (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
First report of the General Committee
(A/66/250)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite the
General Assembly to direct its attention to Section I of
the report of the Committee. In that section, the
General Committee took note of the information
contained in paragraph 2.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-50075 (E)

*1150075*

A/66/PV.2

May I request that the General Assembly now
direct its attention to section II, entitled “Organization
of the session”, which contains a number of
recommendations concerning the General Committee,
the rationalization of work, the opening and closing
dates of the session, the schedule of meetings, the
general debate, the conduct of the meetings and so
forth.
In paragraph 17, the General Committee draws
the attention of the Assembly to the fact that the
general debate will be held from Wednesday,
21 September to Saturday, 24 September, and from
Monday, 26 September to Tuesday, 27 September. May
I take it that the Assembly takes note of the
information contained in paragraph 17?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): All other
recommendations in Section II of the SecretaryGeneral’s memorandum concern established practice.
So, rather than going through them one by one, I
believe it would be better and much more efficient to
address all these organizational matters concerning the
General Assembly as a whole. Are there any comments
on this approach? If there are none, we shall proceed
accordingly.
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of the
information that it is requested to take note of and to
approve all the recommendations of the General
Committee contained in Section II of the report?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Having just
adopted the recommendation contained in paragraph
16, on waiving the requirements set out in rules 67 and
108 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly
to declare a meeting open, I should like to endorse the
practical suggestion made at previous sessions that
each delegation designate someone to be present in the
meeting rooms at the scheduled time.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to take note of the information contained in paragraph
39, which concerns the submission of draft proposals
for the review of their programme budget implications?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): May I now
invite members to turn their attention to Section III,
which deals with the adoption of the agenda. The

2

question of allocation of items will be dealt with
subsequently, in Section IV.
In Section III, the General Committee took note
of the information contained in paragraphs 47 to 52 of
its report.
In paragraph 53, with regard to item 29 of the
draft agenda, “People’s empowerment and a peacecentric development model”, the General Committee
recommends that that item be included in the agenda of
the current session under heading A, “Promotion of
sustained
economic
growth
and
sustainable
development in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United
Nations conferences”. May I take it that the Assembly
approves this recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
54, with regard to sub-item (a) of item 34 of the draft
agenda, “Strengthening the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution”, the General Committee decided to
recommend its inclusion under heading B,
“Maintenance of international peace and security”.
May I take it that the Assembly approves this
recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
55, in connection of item 40 of the draft agenda,
“Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte”, the
General Committee decided to recommend its
inclusion under heading B, “Maintenance of
international peace and security”, on the understanding
that there would be no consideration of this item by the
General Assembly. May I take it that the Assembly
approves this recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
56, in connection with item 61 of the draft agenda,
“Question of the Malagasy islands of Glorieuses, Juan
de Nova, Europa and Bassas da India”, the General
Committee decided to recommend that consideration of
this item be deferred to the sixty-seventh session of the
General Assembly and that the item be included in the
provisional agenda of that session. May I take it that
the Assembly approves this recommendation?
It was so decided.

11-50075

A/66/PV.2

The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
57, in connection with item 86 of the draft agenda,
“The law of transboundary aquifers”, the General
Committee decided to recommend its inclusion under
heading F, “Promotion of justice and international
law”. May I take it that the Assembly approves this
recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
58, with regard to sub-item (b) of item 124 of the draft
agenda, “Central role of the United Nations system in
global governance”, the General Committee decided to
recommend
its
inclusion
under
heading
I,
“Organizational, administrative and other matters”.
May I take it that the Assembly approves this
recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
59, with regard to item 130 of the draft agenda,
“International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals”, the General Committee decided to
recommend
its
inclusion
under
heading
I,
“Organizational, administrative and other matters”.
May I take it that the Assembly approves this
recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
60, with regard to item 131 of the draft agenda,
“Interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union”, the
General Committee decided to recommend its
inclusion
under
heading
I,
“Organizational,
administrative and other matters”. May I take it that the
Assembly approves this recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
61, with regard to item 166 of the draft agenda,
“Observer status for the Cooperation Council of
Turkic-speaking States in the General Assembly”, the
General Committee decided to recommend its
inclusion
under
heading
I,
“Organizational,
administrative and other matters”. May I take it that the
Assembly approves this recommendation?
It was so decided.

The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
62, in connection with item 167 of the draft agenda,
“Observer status for the International Emergency
Management Organization in the General Assembly”,
the General Committee took note of the request of the
sponsor to withdraw the item.
In paragraph 63, in connection with item 168 of
the draft agenda, “Observer status for the Union of
South American Nations in the General Assembly”, the
General Committee decided to recommend its
inclusion
under
heading
I,
“Organizational,
administrative and other matters”.
May I take it that the Assembly approves this
recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
64, in connection with item 169 of the draft agenda,
“Observer status for the International Renewable
Energy Agency in the General Assembly”, the General
Committee decided to recommend its inclusion under
heading I, “Organizational, administrative and other
matters”.
May I take it that the Assembly approves this
recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
65, in connection with item 170 of the draft agenda,
“Observer status for the Central European Initiative in
the General Assembly”, the General Committee
decided to recommend its inclusion under heading I,
“Organizational, administrative and other matters”.
May I take it that the Assembly approves this
recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
66, in connection with item 171 of the draft agenda,
“Observer status for the United Cities and Local
Governments in the General Assembly”, the General
Committee decided to recommend its inclusion under
heading I, “Organizational, administrative and other
matters”.
May I take it that the Assembly approves this
recommendation?
It was so decided.

11-50075

3

A/66/PV.2

The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
67, in connection with item 172 of the draft agenda,
“Observer status for the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development in the General Assembly”, the General
Committee decided to recommend its inclusion under
heading I, “Organizational, administrative and other
matters”.
May I take it that the Assembly approves this
recommendation?
It was so decided.

inclusion
under
heading
I,
administrative and other matters”.

“Organizational,

May I take it that the Assembly approves this
recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We turn now to
the agenda that the General Committee recommends, in
paragraph 72 of its report, for adoption by the General
Assembly, taking into account the decisions just
adopted, with respect to the draft agenda.

The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
68, in connection with item 173 of the draft agenda,
“Financing of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei”, the General Committee decided to
recommend
its
inclusion
under
heading
I,
“Organizational, administrative and other matters”.

Bearing in mind that the agenda is organized
under nine headings, we shall consider the inclusion of
items under each heading as a whole. I should like to
remind Members once again that, at present, we are not
discussing the substance of any item.

May I take it that the Assembly approves this
recommendation?

Items 1 and 2 have already been dealt with. We
turn next to items 3 to 8. May I take it that these items
are included in the agenda?

It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
69, in connection with item 174 of the draft agenda,
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan”, the General Committee decided to recommend
its inclusion under heading I, “Organizational,
administrative and other matters”.
May I take it that the Assembly approves this
recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
70, in connection with item 175 of the draft agenda,
“Observer status for the Parliamentary Assembly of
Turkic-speaking Countries in the General Assembly”,
the General Committee decided to recommend its
inclusion
under
heading
I,
“Organizational,
administrative and other matters”.
May I take it that the Assembly approves this
recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In paragraph
71, in connection with item 176 of the draft agenda,
“Observer status for the International Conference of
Asian Political Parties in the General Assembly”, the
General Committee decided to recommend its

4

It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We turn now to
the inclusion of the items listed under heading A,
“Promotion of sustained economic growth and
sustainable development in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
recent United Nations conferences”.
May I take it that the items listed under heading A
are included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We turn now to
heading B, “Maintenance of international peace and
security”.
May I take it that the items listed under heading
B are included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Armenia disassociates
itself from the consensus on the decision of the General
Assembly to include agenda item 39 in the agenda of
the sixty-sixth session.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We turn now to
heading C, “Development of Africa”. May I take it that

11-50075

A/66/PV.2

the item listed under that heading is included in the
agenda?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Heading D is
entitled “Promotion of human rights”. May I take it
that the items listed under heading D are included in
the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Heading E is
entitled “Effective coordination of humanitarian
assistance efforts”. May I take it that the items listed
under that heading are included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We now turn to
heading F, “Promotion of justice and international
law”. May I take it that the items listed under heading
F are included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We now turn to
heading G, “Disarmament”. May I take it that the items
listed under that heading are included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Heading H is
entitled “Drug control, crime prevention and
combating international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations”. May I take it that the items listed
under that heading are included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Lastly, we turn
to heading I, “Organizational, administrative and other
matters”. May I take it that the items listed under
heading I are included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We now turn to
section IV of the report of the General Committee, on
the allocation of items. The General Committee took
note of the information contained in paragraphs 73 to
76. May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to take note of the information contained in
paragraph 75, concerning the granting of observer
status?
It was so decided.

11-50075

The President (spoke in Arabic): We now turn to
the recommendations contained in paragraphs 77 to 82.
We shall take up the recommendations one by one.
Before we proceed, may I remind members that the
item numbers cited here refer to the agenda in
paragraph 72 of the report before us, namely, document
A/66/250.
We turn first to paragraphs 77 (a) to (p), which
relate to a number of plenary items. May I take it that it
is the wish of the General Assembly to take note of all
of the information that the General Committee wishes
it to take note of and approve all of the
recommendations of the General Committee contained
in paragraphs 77 (a) to (p)?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We now turn to
paragraph 78, concerning item 98, “General and
complete disarmament”.
May I take it that the
General Assembly approves the recommendation
contained in paragraph 78?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We now turn to
paragraph 79, concerning item 29, “People’s
empowerment and a peace-centric development
model”, under the Second Committee. May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to approve
the recommendation contained in paragraph 79?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We now turn to
paragraphs 80 (a) to (d), concerning items 135, 143,
147 and 161 of the Fifth Committee. May I take it that
the General Assembly approves the recommendations
contained in paragraphs 80 (a) to (d)?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We now turn to
paragraphs 81 (a) to (i), concerning items 85 and 167
to 174 of the Sixth Committee. May I take it that the
General Assembly approves the recommendations
contained in paragraphs 81 (a) to (i)?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We now turn to
paragraph 82 of the report of the General Committee,
on the allocation of items to the plenary and to each
Committee.

5

A/66/PV.2

We first turn to the list of items recommended by
the General Committee for consideration directly in
plenary meeting under all the relevant headings. Taking
into account the decisions just adopted, may I consider
that the General Assembly approves the allocation of
the items listed for plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Next, we turn
to the list of items that the General Committee has
recommended for allocation to the First Committee
under all the relevant headings. Taking into account the
decisions just adopted, may I take it that the General
Assembly approves the allocation of those items for
consideration by the First Committee?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We turn now to
the list of items that the General Committee
recommends for allocation to the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) under
all the relevant headings. Taking into account the
decisions just adopted, may I consider that the General
Assembly approves the allocation of those items for
consideration
by
the
Special
Political
and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We come now
to the list of items that the General Committee has
recommended for allocation to the Second Committee
under all the relevant headings. Taking into account the
decisions just adopted, may I consider that the General
Assembly approves the allocation of those items for
consideration by the Second Committee?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We now turn to
the list of items that the General Committee
recommends for allocation to the Third Committee
under all the relevant headings. Taking into account the
decisions just adopted, may I consider that the General
Assembly approves the allocation of those items for
consideration by the Third Committee?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Next, we come
to the list of items that the General Committee
recommends for allocation to the Fifth Committee
under all the relevant headings. Taking into account the

6

decisions just adopted, may I take it that the General
Assembly approves the allocation of these items for
consideration by the Fifth Committee?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Lastly, we
come to the list of items which the General Committee
recommends for allocation to the Sixth Committee
under all the relevant headings. Taking into account the
decisions just adopted, may I take it that the General
Assembly approves the allocation of these items for
consideration by the Sixth Committee?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly has thus concluded its consideration of the
first report of the General Committee. I wish to thank
all the members of the Assembly for their cooperation.
Each Main Committee will receive the list of
agenda items allocated to it so that it may begin its
work in accordance with rule 99 of the rules of
procedure.
I should now like to draw the attention of
representatives to a matter concerning the participation
of the Holy See, in its capacity as an Observer State, in
the sessions and work of the General Assembly.
In accordance with General Assembly resolution
58/314 of 1 July 2004 and the note by the SecretaryGeneral contained in document A/58/871, the Holy
See, in its capacity as an Observer State, will
participate in the work of the sixty-sixth session of the
General Assembly, with no further need for a
precursory explanation prior to any intervention.
I would also like to draw the attention of
representatives to a matter concerning the participation
of Palestine, in its capacity as observer, in the sessions
and work of the General Assembly.
In accordance with General Assembly resolutions
3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974, 43/177 of
15 December 1988, and 52/250 of 7 July 1998, and the
note by the Secretary-General contained in document
A/52/1002, Palestine, in its capacity as observer, will
participate in the work of the sixty-sixth session of the
General Assembly, with no further need for a
precursory explanation prior to any intervention.
In addition, I would like to draw the attention of
representatives to a matter concerning the participation

11-50075

A/66/PV.2

of the European Union, in its capacity as observer, in
the sessions and work of the General Assembly.
In accordance with resolution 65/276 of 3 May
2011, and the note by the Secretary-General contained
in document A/65/856, representatives of the European
Union will participate in the work of the sixty-sixth
session of the General Assembly with no further need
for a precursory explanation prior to any intervention.
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Credentials of representatives to the sixty-sixth
session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee (A/66/360)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In this
connection, the Assembly has before it a report of the
Credentials Committee issued as document A/66/360,
containing a draft resolution recommended by the
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report.
I now give the floor to the Chair of the
Credentials Committee, His Excellency Pablo Antonio
Thalassinós of Panama.
Mr. Thalassinós (Panama), Chair of the
Credentials Committee: I have the honour to introduce
the first report of the Credentials Committee for the
sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly.
The report lists all those Member States that had,
at the time of the Committee’s meeting on
14 September 2011, submitted formal credentials
within the meaning of rule 27 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly. This is in accordance with
prior practice, where on occasion the Committee has
met early on during a session of the General Assembly
to consider formal credentials submitted to date to the
Secretary-General.
For example, I would draw members’ attention to
the first report of the Credentials Committee of the
fifty-fifth session (A/55/537), dated 1 November 2000,
which was adopted by the General Assembly on
6 November 2000 in its resolution 55/16A. The second
report (A/55/537/Add.1) was adopted by the Assembly
in its resolution 55/16B on 6 December 2000.
Members of the General Assembly will note that
Libya was one of those Member States submitting
formal credentials within the meaning of rule 27. In
this connection, I would like to inform the members of
the Assembly that the Committee had before it a

11-50075

communication signed by His Excellency Mr. Mustafa
Mohammed Abdul Jalil, President of the National
Transitional Council of Libya, appointing the Libyan
delegation for the sixty-sixth session of the General
Assembly.
As the report of the Credentials Committee
indicates, the Committee decided, after having
examined the credentials of the representatives to the
sixty-sixth session listed in the report, to accept the
credentials of the Member States concerned. The
proposal was adopted without a vote.
I should also like to assure other Member States
that, in accordance with prior practice, a second
meeting of the Credentials Committee will be later in
the session to consider the credentials of those Member
States that are not reflected in the Committee’s first
report. The Committee will then submit a second report
to the Assembly on those credentials.
Finally, I would request that the General
Assembly proceed to approve the report of the
Credentials Committee as contained in document
A/66/360.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): In the special
declaration of the Bolivarian Alternative for the
Peoples of Our America (ALBA) on the situation in
Libya and Syria, approved in Caracas last Friday,
9 September 2011, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
expressed their rejection of the occupation of the
Libyan seat at the United Nations being by a faction or
an illegitimate transitory authority imposed by foreign
interventionism.
In that declaration, the Bolivarian Alternative for
the Peoples of Our America rejects in the strongest
terms any attempt to transform Libya into a
protectorate of NATO or the Security Council. It
denounces the fact that in that country a military
operation has been carried out to effect a regime
change, manipulating the United Nations in accordance
with geopolitical and economic interests, flagrantly
violating Security Council resolution 1973 (2011).
As we discuss in this forum the possible
recognition of the self-declared National Transitional
Council, NATO’s bombings continue over Libya. More
than 20,000 criminal air raids have been carried out in
order to impose a puppet Government in that sister
nation of Northern Africa. In the name of protecting

7

A/66/PV.2

civilians, thousands of innocent people have been
murdered and the infrastructure of a country has been
destroyed. And before the eyes of the world, certain
Powers are flagrantly sharing out Libya as the spoils of
war.
ALBA has always worked to advance the cause of
peace, solidarity and brotherhood between nations and
human beings. Along with other peace-loving countries
that make up the United Nations, on 31 March 2011 we
asked the President of the Security Council to use that
body to promote a ceasefire and to seek a peaceful
solution to the Libyan conflict. We supported the good
offices of the African Union in that connection in the
search for peace. However, known military Powers that
comprise the Security Council sabotaged those calls for
peace. Instead, they intensified their war and invasion
plans, financing an army of mercenaries and blatantly
violating the resolution that they themselves had
previously promoted.
Today the General Assembly is being asked to
recognize a group under the guardianship of the
Governments of the United States and NATO, which
have neither the legal nor the moral authority to decide
who should govern a country.
African Governments have demanded that the
self-proclaimed National Transitional Council cease
the killings of immigrant workers from other African
nations. They have called on European Powers to
demand that the armed groups they finance cease those
acts of xenophobia.
NATO’s belligerent conduct, draped in the theory
of the responsibility to protect, violates the principles
of sovereignty and non-intervention in the internal
affairs of States, which are the bedrock of international
relations and the United Nations system. It represents
an act of aggression, which negates any humanitarian
purpose. The perpetrators of these crimes should be
brought before the International Criminal Court.
In this historic moment in which international
peace and security are being threatened, the nations of
ALBA reiterate the call to establish an immediate
ceasefire to allow the start of negotiations leading to a
peaceful political solution that will lay the foundations
for a lasting peace in that sister nation of Northern
Africa.
For this Assembly to recognize the illegitimate
National Transitional Council would represent a

8

deplorable precedent, completely undesirable for the
whole world, which would violate the most elementary
principles of international law. This recognition is
being discussed at time when intense battles are still
being fought in different cities of Libya, with uncertain
outcomes.
This is the position of ALBA, and we ask that
members think deeply about this position.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
With respect to the report of the Credentials Committee
(A/66/360), which has just been presented to us, my
delegation would like to recall that foreign intervention
and military aggression carried out by NATO have
worsened the conflict in Libya and have prevented the
people of that sister nation from moving towards a
negotiated and peaceful solution in full exercise of
their self-determination.
From the beginning of the conflict in Libya, my
country, along with other countries from several
continents, asked the Security Council to adopt
measures that would allow for a negotiated political
solution without foreign interference. Regrettably, this
has not been possible, due to the fact that NATO has
carried out in Libya a military operation to change the
regime under the doctrine of preventive war on the
basis of their economic and political interests, in
flagrant violation of Security Council resolution 1973
(2011) and the manipulation of the United Nations.
Cuba does not recognize the National Transitional
Council or any other provisional authority, and will
recognize only a Government which is set up
legitimately in that country and without any foreign
intervention, through the free, sovereign and
independent will of the brotherly Libyan people.
Based on the clumsy pretext of the protection of
civilians, NATO has killed thousands of those people.
It has rejected the constructive initiatives of the
African Union and of other countries and has even
violated questionable resolutions imposed by the
Security Council, in particular through attacking
civilian targets, financing and providing arms to one
party and deploying operational and diplomatic
personnel on the ground.
Cuba calls for an immediate halting of the NATO
bombings, which continue to claim lives. Cuba
reiterates the urgency of allowing the Libyan people to
find a peaceful and negotiated solution without any

11-50075

A/66/PV.2

foreign intervention and in full exercise of their
inalienable rights to independence, self determination,
sovereignty over their natural resources and the
territorial integrity of that sister nation.
Mr. Archondo (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I greet all of the representatives to
this new session of the General Assembly.
First of all, on behalf of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, I would like to share the views of the
representatives who preceded me, the ambassadors of
Venezuela and Cuba. At the same time, I would like to
remind all members that when the conflict within
Libya first started, our country, as have other countries,
firmly condemned the violation of human rights and
the use of force by any party in resolving the political
conflict that emerged in Libya about half a year ago.
At that time, we were very clear in expressing,
together with other countries, the urgency of peaceful
negotiations and the imperative need that solutions
within Libya be addressed, discussed and carried out
by the Libyan people and their representatives. Despite
those ongoing pleas for dialogue and negotiation, the
United Nations ended up involved in manipulation that
led it to validate a foreign armed intervention on a
people who still have not had the opportunity to
express their opinion clearly and decisively.
We believe that the main historic subject at
present that has not taken the floor in this Hall nor in
any other forum is the people of Libya, who continue
today, as we have stated, to suffer from those attacks.
As a result, the Plurinational State of Bolivia considers
that as long as the Libyan people have not had the
opportunity to express their opinion, to elect their
leaders and to set up an authentic representation of
their interests, we cannot recognize a transitional
committee that embodies characteristics that we
question and criticize.
We believe that this process, which has been
managed from the centres of global power, contains
certain traits that must be emphasized. Those call for
our attention and must be kept in mind for future
analysis.
During the process of overthrowing the Libyan
Government we have noticed, for example, that there
was wave of racism against civilians, immigrants or
Libyan citizens, who were black. They were viewed as
mercenaries of the deposed Government and mistreated

11-50075

and had their rights violated, as was revealed in the
news reports provided by journalists.
We also noted that at this time, large sectors of
the deposed Government are moving over to the new
Government, which makes us wonder about the real
possibilities for a change within Libya. We have also
heard that prior government officials have become new
leaders, and therefore we do not believe the statements
indicating that a qualitative change is taking place in
Libya.
Furthermore, we have observed that a series of
profound differences exists within the governing front.
Before Tripoli was taken, one of the main leaders of
the Council was killed, apparently by the very forces
promoting this process. From that we see that the
National Transitional Council is not a unified body. It
is still a great question mark for the international
community with regard to its composition and its
forces.
Another important point is that the author of the
supposed victory of the opposition in Libya is the
NATO planes. This seems to us a very dangerous
precedent, the fact that a Government ends up being
overthrown by an armed, foreign military coalition that
is the author of the victory. Without that intervention,
the previous Libyan Government would remain in
power. It was this intervention that caused it to fall,
and we believe that represents a regrettable precedent
for Libya’s democratic future. We believe that the
international
community
in
general
supports
democratic change.
We have also been concerned by a deep internal
division developing within Libya since the early days,
between those who support the opposition in Benghazi
and those who support the former regime in Tripoli. We
are deeply concerned by the fact that the unity and
territorial integrity of Libya could be put at risk by the
profound dangers resulting from the intervention.
Lastly, we are deeply concerned by the fact that
oil has also played an important role in this
intervention. We are concerned that oil could become a
reward for the corporations that will surely try to
exploit that resource and that were part of the coalition.
We believe that there exists a very suspicious blend of
economic, military and geopolitical interests, as was
pointed out by the representative of Venezuela.

9

A/66/PV.2

In that respect, my country is convinced of the
fact that force can never be the basis of international
law. We believe that if all of these elements remain and
continue to generate questions and doubts, then the
General Assembly should not recognize the credentials
of the new Libyan Government until it can comply
with the minimal conditions necessary for us to believe
that those who say they represent the people of Libya
are effectively acting in compliance with the norms of
international law.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): First, I would like to align myself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the countries of the Bolivarian Alternative
for the Peoples of Our America.
Nicaragua has been and remains a fervent
defender of the self-determination of the peoples of the
world. That founding principle of the United Nations
Charter made it possible for Nicaragua to be liberated
from the yoke of the Somoza tyranny that was imposed
by the imperial doctrines of the Power that had
historically sought to dominate our country.
Nicaragua will always respect the will of the
peoples — the only teachers of their future, the only
sovereigns of the political, social and economic model
that they wish to choose for themselves, free from any
hegemonic caprice of any Power.
In this sense, in speaking before the General
Assembly, Nicaragua, in light of the events in Libya,
would like to recall some evidence. Free determination
must be of the peoples, and not of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization. Revolutions cannot but be
authentic. They cannot be carried out by proxy, nor can
they ever be seized by a group of States with clear
hegemonic interests.
We denounce and condemn the manipulation and
distortions of those States that are blatantly and openly
violating the United Nations Charter and Security
Council resolution 1973 (2011), hoping to impose a
regime change in a sovereign State. They use the
blatant and deceptive guise of protecting civilians,
once again disrupting the sovereign equality of States.
We denounce and condemn the bombings by NATO
and demand the immediate and unconditional cessation
of those bombings and of all kinds of attacks
perpetrated the NATO military intervention in Libya.

10

We also firmly call for respect for the role of the
African Union and support for its initiatives to achieve
an end to hostilities and the beginning of a dialogue
among brothers in Libya, free of any foreign
interference.
Therefore, while the internal situation is not
resolved by the Libyan people without foreign
intervention, Nicaragua rejects the occupation of
Libya’s seat by a faction imposed by the NATO
commanders.
In conclusion, I wish to repeat that we need basic
conditions to be able to consider any recommendation
of the Credentials Committee as to who should occupy
Libya’s seat. Such basic conditions include an
immediate end to all attacks and bombings by NATO
and respect for the role and initiatives of the African
Union. It should be the Libyan people who decide their
own fate, without any exclusion. This is essential to
promote a political climate that would lead to a
political solution negotiated among the people of
Libya, without foreign intervention or interference.
Meanwhile,
Nicaragua
will
not
accept
impositions by NATO in the Credentials Committee.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): It gives me great
pleasure to make this statement on behalf of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC).
Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the General
Assembly. I think this sixty-sixth session is going to be
a very historic event. Let me also convey our
appreciation to the Chair of the Credentials Committee
for his report and for all the Committee’s efforts.
The Southern African Development Community
has questions regarding process, legality and principle,
which we would like to raise in connection with the
report just presented, particularly as it relates to the
credentials of Libya. We are firm in our belief that the
United Nations is, and should remain, an organization
of principles governed by rule of law. Such rules and
procedures adopted by the General Assembly should
not be discarded merely because it is expedient or
convenient to do so.
The heads of State of the African Union (AU),
through various decisions — including the latest
communiqué of the African Union high-level ad hoc
committee on Libya, on 14 September 2011 — have
indicated the steps that they felt necessary to be

11-50075

A/66/PV.2

fulfilled in respect of Libya and its representation. In
none of these decisions has the AU indicated that it
opposes the National Transitional Council (NTC).
However, the African Union has also been consistent in
its insistence on the need for an all-inclusive national
unity Government to get Libya moving towards a
brighter future. To that end, in its 14 September
communiqué the high-level committee on Libya
declared its willingness to work with the NTC to
achieve this milestone.
In this connection, let me inform this Assembly
that the heads of State of the members of the African
Union Peace and Security Council will be meeting on
the margins of the General Assembly on 19 September
here in New York to decide on the representation of
Libya.
Let us be clear: the achievement of the milestone
of the national unity Government or an interim
Government has not yet occurred. Indeed, the NTC has
committed itself to establish such an interim
Government of national unity in the very near future,
which will work towards crafting a new dispensation
for Libya. Thus, notwithstanding the fact that the NTC
is in control in Libya, it is as yet not the Government in
Libya, interim or otherwise. The fact that the NTC
intends to form a Government suggests that the NTC is
not a Government, at least, not yet.
Moreover, rule 27 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly is clear that the credentials of
representatives must be issued by the head of State or
Government or by the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
From the perspective of adherence to the rules of law
and to the procedure of the General Assembly, it is
important to ask the question: who assigned the
credentials of Libya that were accepted by the
Credentials Committee? In follow-up, we would need
to ask whether such a person constitutes a head of
State, head of Government or Minister for Foreign
Affairs.
In summary, the Southern African Development
Community wishes to ask who has signed the
credentials that were accepted by the Credentials
Committee and whether such a person was a head of
State, head of Government or Minister for Foreign
Affairs in accordance with the rule 27 of the rules of
procedure. In the absence of a satisfactory answer to
this question, in order to preserve the integrity of the
General Assembly and the United Nations, we move

11-50075

that the consideration of this matter be deferred,
pending further consideration.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of Angola has moved, within the terms
of rule 74 of the rules of procedure, that action be
deferred on the draft resolution contained in the report
of the Credentials Committee (A/66/360). Rule 74
reads in part as follows:
“During the discussion of any matter, a
representative may move the adjournment of the
debate on the item under discussion. In addition
to the proposer of the motion, two representatives
may speak in favour of, and two against, the
motion, after which the motion shall be
immediately put to the vote.”
Does any member wish to take the floor?
I give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): As the immediate
neighbour of Libya, Egypt is the best witness of the
most horrifying times that the people of Libya have
lived through as a result of an oppressive regime that
ruled Libya for more than 40 years, practices that more
than one million Egyptians have been suffering from as
well.
The international community has been in the
forefront of support for the legitimate aspirations of the
Libyan people for freedom, democracy and respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Security
Council resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) were
adopted with full recognition of the need to protect
Libyan civilians from the atrocities that were
committed by the oppressive regime of Colonel
Al-Qadhafi and his Government.
The different interpretations that have been cited
today regarding the military actions taken on the basis
of Council resolution 1973 (2011) should not constitute
an impediment to the cause of legitimacy — the
legitimacy of the Libyan people, who have supported
the National Transitional Council and continue to
support it.
Now comes the moment of truth, when the will of
the Libyan people has to be respected. That is why the
Credentials Committee unanimously approved the
request of the National Transitional Council to
represent Libya at the United Nations. Arguing against
that would only prolong the suffering of the Libyan

11

A/66/PV.2

people and delay achieving justice, particularly since
close to 90 States Members of the United Nations have
recognized the Libyan National Transitional Council as
the only representative of the Libyan people — a
number that is rising every day.

the authorities of that country. Accordingly, the
Security Council adopted resolution 1973 (2011) with a
view to protecting the lives of the innocent, because
that is the role of the United Nations, in conformity
with Chapter VII of its Charter.

The National Transitional Council has made all
the necessary commitments — to the African Union, to
the Arab League and to the United Nations. We in
Egypt trust the ability of the National Transitional
Council to represent the Libyan people properly in
General Assembly and in other international forums.
We are not convinced that there is any other legitimate
option that could be considered — in meetings of the
African Union or the Arab League or the United
Nations — other than to allow the National
Transitional Council of Libya to occupy the seat in
question.

The establishment of the National Transitional
Council (NTC) as a force for supporting the people has
been decisive in these long months of combat
throughout the country. Gabon officially recognized
the NTC as the legitimate authority representing the
national and international interests of Libya.

Therefore, Egypt opposed any attempt to delay
the consideration of the report of the Credentials
Committee (A/66/360) and appeals to all Member
States to support the draft resolution proposed by that
Committee as it is.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Zambia.
Mr. Kapambwe (Zambia): Zambia has requested
the floor in order to second the motion for
postponement of this item. I did not hear the
representative of Angola suggest that the African
Union rejects the credentials of the National
Transitional Council of Libya, as such. I heard the
representative of Angola say that a process has begun,
through which the African heads of State are seeking to
resolve this issue on 19 September. Therefore, his
request for us to delay consideration of this item has
merit, and my delegation wholeheartedly supports it.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Gabon.
Mrs. Bibalou (Gabon) (spoke in French): During
what we now call the Arab Spring, the international
community as a whole has followed with great interest
the social upheavals that have beset North Africa,
where young people, men and women, rose up as one
to defend their legitimate right to the values of law and
justice, which all of us here in this Hall share and
defend.

Today Libya’s needs are enormous. We need to
act quickly and in a coordinated manner to restore to
that beautiful country and its people its true face. To do
that, we must avoid confusion and duplication of
efforts with respect to the United Nations, first of all,
through the accreditation of a Libyan delegation to the
Organization comprised of direct representatives
authorized, obviously, by the NTC, the sole effective
authority in place in Libya today.
From my delegation’s perspective, the divisions
in this Hall are unnecessary. We must simply show
solidarity with the brotherly people of Libya, allow the
country to regain its place within the international
community and ensure a progressive return to peace in
that part of North Africa.
As an African State; on the basis of the
conclusions reached by the African Union High-level
Ad Hoc Committee on Libya, meeting on
14 September in Pretoria at the level of Head of State
and Government; bearing in mind the commitment of
the Committee to working with the National
Transitional Council and all stakeholders in Libya
towards the establishment of an inclusive national
Government of unity, and its encouragement of the
African Union Commission to do so; and taking into
account the readiness of the Committee to work with
the United Nations, the Arab League, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, the European Union and
NATO to ensure coordinated support to Libya, Gabon
does not support the motion of adjournment put
forward by Angola and calls on all delegations
concerned for the future of Libya and its people to also
oppose this motion.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of Senegal.

As concerns Libya, we were unanimous in
condemning the treatment inflicted on the people by

12

11-50075

A/66/PV.2

Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I will
refrain from revisiting the humanitarian tragedy that
could have occurred in Libya if the international
community had not, through the Security Council,
adopted a resolution that made it possible to save
thousands of lives. I would like to recall, however, that
the United Nations Charter begins with the phrase “We
the peoples of the United Nations”. Our role therefore
involves standing ready to ensure that our peoples are
spared a life of fear and need and that they are allowed
to live in dignity.
In these difficult times, we must stand alongside
the Libyan people, who have made a very clear choice,
as seen in the joyful demonstrations when the National
Transitional Council troops arrived in Tripoli. The
Libyan people are making enormous efforts to organize
and to take their fate in their own hands. We must
support that dynamic and help the Libyans emerge
from this difficult situation.
With respect to the Credentials Committee, it has
recommended that the National Transitional Council’s
credentials be recognized. I believe that the General
Assembly would be justified in supporting this request
and in adopting the credentials for the National
Transitional Council. Therefore, I would like to support
the proposal made by my colleague from Egypt that the
General Assembly consider the report (A/66/360) of
the Committee here and now.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I take the floor in order
to support as enthusiastically as possible the motion for
deferment that was moved by the delegation of Angola.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now put
to the vote the motion submitted by the representative
of Angola that action on the draft resolution contained
in the report of the Credentials Committee (A/66/360)
be deferred. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Angola, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Congo,
Cuba, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Jamaica, Kenya, Lesotho, Mali, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,

11-50075

South Africa, Swaziland, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Afghanistan, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia,
Germany,
Greece,
Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives,
Malta,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro,
Morocco,
Netherlands,
New
Zealand, Norway, Oman, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bangladesh, Botswana,
Dominican Republic, Indonesia, Mauritania,
Mexico, Myanmar, Nepal, Saudi Arabia,
Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago
The motion was rejected by 107 votes to 22, with
12 abstentions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to speakers in explanation of vote before the
voting on the draft resolution contained in document
A/66/360.
Mr. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines): Allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of your important
position. I would also like to thank the Credentials
Committee for its report (A/66/360), and the many

13

A/66/PV.2

representatives who have spoken this morning,
elucidating their various positions on this matter.

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines considers the
recommendation of the Committee today to be unripe.

In recent months, the political and military
situation in Libya has been fast-moving and fluid, and
it has yet to stabilize. In recent months, forces loyal to
or supportive of Libya’s National Transitional Council
(NTC) have gained control of a number of cities in
Libya, including, most recently, Tripoli. However, a
number of cities remain outside of the control of the
NTC, and military action continues today as we speak.

With an appropriate pause to properly reflect on
the realities on the ground, I am sure that the Assembly
could have and would have come to a consensus
position on this issue. We should not attempt to subject
the struggles of the Libyan people to the strictures of
the General Assembly’s calendar. As such, and with
great regret, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will
abstain in the voting on this matter. We hope that the
people of Libya, the National Transitional Council and
all relevant stakeholders will emerge quickly from this
crisis, united, peaceful and looking forward to a future
of prosperity, development and partnership.

Given this fluidity and uncertainty on the ground
and the fact that neither Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines nor the wider international community has
had the benefit of a report on the recent relevant
developments, my State has not considered itself to be
in a position — or in possession of sufficient factual
data — to extend recognition to the National
Transitional Council at this point in time.
Similarly, no State in our subregion has yet to
formally recognize the National Transitional Council
or, indeed, to even discuss the issue with a view to
seeking a coordinated policy on this matter. Such a
discussion is in fact scheduled for the very near future.
As such, we view the present recommendation by the
Credentials Committee to be somewhat premature.
Accepting the recommendation at this time without
consideration by our regional and national authorities
would be to substitute the judgment of our Committee
for that of our own Governments.
In that regard, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
sees the wisdom of the African Union (AU) High-level
Ad Hoc Committee on Libya, which issued a
communiqué two days ago on the analogous situation
of the National Transitional Council’s occupancy of
Libya’s seat within the African Union. In that
communiqué, the AU Committee’s approach was to
first request as early as possible a report covering all
recent developments, in order to allow the Government
of the National Transitional Council, which is soon to
be formed, to be seated within the AU. The African
Union Committee went on to commit itself to working
with the NTC and all other Libyan stakeholders
towards the goal of the early establishment of an allinclusive national unity Government.
In an environment in which the National
Transitional Council has not yet been seated in regional
organizations and the existence of a functioning
national Government is an open question at this point,

14

The President (spoke in Arabic): We shall now
proceed to consider the draft resolution recommended
by the Credentials Committee in paragraph 11 of its
report (A/66/360). A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
Botswana,
Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada,
Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia,
Germany,
Greece,
Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar,
Malaysia,
Maldives,
Malta,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro,
Morocco,
Netherlands,
New
Zealand, Norway, Oman, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San
Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen

11-50075

A/66/PV.2

Against:
Angola, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cuba,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador,
Equatorial Guinea, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi,
Namibia, Nicaragua, South Africa, Swaziland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Cameroon,
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Indonesia,
Mali, Mauritania, Nepal, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Suriname, Trinidad
and Tobago, Uganda, Uruguay
The draft resolution was adopted by 114 votes to
17, with 15 abstentions (resolution 66/1).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic advised the Secretariat that
it had intended to vote in favour.]
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to representatives wishing to speak in explanation
of vote on the resolution just adopt.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): As this is the first time I have taken the floor
since your election as President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-sixth session, Sir, allow me, on
behalf of my Government, to offer you my sincerest
congratulations and our full support throughout your
presidency.
As several other speakers have already stated this
morning, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is
currently presiding over the African Union. From the
outset of this process, the President of Equatorial
Guinea, Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, as
President of the African Union, has spared no effort in
seeking to coordinate and harmonize the positions of
the General Assembly and the African Union.
Regrettably, this has not been achieved because, while
I personally had a lot of contact on this issue, no
initiative ever made any progress.
A great number of speakers here this morning
have cited the reports of the African Union High-level
Ad Hoc Committee on Libya. It should therefore be
very clear that the African Union supports the rights of
the Libyan people and has never said that it will not
recognize the National Transitional Council. But the
African Union has requested the Council to form a
Government, which will take its seat in the African
Union and receive support and recognition. This not

11-50075

yet having been achieved, Heads of State of African
States shall meet here during the sixty-sixth session to
take concrete decisions on this issue.
The decision that has just been taken underlines
once again the lack of harmonization and coordination
between the United Nations and the African Union.
The African Union would have liked to have had the
opportunity to debate this topic at the level of its Peace
and Security Council so as then to consider and take a
decision on it. This is why Equatorial Guinea, as the
current President of the African Union, voted against
resolution 66/1.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): Kenya would like to
explain its vote. Kenya is an active member of the
African Union Peace and Security Council and will
continue to align itself with the position of the African
Union.
Kenya condemns the use of violence against
innocent civilians and calls for the start of a negotiated
political settlement under the mediation of the African
Union High-level Ad Hoc Committee on Libya. Kenya
also favours an all-inclusive political process that will
pave the way for free and fair elections. This is also in
line with the position of the African Union.
Kenya is also ready and willing to work with
Libyans and the international community to resolve the
crisis in Libya. Kenya believes that only a political
solution will achieve the mutually reinforcing
objectives of peace, democracy, respect for human
rights and the rule of law and national reconciliation
for the Libyan people.
Kenya is concerned about the spirit of
lawlessness and about the killings of immigrant
workers that have been taking place in Tripoli since the
National Transitional Council (NTC) took over the
capital, provoked by mistaken accusations that the
immigrants are mercenaries fighting alongside Colonel
Al-Qadhafi’s forces. Indeed, just this morning, gangs
alleging to be acting on behalf of the NTC invaded
Kenya’s embassy in Tripoli, with the intention of
lowering the national flag of Kenya and replacing it
with that of the NTC. Such an action would be a
serious violation and infringement of Kenya’s
sovereignty.
Given that the situation in Libya is still evolving
and that there is no consolidated leadership, Kenya will
continue to maintain its position until there is an
effective and all-inclusive Government, law and order

15

A/66/PV.2

are restored and there is a clear road map outlining the
transition to democratic governance in Libya.
Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French) I have
requested the floor to say a few words about a situation
that concerns my country, as Libya is a neighbour of
Chad.
After some hesitation — justified by the
complexity of the situation in Libya, which makes the
concerns expressed by many here today understandable —
my country has decided to express its willingness to
cooperate with the National Transitional Council
(NTC), which, realistically speaking, has Libya’s
destiny in its hands. As a neighbouring country very
familiar with Libya, where there is not even a
minimum of Government, we had no choice but to put
our trust in that entity to build the Libya of tomorrow.
Chad therefore recognized the National Transitional
Council as the only legitimate authority embodying the
aspirations of the Libyan people. One only need look at
its composition to understand why.
Our most ardent hope as Chadians is that peace
will return to Libya, that the killings will end and that
Libyans will reconcile and unite around the NTC and
form a Government, which we hope will be a member
of the African Union and its Peace and Security
Council. That is not to say that the NTC is the only
inevitable governmental entity or that it is in fact the
Libyan Government. For the NTC to comprise the
Libya of tomorrow, we support it in establishing the
rule of law and democracy. We hope that in the new
Libya our nationals will be compensated, that their
rights will be respected and that they will hold the
status of immigrant workers, and not be branded as
mercenaries, as some have seen fit to do.
We intend our relations with the new Libya to be
those of friendship, cooperation and good-neighbourliness
between our two fraternal peoples and countries. That
is what I wanted to say earlier, in support of the report
of the Credentials Committee (A/66/360), of which we
are in favour.

16

Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): We
voted in favour of resolution 66/1, to accept the
credentials of representatives of Member States to the
sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly, including
accepting the credentials of the representative of
Libya’s National Transitional Council.
As a nation that toppled a foreign-backed dictator
in the Middle East 32 years ago, the Islamic Republic
of Iran has always been supportive of the just struggle
of peoples against dictatorship. As a principled position
rooted in our religious beliefs and elaborated in our
Constitution, we will continue to support such just
struggles of freedom-seeking peoples and their efforts
to establish national Governments of their own choice.
At the same time, I would like to explain that the
Islamic Republic of Iran categorically rejects all forms
of foreign intervention and interference in the internal
affairs of other States. In a situation where a nation is
firmly resolved to determine its own destiny, foreign
interference only leads to more complexity, bloodshed
and destruction of economic infrastructure, and
therefore is counterproductive. We hope that with the
end of the NATO operation in Libya — which also
resulted in the killing and injuring of many innocent
civilians, including women and children, and the
destruction of Libyan infrastructure — the Libyan
nation will be able to realize its desire to establish a
national Government of its choice. We are fully
confident in the ability of the Libyan people to fully
achieve that goal very soon, and we wish them every
success.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote after the vote.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 3.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

11-50075
