Resolutions adopted on the repol:'ts of the Secom£ Conantlttee

Declares that no resolution adopted at the twentyseventh session of the General Assembly can affect
principles 21 and 22 of the Declairation of the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment.
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972
2997 (XXVII). Institutional and financial arrangements lor international environmental cooperation

The General Assembly,
Convinced of the need for prompt and effective
implementation by Governments and the internatioool
community of measures designed to safe-guard and
enhance the environment for the benefit of present
and future generations of man,
Recognizing that responsibility for action to protect
and enhance the environment rests primarily with
Governments and, in the first instance, can be exercised
more effectively at the nationial and regional levels,
Recognizing further that environmental problems of
broad international significance fall 'Within the competence of the United Nations system,
Bearing in mind that international co-operative programmes in the field of the environment must be undertaken with due respect for the sovereign rights of
States and in conformity with the Charter of the United
Nations ,and principles of international law,
Mindful of the sectoral responsibilities of the organizations in the United Nations system,
Conscious of the significance of regional and subregional co-operation in the field of the environment and
of the important role of the regional economic commissions and other regional intergovernmental organizations,
Emphasizing that problems of the environment constitute a new and important area for international cooperation and that the comple::it!ity and interdependence
of such problems require new approaches,
Recognizing that the relevant international scientific
and other professional communities can make an important contribution to international co~operation in the
field of the environment,
Conscious of the ne~d for processes within the United
Nations system which would effectively assist developing countries to implement environmental policies and
programmes that are compatible with their deve1opment
plans and to paTticipate meaningfully in international
environmental programmes,
Convinced that, in order to be effective, international
co-operation in the field of the environment requires
additional financial and technical 1"esources,

A ware of the urgent need for a permanent institutional arrangement within the United Nat-ions system
£or the protection and improvement of the environment,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment,41
4 2 A/8783

and Add.1, Add.1/Corr.1 and Add.2.

43

I
GOVERNING COUNCIL OF THE UNITED NATIONS
ENVrn.ONMENT PROGRAMME

1. Decides to establish a Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme, composed of
fifty-eight members elected by the General Assembly
for three-year terms on the following basis:
(a) Sixteen seats for African States;
( b) Thirteen seats for Asian States;
( c) Six seats for Eastern European States;
(d) Ten seats for Latin American States;
(e) Thirteen seats for Western European and other
States;
2. Decides that the Governing Council shall have
the following ma.in functions and responsibilities:
(a) To promote international co-operation in the
field of the environment and to recommend; as appropriate, policies to this end;
( b) To provide general policy guidance for the
direction and co-ordination of environmental programmes within the United Nations system;
( c) To 1eceive and review the periodic reports of
the Executive Dkector of the United Nations Environment Programme, refer1ed to in section II, paragraph 2,
below, on tlle implementation of environmental programmes within the United Nations system;
(d) To keep under revlew the world environmental
situation in order to ensure that emerging environmental problems of wide international significance
receive appropriate and adequate consideration by
Governments;
( e) To rromote the contribution of the relevant
internationa scientific and other professional communities to the acquisition, assessment and exchange
of environmental knowledge and in.formation and, as
appropriate, to the teclmical aspects of the formulation
and implementation of environmental programmes
within the United Nations system;
(f) To maintain under continuing review the impact
of national and international environmental policies
and measures on developing countries, as well as the
problem of additional costs that may be incurred by
developing countries in the implementation of environmental programmes and projects, and to ensure that
such programmes and projects s11all be compatible with
the development plans and priorities of those countries;
(g) To review and approve annually the programme
of utilization of resources of the Environment Fund
referred to jn section III below~
3. Decides that the Governing Council shall report
annually to tbe General Assembly through the Economic
and Social Council, which will transmit to the Assembly
such comments on the report as it may deem necessary,
particularly with regard to questions of co-ordination
and to the :relationship of,..onvironmental policies and
programmes within the U1lited Nations system to overall economic and social policies and priorities;

II
ENVIRONMENT SECRETARIAT

1. Decides that a small secretariat shall be established in the United Nations to serve as a focal point
for environmental action and co-ordination within the

44

Genern] Assen1bly-TweJ1ty-seventh Session

-qnited Nations system in such a way as to ensure a
for ,the Human Environment43 adopted by the United
high degree of effective management;
Nations Conference on the Human Environment with
particular attention to integrated projects, and' such
2. Decides that the environment secretariat shall
other environmental activit!ies as may be decided upon
be headed by the Executive Director of the United
by th~ Governing Council-and that the Governing
Nations Environment Programme, who shall be elected
Coune1l shall review these initiatives with a view to
by the General Assembly on the nomination of the
taking appropriate decisions as to their continued
Secretary-General for a term of four years and who shall
:financing;
be entrusted, inter aliaJ with the following responsibilities:
3.- Decides that the Environment Fund shall be used
for
:financing such programmes of general interest as
(a) To provide substantive support to the Governregional
and global monitoring, assessment and dataing Council of the United Nations Environment Procollecting
systems, including, as appropriate, costs for
gramme;
national counterparts; the improvement of environ(b) To co-ordinate, -under the guidance of the
mental quality management; environmental research;
Governing Council, environmental programmes within
information exchange and dissemination; public educathe United Nations system, to keep their implementatio11 and training; assistance for national, regional and
tion under review and to assess thek. effectiveness;
global environmental institutions; the promotion of environmental research and studies for the development
(c) To advise, as appropriate and under the guidance
of industrial and other technologies best suited to a
of the Governing Council, intergovernmental bodies of
poli.cy of economic growth compatible with adequate
the United Nations system on the formulation and
environmental safeguards; and such other programmes
implementation of environmental programmes;
as the Governing Council may decide upon, and that
(d) To secure the effective co-operation of, and
in the implementation of such programmes due account
contribution from, the relevant scientific and other
should. be taken o.f the special needs of the developing
professional communities in all parts of the world;
countnes;
.
.
(e) To provide, at the request of all parties con4. Decides that, in order to ensure that the developcerned, advisory services for the promotion of interment priorities of developing count,ries shall not be
national co-operation in. the field of the environment;
adversely affected, adequate measures shall be taken
to £rovide additional financial resources on terms com(f) To submit to the Governing Council, on his
patible with the economic situation of the recipient
own initiative or upon request, proposals embodying
developing country, and that, to this end, the Executive
medium-irange and long-range planning for United
Director, in co-operation with competent organizations,
Nations programmes in. 1:'he field of the environment;
shall keep this problem under continuing review;
(g) To bring to the attention of tl1e Governing
5. Decides that the Environment Fund, in pursuance
Council any matter which he deems to require conof the objectives stated in paragraphs 2 and 3 above,
sideration by it;
shall be directed to the need for effective co-ordination
(h) To administer, 11nder the authority and policy
in the implementation of international environmental
guidance of the Governing Council, the Environment
programmes of the organizations in the United Nations
Fund referred to in section III below;
system and other international organizations;
(i) To report on environmental matters to the
6. Decides that, in the in1plementation of proGoverning Council;
grammes to be financed by the Environment Fund,
(j) To perform such other functions as may be
organizations outside the. United Nations system, parentrusted to him by the Governing Council;
ticularly those in the countries and regions concerned,
shall also be utilized as appropriate, in accordance with
3. Decides that the costs of servicing the Governing
the prncedures established by the Governing Council,
Council and providing the small secretariat referred
and
that such organizations are invited to support the
to in paragraph 1 aboYe shall be borne by the regular
United Nations environmental programmes by combudget of the United Nations and that operational
programme costs, programme support and administra- . plementary initiatives and contributions;
7. Decides that the Governing Council shall fortive costs of the Environment Fund established under
mulate such general ,procedures as a,re necessary to
section III below shall be borne by the Fund;
govern the operations of the· Environment Fund;
III

IV

ENVIRONMENT FUND .

1. Decides that, in order to provide for additional
financing for environmental programmes, a voluntary
fund shall be established, with effect from 1 January
1973, in accordance with existing United Nations
financia1 procedures;
2. Decides that, in order to enable the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme to fulfil its policy-guidance role for the
direction and co-ordination of environmental activities,
the Environment Fund shall finance wholly or partly
the costs of the new environmental initiatives undertaken within the United Nations system-which will
include the initiatives envisaged in the Action Plan

ENVIRONMENT CO-ORDINATION BOARD

. 1. Decides that, in order to provide for the most
efficient co-ordination of United Nations environmental
programmes, an Environment Co-ordination Board,
under the chairmanship of the Executive Director of
the United Nations Environment Programme, shall be
established under the auspices and within the framework
of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination;
2. Further decides that the Enviroriment Co-ordination Board shall meet periodically for the purpose of
ensuring co-operation and co-ordination . among all
43 A/CONF.48/ 14 and

Corr.1, chap. II.

Resolution~ adopted 011 1foe rcporll! of 1'1~ St•eond Conm1i ltee

bodies concerned in the implementation of environmental programmes and that it sha11 report annually to
the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme;
3. Invites the organizations of the United Nations
system to adopt the measures that may be required to
undertake concerted and co~ordinnted programmes with
regard to international environmental problems, taking
into account existing procedures for prior consultation,
particularly on programme and budgetary matters;
4. Invites the regional economic commissions and
the United Nations Economic and Social Office at
Beirut, in co..operation where necessary with other
npproprinte regional bodies, to intensify further tl1cir
efforts directed towards contributing to the implementation of environmental programmes jn view of the particular need for the rapid development of regional cooperation in this field;
5. Also invites other intergovernmental and those
non-governmental organizations that have an interest
in the field of the environment to lend their full support
and collaboration to the United Nations with a view
to achieving the largest possible degree of co-operation
and co-ordination;
6. Calls upon Governments to ensure that appropriate national institutions shall be entrusted with the
task of the co-ordination of environmental action, botb
national and international;
7. Decides to review as appropriate, at its thirtyfirst session, the above institutional arrangements, bearing in mind, inter alia, the responsibilities of the
Economic and Social Council under the Charter of the
United Nations.
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

At its 2l121l1 plenary mel'tinJf, on 15 Dl!'cember 1972, tT1e
Ge11cra/ Assembly, fn pursuance of sectiotl I, paragraph J,
of the aboi·e resolution, l"lected tlie fifty-elght members of t11e
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Prt>gramme.

The following States were elected: AROEN11NA, AUSTRALIA,
AUSTRIA, BRAZtl., BtrnUNOI, CAMEROON, CANADA, C!l.NTBAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC, Cun.I!, CH1NA, CzECl!OSLOVAKIA, FRANC:&,
GAllON, GERMAN DBMOCRATIC REPUDUC, GF.l!.MANY, FE:DBRAL
REPUBLIC OF, GHANA, GUATEMALA, JCBLAND, lNotA, lNDO~ESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, lTAt.Y, JAl>!AJCA, JAPAN, JORDAN, KENY.A,
KUWAIT, LEBANON, MADAOASCAR, MALAWI, M!!X!CO, MOROCCO, N1m11?.RLANDS, NIC!,.JlAGUA, NroF.FtlA, PAKISTAN, PANAM,\,

Pmm, PHll.rl"PINf::S, Pot.ANO, ROMANIA, SENEGAL, SIERRA LEONE, SOMALIA, SPAIN, SRI I..J..NXA, SUDAN, Swf.O:EN, SYRIAN
ARAB Rl'.PUDI.lC, TuN!SlA, TtlRKJ'!Y, UNION OF SOVlllT SoclALlST

REPUBLICS, UN!Tl!D KJNG001'f OF GREAT BRtrAtN AN'D No1tntF.RN IRELAND, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, UNlTJ!.O STATl!S
OF AMERICA, VE.NBZUP.LA and YUGOSLAVIA,

The General Assembly then selected by the drawing of lot,
the members of the G01•erni,ig Council to sen•e for tl1ree
years, for two years and for one year.

As a rl!suft of the abow! election, the composition of tire
Gol•emfn11 Council of tlie U,i(ted Nall0!1.$ Environment Programme Ior 1973 will be as follows:

AUSTRA.•
CAMEROON,"'*

AltOBNTINA, •

AUSTRIA,** BRA.ZtL, •• BURUNDI,***
CANADA,*
C:eNTRAL AFRICAN REPunuc,••• CHrtn,""'"'
Cl!INA, * CzBCTIOSLOVAKlA, FRANCB, * GABON,* GERMAN DEMO·
CRATIC REPtmUc,••· GF.RMANY, FEDERAL Rll.PU'BLIC op,••
UA,u•

*

GHANA,•

GUATBMALA,•

lent.AND,**

INDIA,*"'•

TNOONI!SIA,>il

IRAN,*"' IRAQ,*""' ITALY,** JAMAICA,• JAPAN,•* Jotl.DAN,* 111 -t
KENYA, . . KuwArr,•• LE13A.NON,* MADAOASCAR, ..... MAuwr,••
Mexico,... MOROCCO,. NnmmtLANDS, ... • NICARAGUA, ......
NIGERIA,••· PAKISTAN,••· PANAMA,••· PBRu,•• PmUPPIN!!s,•

45

Pou'!'<D,'1H1 * ROMJu\1tA,** SENEOAt,•*• StE.RRA LEONI!,• So~
MA.LLA,'"* SPAIN,* SRl UNR:A,"""'"' SUDAN,* SWEDEN,• SYRl'.AN
AltU RtPU!lLlC,• TllNISI.A/' 111 TURKEY,"'** UNION OF SOVIET
SOCIA.LIST REI'UllllCS, u Ui-;rnm KINGDOM OP GREAT BRrTAlN
AND NoRU!tR."'I llU,I..ANP, <I'<$$ UNrnm REl'UllL.IC OP TANZANrA,
UNrrao STATES OP AME.RICA,*• VENEZOBL.A.** and
YllG()SUt.VIA,"'

*"""

"Term of office expirris on 31 December 1973.
Term of office expires on 31 December 1974.
• 0 Term of office expire,s on 31 December 1975,
0

.Ar rite same meeting, i11 purs11a11ce of section II, paragraph 2,
of 11,e abo1,•c rescluthm, tlrt" General Assembly, on the 11omina-

tion o/ the Secretar)•-Ge11eu1J,,t4 elected Mr. Maurice F.
SrnoNo E.recmi1·e Director of the U1rited Nations Environment

Programme.

2998 (XX\'IJ). Crittria iro,•erning multilateral
finandng of ltousit11?: and buman settlements

The Gn1eral Ass-emblr,
Hm·ing considered tile report of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment,'~
Recalfing its resolutions 1393 (XIV) of 20 November 1959, 1508 (XV) of 12 December 1960, 1676
(XVI) of 18 December 1961, 1917 (XVIII) of
5 Dtcember 1963, 2036 (XX) of 7 December 1965,
2598 (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, 2626 (XXV)
of 24 October 1970 and 2718 (XXV) of 15 December 1970,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1170 (XLI) of 5 August 1966,
Mindful of the aims
ressed in the Preamble of
the Charter of the Unite Nations to employ international machinery for the promotion of the economic
and social advancement of all peoples, as well as in
Articles 55 and 56 of the C11atter,
Takin.r: into account the World Plan of Actio1t for

the Application of Science and Technology to Develop~

ment,1.-s

Considering the important role assigned to housing
as part of the International Development Strategy for
the Second United Nations Development Decade, 47
Further rteaJflng resolutlon 2718 (XXV) in which
the General Assembly set out broad directions and
measures essential for the improvement of human
setdementss
Notilig the report of tb,e Secretary-Ger:eral en.tit!ed
Proposals for Action on Fmt:rnce for Housing, Bmldmg
and Plmining;u1
Taking inJo account tbe annual report of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development for
1970,-111 in which the Ba□k, inter alia, considered that
priority shou1d be given to lwusing and human settl~

ments.
Takillg note of the poUcy statement on urbanization
of 1972 of the International Bank for Reconstruction
H

See A/8965.

<1:s AICONF.48/ 14 and Corr.I.
48 United

Nations publication, Snles No.: E.71.II.A. 18.

u Resolution 2626 (XXV).

•JS United Nation~ p1lblica1km. Sales No.: E.7:1.lV.4.
40 International Bn11k for Rcconstrm:tion and Development"'."
Tnternalfonal Development Association, A111111al Repc>rr, 1970
(Wnsl1ington, D.C,).
