IX,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and the relevant resolutions of the organs of
the United Nations;
4. Condemns the _continu_ation of !epre~s~ve a~d
terrorist acts by colonial, racist and alien regime~ m
denying peoples their legitimate right to self-d_etermmation and independence and other human nghts and
fundamental freedoms;
5. Appeals to States which have not ye! done so
to examine the possibility of . becomll!-g parties to the
existing international conventlo~s wh1c~ relate to. va:
rious aspects of the problem of mternat10nal terrorism,
6. Invites States to take all appropriate measures
at ,the national level with a view to the speedy and final
elimination of the problem, bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3 above;
7 Invites the Ad Hoe Committee on International
Ter;orism to continue its work in accordance with the
mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly under
resolution 3034 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, first
by studying the underlying causes of terrorism and -then
by recommending practical measures to combat terrorism;
8. Invites the States which have not yet done so to
submit their observations and concrete proposals as
soon as possible to the Secretary-General so as to
enable the Ad Hoe Committee to carry out its mandate
more efficiently;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Ad Hoe Committee an analytical study of the
observations of States submitted under paragraph 8
above;
10. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to consider
the observations of States under paragraph 8 above and
to submit its report with recommendations for possible
co-operation for the speedy elimination of the problem,
bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3, to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Ad Hoe Committee with the necessary facilities and
services, including summary records of its meetings;
12. Decides to include the item in the provisional
agenda of its thkty-fourth session.

105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/148.

Drafting of an international convention
against the taking of hostages

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/ 103 of 15 December
1976,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention
against the Taking of Hostages, 26
Considering that the Ad Hoe Committee has been
unable to complete the mandate given to it within the
allocated time,
Mindful of the need to conclude, under the auspices
of the United Nations, an international convention
against the taking of hostages, taking into account the
20 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 39 (A/32/39).

2U

urgency of formulating effective measures to put an
end to the taking of hostages,
Bearing in mind the recommendation of the Ad Hoe
Committee that it should continue its work in 1978, 27
l. Takes note of the repmt of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention
against the Taking of Hostages;
2. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee, as constituted,28 should continue, in accordance with paragraph 3
of General Assembly resolution 31/103, to draft at the
earliest possible date an international convention against
the taking of hostages and, in the fulfilment of its mandate, to consider suggestions and proposals from any
State, bearing in mind the views expressed during the
debate on this item at the thirty-second session of the
Assembly;
3. Invites Governments to submit, or to bring up
to date, suggestions and proposals for consideration by
the Ad Hoe Committee;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to r,ender all
assistance to the Ad Hoe Committee, including the preparation of summary records of its meetings;
5. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit its
report and to make every effort to submit a draft convention against the taking of hostages to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "Drafting of
an international convention against the taking of hostages".
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/150.

Conclusion of a world treaty on the
non-use of force in international relations29

The General Assembly,
Considering that, in conformity with the Charter of
the United Nations, States shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the need for universal and effective application of this principle in international relations and
for assistance by the United Nations in this endeavour,
Recalling its resolution 31/9 of 8 November 1976,
in which it invited Member States to examine further
the draft World Treaty on the Non-Use of Force in
International Rclations 30 submitted by the Union of
21 Ibid., para. 14.
28 As a result of the

appointment of the Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic (see A/31/479/Add.l), the Ad Hoe Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against
the Taking of Hostages is composed of the following Member
States: Algeria, Barbados, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Chile, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Egypt,
France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Guinea, Iran, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Philippines, Poland,
Somalia, Surinam, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Venezuela and Yugoslavia.
29 See also sect. X.B.2, decision 32/442.
30 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 124, document A/31/243, annex.

214

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

Soviet Socialist Republics as well as other proposals
and statements made during the consideration of this
item,
Noting the report of the Secretary-General which
contains views and suggestions of Member States on
the conclusion of a world treaty on the non-use of force
in international relations, 31
l. Decides to establish a Special Committee on
Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Pr,inciple of Non-Use
of Force in International Relations, composed of thirty.five Member States to be appointed by the President
of the General Assembly on the basis of equitable geographical distribution and representing the principal
legal systems of the world;
2. Instructs the Spedal Committee to consider proposals and suggestions submitted by any State, bearing
in mind the views expressed during the debates on
this item at the thirty-first and thirty-second sessions
of the General Assembly, with the goal of drafting a
world treaty on the non-use of force in international
relations as well as the peaceful settlement of disputes
or such other recommendations as the Committee deems
appropriate;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and
services, inoludi'!lg the preparation of summary records
of the meetings of the Committee;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session an item entitled "Report of the
Special Committee on Enhancing the Effectiveness of
the Principle of Non-Use of Force in International
Relations".
106th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

*

*
*
The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-Gencra/32 that, in accordance with paragraph 1 of the above resolution, he had appointed the members of the Special Commillee on Enhancing the Effectiveness
of the Principle of Non-Use of Force in illtcrnational Re!ations.
As a result, the Special Committee is composed of the following Member States: ARGENTINA, BELGIUM, BENIN, BRAZIL,
BULGARIA, CHILE, CUBA, CYPRUS, ECUADOR, EGYPT, FINLAND,
FRANCE, GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF, GREECE, GUINEA,
HUNGARY, INDIA, IRAQ, ITALY, JAPAN, MEXICO, MONGOLIA,
MOROCCO, NEPAL, POLAND, ROMANIA, SENEGAL, SOMALIA,
SPAIN, TOGO, TURKEY, UGANDA, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

32/151.

Report of the International Law Commission

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its twenty-ninth
session,33
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development of international law and its codification in order
to make it a more effective means of implementing the
purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the
United Nations and in the Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
31A/32/181 and Add.I.
32 A/32/500.
38 Official Records

of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 10 lA/32/10).

Co-operation amO'!lg States,34 and to give increased importance to its role in relations among States,
Noting with appreciation the work done by the International Law Commission on State responsibility, succession of States in respect of matters other than treaties
and treaties concluded between States and international
organizations or between international organizations,
Noting with satisfaction the conclusions reached by
the International Law Commission regarding the study
of other topics under current consideration,
Welcoming the review made by the International Law
Commission of possible additional topics for future
study and the continued attention paid by it to the
question of rationalizing further its organization and
methods of work,
l. Takes note of the report of the International Law
CommissiO'!l on the work of its twenty-ninth session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the work accomplished at that
session;
3. Approves the programme of work planned by
the International Law Commission for 1978;
4. Recommends that the International Law Commission should:
(a)
Complete at its thirtieth session the second
reading of the draft articles on the most-favoured-nation
clause adopted at its twenty-eighth session, as recommended by the General Assembly in resolution 31/97
of 15 December 1976;
( b) Continue on a high priority basis its work on
State responsibihty, taking into account resolutions of
the General Assembly adopted at previous sessions,
with the aim of completing at least the first reading of
the set of articles constituting part I of the draft on
responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts,
within the present term of office of the members of the
International Law Commission;
(c)
Proceed with the preparation, on a priority
basis, of draft articles on:
(i) Succession of States in respect of matters other
than treaties, in an endeavour to complete the
first reading of the set of articles concerning
State property and State debts;
(ii) Treaties concluded between States and international organizations or between international
organizations;
(d) Continue its work on the law of the mmnavigational uses of international watercourses;
5. Endorses the conclusions reached by the International Law Commission to study the proposals on the
elaboration of a protocol concerning the status of the
diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier, as requested by the General Assembly in resolution 31/76 of 13 December
1976;
6. Endorses the conclusions reached by the International Law Commission regarding the second part
of the topic of relations between States and international
organizations;
7. Invites the International Law Commission, at
an appropriate time and in the light of progress made
on the draft articles on State responsibility for internationally wrongful acts and on other ,topics in its
current programme of work, to commence work on
the topics of international liability for injurious cons4 Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
