UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

2262”

MEETING:

15 JANUARY

19bl

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisionalagenda(S/Agenda/2262)..,....,,............,...............
Tribute to the memoryof Mr. Aleksei Nikolaevich Kosygin, former Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of the Union of Soviet SocialistRepublics. . . . .
Statementby the President ,,.,,,..,.....I,,,*.....,...,........*.......
Adoption of the agenda .*....,..,,,.,...,..,..*.,.....,,.*.............
Election of two membersof the International Court of Justice:
(u) Vacancy causedby the deathof JudgeRichardR. Baxter (S/14283,S/14311
and Add.1, S/14312);
(h) Vacancy causedby the death of Judge Salah El Dine Tarazi (S/14283,
S/14313and Add.1 to 3, S/14314,S/14321). . . . . , , . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . I

S/W.2262

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with fiaures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the documentindicatesthe supplement
in whichit appearsor in whichinformationaboutit is given.
The resolutionsof the Security Council,numberedin accordancewith a
systemadoptedin 1%4, are publishedin yearly volumesof Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system,which hasbeenapplied
retroactivelyto resolutions
adoptedbefore1January1%5,became
fully operative
on that date.

2262nd MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 15 January 1981, at 10.30 a.m.
rity Council,whichwill beof invaluableassistance
in
the searchfor a solutionof the complexissues
which
Present: The representativesof the following the Councilconfrontsin its importantrole.
States:China,France,GermanDemocraticRepublic,
Ireland,Japan,Mexico, Niger, Panama,Philippines, 4. I wishalsoto express,on behalfof the Council,
Spain, Tunisia,Uganda,Union of Soviet Socialist our gratitudeto the outgoingnon-permanent
memRepublics,United Kingdomof Great Britain and bersfor their importantand invaluablecontributions
to our work. The representativesof Bangladesh,
NorthernIreland,UnitedStatesof America.
Jamaica,Norway, Portugal and Zambiawon our
esteemandfriendshipandcontributedtheir talentsin
ProvlsionaI agenda (S/Agenda/2262)
immeasurable
waysto the work of the Council.I am
surethat we shallcontinueour fruitful co-operation
1. Adoptionof the agenda
in the future.
of the International
2. Election of two members
5. Beforeconcluding.I wishalsoto pay a well-deCourtof Justice:
(a) Vacancycaused
by the deathof JudgeRichard servedtributeto theGtirlng Presidentof ihe Security
R. Baxter (S/14283,S/14311and Add.1, Council,Mr. DonaldMcHenry of the UnitedStates,
whoconductedthe work of the Councilin December
S/14312);
(6) Vacancycausedby the deathof JudgeSalah with great skill and distinction.His experienceand
Bl Dine Tarazi (S/14283,S/I4313andAdd.1 the personalqualitiesthat we all appreciatehave
to 3, S/14314,
S/14321)
won our respectand admirationand I am sureI am
speakingon behalfof all presentandoutgoingmemThe meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
bersof theSecurityCouncilwhenI expressour gratitudefor havinghadthe opportunityto work together
Tribute to the memory of Mr. Aleksei Nlkolaevich
with Mr. McHenryandour bestwishesfor hisfuture
Kosygin, former Chulrman of the Council of hIlnsuccess.
President: Mr. LING Qing(China).

isters of the Union of Soviet SoclaM Republics

6. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
1. The PRESIDENT(interpretation from Chinese):
Republics)(interpretatfon from Russian): Mr. PresSincethe Security Councillast met, members
have ident,onbehalfof the delegation
of the SovietUnion,
learnedwith sorrowof theoassina
awavof the former I shouldlike to expressmy gratitudeto you andto all
Chairman
of theCouncilof Minl~ers6f the Unionof themembers
of the Councilonwhosebehalfyou have
Soviet SocialistReaublics.Mr. AlekseiNikolaevich spokenfor the profoundcondolences
on the deathof
Kosygin.On behalfof thd members
of the Security the outstandingstatesman
of the CommunistParty
Council,I wishto extendto the representative
of the andthe Soviet State,AlekseiNikolaevichKosygin.
Soviet Union and, throughhim, to his Government
and people,as well asto the bereavedfamily, our
Adoption of the agenda
expression
of deepcondolences.
Statement by the Prcsldent

The agenda was adopted.
Election of two members of the Internatlonal

Court

2. The PRESIDENT(inferprefafion from Chinese):
of Justice:
As this is the first meetingof the Security Council (a) Vacancy caused by the death of Judge Richard
to be heldin the new year, I shouldlike to extend
R. Baxter (S/14283, S/14311 and Add.1, S/14312);
greetingsto all assembled
heretoday.
(b) Vacancy caused by the death of Judge Salah El
Dine Tarazl (S/14283, S/14313 and Add.1 to 3,

3. It is a particularpleasureto welcomethe newly
S/14314, S/14321)
elected non-permanentmembersof the Security
Council,the ;.epresentatives
of Ireland, Japan,Pan- I. The PRESIDENT(interpretation from Chinese):
ama,SpainandUganda.We look forwardwith con- I shouldlike to recallthat at its 2255thmeetinaheld
fidenceto their participationin the work of the Secu- on 12 Novemberlast year, the Security C&cil

adopted resolution 480 (1980) in which it decided that
elections to fill two vacancies in the International
Court of Justice should take place at a meeting on
15 January 1981 and at a meeting of the resumed
thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly. Those
vacancies had been caused by the death of Judge
Richard R. Baxter on 25 September and of Judge
Salah El Dine Tarazi on 4 October 1980.

S/14311/Add.l indicates that One of the candidates
has requested that his name be withdrawn. Consequently, only one name will appear on this kallot
paper, May I remhId members that only the candIdate
whose name appears on the ballot paper is eligible.

8. This morning the Security Council and the General
Assembly are meeting separately, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Statute of the Court, for
the purpose of filling those vacancies. Both bodies will
proceed concurrently, and will deal with the vacancies
separately.

14. The vote will be taken by secret ballot. I request
the conference officer to distribute the ballots. Members should place a cross at the left of the name of the
candidate if they wish to vote for him.

13. I take it that the Council is now prepared to
proceed with the election to fill the vacancy created by
the death of Judge Baxter.

A vote wus taken

9. The Council has before it a memorandum by the
Secretary-General [S/14283] describing the present
comuosition of the Court and the orocedure to be
foll&wed in the Security Council and the General
Assembly for the election of the new members of the
Court. May I remind members of the Council that
under article 10. paragraph 1 of the Statute

bullet.

Namber
of ballot papers:
Invalid ballots:
Namber
of valid ballots:
Reqrtired
mqiority:
h’amber

of votes obtuined:

Mr. Stephen Schwebel (United States of
America) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

“Those candidates who obtain an absolute mdority of votes in the General Assembly and in the
Security Council shall be considered as elected.”
The required majority
therefore eight votes.

by secret

15

15. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese):
Mr. Schwebel of the United States of America has
accordingly received the required absolute mtiority of
votes in the Security Council. I shall communicate
the result to the President of the General Assembly.
I would request the Council to remain in session until
the President of the General Assembly has informed
the Council of the results of the voting in the Assembly.

in the Security Council is

10. When we come to the ballotting, members of
the Council will receive a separate ballot for each
vacancy to be filled and will vote for one candidate
only on each ballot. The only votes that will be counted
are those for candidates whose names appear on the
ballot papers. The Security Council will continue
ballotting to fill the first vacancy until the candidate
whose name auuears on the ballot has obtained the
required majo& of votes. At that stage, I shall communicate the result to the President of the General
Assembly and I shall request the Council to remain in
session until the President of the General Assembly
has informed the Council of the result of the voting in
the Assembly. Thereafter, the Security Council and
the General Assembly will proceed to vote on the
second vacancy. The Council will now turn to the
voting to fill the vacancy caused by the death of Judge
Richard R. Baxter, which appears as subitem ((4) of
the item on today’s agenda.

The meeting
was suspended
resumed at 11.50 a.m.

at Il.35

u.m.

und

16. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Chinese):
I have just received the following communication,
from the President of the General Assembly:
“I have the honour to inform you that, at the
100th plenary meeting of the General Assembly, held
today for the purpose of electing a member of the
International Court of Justice to fill the vacancy
caused by the death of Judge Richard R. Baxter,
Mr. Stephen Schwebel of the United States of
America has obtained an absolute majority in the
General Assembly.
“I note from your letter of the same date that,
at the 2262nd meeting of the Security Council,
Mr. Stephen Schwebel has also obtained an absolute
majority for the above-mentioned vacancy.

11. Article IS ot’ the Statute of the International
Court of Justice provides that a member of the Court
elected to replace a member whose term of office has
not expired shall hold office for the remainder of his
predecessor’s term. Accordingly, the member elected
to replace Judge Baxter will serve until 5 February
1988.

“I have, therefore, informed the General Assembly that Mr. Stephen Schwebel has been elected
member of the International Court of Justice for a
term of office expiring on 5 February 1988,”

12. Document S/14311 contains a list of persons
nominated for that post, and document S/14312 sets
out the curricula vitae of those persons. Document

17. As President of the Security Council, I have the
honour of declaring the distinguished jurist Mr. Stephen Schwebel of the United States of America elected
2

of the International Court of Justice for a
term of office ending on 5 February 1988.I should like
to congratulate Mr. Schwebel. and I wish him every
success in the high office he will assume.
u member

18, The Security Council will now proceed to subitem (/I) of the item on its agenda. entitled “Vacancy
caused by the death of Judge Salah El Dine Tarazi”,
whose term of office would have expired on 5 February
1985.Accordingly, in accordance with article 15of the
Statute of the Court, the member elected to replace
Judge Tarazi will serve until 5 February 1985.
19. Document S/l4313 contains a list of persons
nominatedfor that aost and document SI 14314sets out
the curricula vi&e of those persons. Documents
S1143131Add.lto 3 indicate that three of those nominated h&e requested that their names be withdrawn.
Consequently, their names do not appear on the
ballots.
20. I take it that the Council is now prepared to
proceed with the election to fill the vacancy created
by the death of Judge Tarazi.
21, The vote will be taken by secret ballot. Members
should place a cross at the left of the name of the
candidate for whom they wish to vote. Ballot papers
on which more than one name are marked will be
considered invalid. If, on the first ballot, no candidate obtains the required majority, it will be necessary to proceed to other ballots until the vacancy is
filled.
A vote wus tuken

by secret

ballot.

Number
of bullor papers:
lnvu/id bullors:
Number
of valid ballots:
Required
majority:
Number

15
0

15
8

of vores obtained:

Mr. Abdallah Fikri El-Khani (Syrian
ArabRepublic). . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I....
Mr. Mustafa Kamil Yasseen (Iraq) . . . . .
Mr. Antoine Fattal (Lebanon) . . . . . . ..I

8
6
1

22. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
frotn Chinese):
Mr. Abdallah Fikri El-Khani of the Syrian Arab Reoublic has accordingly received the required absolute
msjority of votes in-the Security Counc-il.I shall communicatethe result to the President of the General Assembly and I would request the Council to remain
in session until the President of the Assembly informs
the Council of the results of the vote in the Assembly.
The meeting
af 1.25 p.m,

was suspended

at noon

and resumed

23. The PRESIDENT (itrrerpretation
from Chinese):
I shall now read out the. communicati& which I have
just received from the President of the General Assembly:
“I have the honour to inform you that, at the
100th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing a member of
the International Court of Justice to fill the vacancy
caused by the death of Judge Salah El Dine Tarazi,
Mr. Abdallah Fikri El-Khani of the Syrian Arab
Republic has obtained an absolute majority in the
General Assembly.
“I note from your letter of the same date that,
at the 2262nd meeting of the Security Council,
Mr. Abdallah Fikri El-Khani has also obtained an
absolute majority for the above-mentionedvacancy.
“I have, therefore, informed the General Assembly that Mr. Abdallah Fikri El-Khani of the
Syrian Arab Republic has been elected member of
the International Court of Justice for a term of
office expiring on 5 February 1985.”
24. As President of the Security Council, I have the
honour of declaring that the distinguished jurist,
Mr. Abdallah Fikri El-Khani of the Syrian Arab
Republic has been elected a member of the International Court of Justice for a term of office ending
on 5 February 1985.I should like to extend congratulations to Mr. Abdallah Fikrl El-Khani and offer best
wishes for success in his high office.
The meeritrg

rose at 1.30 pm.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

United Naiions
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dam les tibrairies et Ies agences d@osilaires
du
monde entier. Inrormez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Units. Section
des ventes. New York ou Gen&ve.

COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicacioncs
dc Ias Naciones Unidas es& en venta en librcrias y casas distribuidoms
eo
todas yartcs del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n dc Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

___Litho in Uniled

Nalions,

New York

cQ300

86-61 IO)-June

1988-2.050
