V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee~----- ___________I_S~

port of action taken individually or collectively by the
affected countries;
4. Recommends that the international community,
above all the developed countries, should continue to provide coherent short-term, medium-term and long-term
assistance to the countries stricken by desertification and
drought in order to support effectively the rehabilitation
process - in particular through intensive reafforestation - and the renewal of growth of agricultural production in the affected countries, particularly in Africa;
5. Recommends that, within the framework of bilateral
and multilateral aid programmes, the fight against desertification and drought should be granted priority in view of
the extent of those problems;
6. Takes note of decision 12/10 of 28 May I 984 on
desertification, adopted by the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme, 134 calls for its
full and speedy implementation, requests the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to
have the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office establish
specific biennial programmes for the ongoing implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification, with
the requirement that these programmes be submitted for
the consideration and joint approval of the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme, and, lastly, emphasizes the urgent need for
increased financial support by the international community for the activities of the Office and of the United
Nations Environment Programme;
7. Emphasizes the fundamental importance of all
forms of South-South co-operation m executing programmes to combat desertification and drought;
8. Appeals to all members of the international community, organs and agencies of the United Nations system,
regional and subregional financial institutions, as well as
non-governmental organizations, to continue to provide
full support, in all forms - including financial, technical,
or any other form of assistance - to the development
efforts of countries stricken by desertification and drought;
9. Welcomes the decision of the Trade and Development Board to request the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to prepare a study on the impact of desertification and drought
on the external trade of the countries affected; 135
I 0. Requests the appropriate organs and agencies of
the United Nations to provide the Secretary-General with
all relevant studies carried out in their respective spheres
of competence, in particular with respect to food and
agricultural production, development of water resources,
industrialization and raw materials, for transmission to the
stricken countries;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that in
the activities of the organs and agencies of the United
Nations, emphasis should also be placed on scientific
knowledge of the causes and effects of the phenomena of
desertification and drought and on the use of the most
appropriate technology to overcome them;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to place greater
emphasis on the situation and prospects of the countries

stricken by desertification and drought in the World /fronomic Survc1~
I J. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary steps to ensure the implementation of the different activities mentioned above and to report to the General Assembly, at its fortieth session, through the Economic
and Social Council, on the evolution of the situation in
these countries, and to formulate proposals for specific, coordinated action.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December ! 984

134 See Official Records of the General Assemhly. Thmy-ntnth Session,
Suf~lement No. 25 (A/39/25), annex.
5 !bid., Supplement No. 15 (A/39/15). vol. II, secl. IIA resolution 295
(XXIX), para. 6.
136 See Proceedings of the United Natwns Conference on Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E. 73.11.D.4), annex I.A.
I 37 Ibid., Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexe,· (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76JI.D.I0 and corrigendum). part one. sec1. A.

I 38 find .. F(/ih Sesswn. vol. I. Rcport and .·111111'.\I'., (l ln,Jed Na11ons pubhcation, Sales No. E.79.11.D.l4). part one. sect. A.
139 f/,,d .. S,xth Session. vol. I Report and Anrw,n (I lnitcd Nations puhhcatmn. Sales No. E.83.11.D.6). part one. ,ert. A
14 0 See resolution 35/56. annex.
141 Oft,c,a/ R,n,rds of the Thml l 'mted lVatwns Confi·n•nce 011 the LaH of
thc Sea. vol. XVII (United Na11on, puhhcat1on. Sales No. F.84.V._1). document •\ '( '( lNF.62 122

39/209.

Specific action related to the particular
needs and problems of land-locked developing countries

1he (icneral Assemb/_1.
Relferating the specific actions related to the particular
needs of the land-locked developing countries stated in
resolutions 63 (III) of 19 May 1972, " 6 98 (IV) of 31 May
1976, 137 !23(V)of3June 1979Ll8 and 137(Vl)of2July
1983 119 of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development,
Recalling the provisions of its resolutions 3 I/ 15 7 of 21
December 1976, 32/191 of 19 December 1977, 33/150 of
20 December 1978, 34/ l 98 of 19 December 1979, 35/58
of 5 December 1980 and 36/175 of I 7 December I 98 I
and other resolutions of the United Nations relating to the
particular needs and problems of land-locked developing
countries,
Bearing in mind various other resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly, its related organs and the specialized agencies, emphasizing special and urgent measures in
favour of land-locked developing countries,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade, 14''
Recalling the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea. 141 adopted on 10 December 1982,
Recognizing that the lack of territorial access to the sea,
aggravated by remoteness and isolation from world markets, and the prohibitive transit, transport and trans-shipment costs impose serious constraints on the socio-economic development of land-locked developing countries,
/Voting with concern that the measures taken so far m
favour of land-locked developing countries and the assistance given fall far short of their needs,
l. Reaffirms the nght of access of land-locked
countries to and from the sea and freedom of transit
through the territory of transit States by all means of transport, in accordance with article 125 of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea;
2. Appeals to all States, international organizations and
financial institutions to implement, as a matter of urgency
and priority, the specific actions related to the particular
needs and problems of land-locked developing countries
envisaged in resolution 63 (III), 98 (IV), 123 (V) and 137
(VI) of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, in the International Development Strategy

160

General Assembly-- Thirty-ninth Session

for the Third United Nations Development Decade, in the
Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for
the Least Developed Countries 142 and in other relevant
resolutions of the United Nations:
3. Urges all concerned countries as well as international organizations to provide land-locked developing
countries with the appropriate financial and technical
assistance in the form of grants or concessional loans for
the construction and improvement of their transpor1 and
transit infrastructures and facilities:
4. Urges also the international community and multilateral and bilateral financial institutions to intensify
efforts in raising the net flow of resources to all land-locked
developing countries to help offset the adverse effects of
their disadvantageous geographical situation on their economic development efforts, in keeping with the overall
development needs of each land-locked developing country;
5. Invites transit countries and the land-locked developing countries to co-operate effectively in harmonizing
transport planning and promoting other joint ventures in
the field of transpor1 at the regional, subregional and bilateral levels;
6. Further invites the international community to give
financial, technical and other support to interested transit
and land-locked developing countries in the construction
of alternative routes to the sea:
7. Commends the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development and other United Nations agencies for their
work and the assistance they have provided to the landlocked developing countries and invites them to continue
to take appropriate and effective measures to respond to
the specific needs of those countries;
8. Recommends continued and intensified activities
relating to the conducting of necessary studies and the
implementation of special actions and specific measures
for the land-locked developing countries, including those
in the area of economic co-operation among developing
countries, as well as those that have been envisaged in the
programme of work of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the regional commissions and
other programmes and activities at the regional and subregional levels:
9. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Group of
Experts to Study Ways and Means of Improving Transittransport Infrastructures and Services for Land- Locked
Developing Countries; 141
I 0. Requests Member States to transmit to the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development their views and comments on the repor1
of the Ad Hoe Group of Experts;
11. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to submit
to the General Assembly at its fortieth session a report on
the geographical disadvantages of land-locked developing
countries and their consequences for the development of
those countries.
104th plenary meeting
18 December 1984
14 2 Report cf the l 1nlled Nat1otVi ( ,infcrctu·c on the Least /)evelop('d
Cuuntnes. Pans. 1-14 Scptcmlw N8/ (llmtcd Nauons publicalion. Sales
No. E.82.1.8). part one, sect. A.
14 .1 Offinal Record\ 1f the Trade 1uul ne1·d(l/Jrncnt IJ/!ard. J\rcnt1 ninth
.\'nswn .. ·lnnern, agenda item 6. docum•.:nt TD ·n 1OIJ.)

39/210.

Economic measures as a means of politkal
and economic coercion against developing
countries

The General Assembly,
Reca//ing the relevant principles set forth in the ( 'harter
of the United Nations,
Recalling also its resolutions 2625 (XX V) of 24 lktober
1970, containing the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, 3201 (S-YI) and 3202 (S-Vl) of l May
1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of
Action on the Establishment of a New International f-rnnomic Order, and 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974.
containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Dutil·~ ot
States.
Reaffirming article 32 of the Charter of Econom1.- R1ghts
and Duties of States, which declares that no State may use
or encourage the use of economic, political or any other
type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain
from it the subordination of the exercise of its ~ovcreign
rights,
Bearing in mind the general principles governmg international trade and trade policies for development contained in its resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1%4.
resolution I 52 (YI) of 2 July 1983 of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and DevelopmentLl 9 entitled "ReJection of coercive economic measures". and the principles
and rules of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
and paragraph 7 (iii) of the Ministerial Declaration adopted on 29 November 1982 by the Contracting Parties or the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade at the11 thirtyeighth session, 144
Reqftirmingitsresolution 38/197 of20 December 1983.
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the adoption and effects of economic measures taken by
developed countries as a means of political and economic
coercion against developing countries, 14 '
(iravelv concerned that the use of coercive mea~ures
adversely affects the economies and development efforts of
developing countries and that, in some cases, those measures have worsened, creating a negative impact on mternational economic co-operation,
l. Deplores the fact that some developed countne~
continue to apply and, in some cases, have increased thl'
scope of economic measures that have the purpose of
exerting coercion on the sovereign decisions of de"eloping
countries subject to those measures;
2. Reaffirms that developed countries should refrain
from threatening or applying trade restrictions, blockades.
embargoes and other economic sanctions. mcompatihll'
with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and in violation of undertakings contracted multtlaterally
or bilaterally, against developing countries as a form of
political and economic coercion which affects their economic, political and social development:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a comprehensive report on the economic measures mentioned in
paragraph 2 above, taken by developed countries for coercive purposes, including their impact on international economic relations, with a view to assisting in concrete mter144 See General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Ba.He hnr,1111,c·w, ,u1d
\elected Docwnents, .\~u,,,,/ement l'•/o. ~..,() (Saks No (iATT I il~ 1 I) docu
ITH'Tlt

L/5424.

14 'A,:\941:i
