United Nations

A/RES/66/182

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 March 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 107

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2011
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/66/463)]

66/182. United Nations African Institute for the Prevention
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 65/231 of 21 December 2010 and all other relevant
resolutions,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 1
Bearing in mind that weaknesses in crime prevention lead to subsequent
difficulties at the level of crime control mechanisms, and bearing in mind also the
urgent need to establish effective crime prevention strategies for Africa, as well as
the importance of law enforcement agencies and the judiciary at the regional and
subregional levels,
Aware of the devastating impact of new and more dynamic crime trends on the
national economies of African States, such as the high levels of transnational
organized crime being recorded in Africa, including the utilization of digital
technology to commit all types of cybercrime, illicit trafficking in cultural property
and drugs, piracy and money-laundering, and of the fact that crime is a major
obstacle to harmonious and sustainable development in Africa,
Noting with concern that in most African countries the existing criminal justice
system does not have sufficiently skilled personnel and adequate infrastructure and
is therefore ill-equipped to manage the emergence of new crime trends, and
acknowledging the challenges that Africa faces in litigation processes and the
management of correctional institutions,
Recognizing that the United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders is a focal point for all professional efforts
aimed at promoting the active cooperation and collaboration of Governments,
academics, institutions and scientific and professional organizations and experts in
crime prevention and criminal justice,

_______________
1

11-46974

*1146974*

A/66/131.

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/182

Bearing in mind the Revised African Union Plan of Action on Drug Control
and Crime Prevention (2007–2012), aimed at encouraging Member States to
participate in and own the regional initiatives for effective crime prevention and
good governance and strengthened justice administration,
Recognizing the importance of promoting sustainable development as a
complement to crime prevention strategies,
Emphasizing the need to create necessary coalitions with all partners in the
process of achieving effective crime prevention policies,
Noting that the financial situation of the Institute has greatly affected its
capacity to deliver its services to African Member States in an effective and
comprehensive manner,
Commends the United Nations African Institute for the Prevention of
1.
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders for its efforts to promote and coordinate
regional technical cooperation activities related to crime prevention and criminal
justice systems in Africa;
Also commends the initiative of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
2.
Crime in strengthening its working relationship with the Institute by supporting and
involving the Institute in the implementation of a number of activities, including
those contained in the Revised African Union Plan of Action on Drug Control and
Crime Prevention (2007–2012), on strengthening the rule of law and criminal justice
systems in Africa;
Reiterates the need to strengthen further the capacity of the Institute to
3.
support national mechanisms for crime prevention and criminal justice in African
countries;
Notes the efforts of the Institute to establish contacts with organizations
4.
in those countries which are promoting crime prevention programmes and its
maintenance of close links with regional and subregional political entities, such as
the African Union Commission, the East African Community, the Commission of
the Economic Community of West African States, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the Southern African Development Community;
Encourages the Institute, in cooperation with relevant United Nations
5.
agencies, to take into account the various planning authorities in the region that
focus attention on the coordination of activities that promote development based on
sustainable agricultural production and preservation of the environment in
developing its crime prevention strategies;
Urges the States members of the Institute to continue to make every
6.
possible effort to meet their obligations to the Institute;
Welcomes the decision of the Governing Board of the Institute, at its
7.
eleventh ordinary session, held in Nairobi on 27 and 28 April 2011, to carry out a
review of the Institute to ensure that it can fulfil its mandate and assume a more
prominent role in dealing with existing crime;
Also welcomes the introduction by the Institute of a cost-sharing
8.
initiative in its execution of various programmes with Member States, partners and
United Nations entities;
Urges all Member States and non-governmental organizations and the
9.
international community to continue adopting concrete practical measures to
2

A/RES/66/182

support the Institute in the development of the requisite capacity and in the
implementation of its programmes and activities aimed at strengthening crime
prevention and criminal justice systems in Africa;
10. Urges all States that have not already done so to consider ratifying or
acceding to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and the Protocols thereto, 2 as well as the United Nations Convention against
Corruption; 3
11. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify efforts to mobilize all
relevant entities of the United Nations system to provide the necessary financial and
technical support to the Institute to enable it to fulfil its mandate, bearing in mind
that the precarious financial situation of the Institute greatly undermines its capacity
to deliver services effectively;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to mobilize
the financial resources necessary to maintain the Institute with the core professional
staff required to enable it to function effectively in the fulfilment of its mandated
obligations;
13. Encourages the Institute to consider focusing on specific and general
vulnerabilities of each programme country and to maximize the use of available
initiatives to address crime problems with existing funds, as well as available
capacity, by creating useful coalitions with regional and local institutions;
14. Calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to continue to
work closely with the Institute;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to enhance the promotion of regional
cooperation, coordination and collaboration in the fight against crime, especially in
its transnational dimension, which cannot be dealt with adequately by national
action alone;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue making concrete
proposals, including for the provision of additional core professional staff, to
strengthen the programmes and activities of the Institute and to report to the General
Assembly at its sixty-seventh session on the implementation of the present
resolution.
89th plenary meeting
19 December 2011

_______________
2
3

United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2225, 2237, 2241 and 2326, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2349, No. 42146.

3
