Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Parties to the Statute of the International Court of
Justice and States that the General Assembly decides
specially to invite, to participate in the Conference;
5. Invites the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Committee on Space Research of the International Council of Scientific Unions
and intergovernmental space organizations to attend
the Conference as observers ;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of the Chairman of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and the panel of experts
within its terms of reference, and in co-operation with
the interested specialized agencies, to make, within
the ceiling of expenditure established for the Conference, the necessary organizational and administrative arrangements ;
7. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to submit to the General Assembly at its
twenty-second session a report on the preparations for,
and the organization and proceedings of, the Conference.
1499th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.
2222 (XXI). Treaty on Principles Governing the
Activities of States in the Exploration and
Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and
Other Celestial Bodies

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space covering its work
during 1966,10 and in particular the work accomplished
by the Legal Sub-Committee during its fifth session,
held at Geneva from 12 July to 4 August and at New
York from 12 September to 16 September,
Noting further the progress achieved through subsequent consultations among States Members of the
United Nations,
Reaffirming the importance of international co-operation in the field of activities in the peaceful exploration
and use of outer space, including the Moon and other
celestial bodies, and the importance of developing the
rule of law in this new area of human endeavour,
1. Commends the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of
Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies, the text of which is annexed to the present
resolution ;
2. Requests the Depositary Governments to open
the Treaty for signature and ratification at the earliest
possible date;
3. Expresses its hope for the widest possible adherence to this Treaty ;
4. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space:
(a) To continue its work on the elaboration of an
agreement on liability for damages caused by the launching of objects into outer space and an agreement on
assistance to and return of astronauts and space
vehicles, which are on the agenda of the Committee;
( b) To begin at the same time the study of questions
relative to the definition of outer space and the utilization of outer space and celestial bodies, including the
various implications of space communications ;
10 Ibid., document A/6431.

13

( c) To report on the progress of its work to the
General Assembly at its twenty-second session.
1499th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.
ANNEX
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States
in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including
the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies

The States Parties to this Treaty,
Inspired by the great prospects opening up before mankind
as a result of man's entry into outer space,
Recogni:::ing the common interest of all mankind in the
progress of the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes,
Believing that the exploration and use of outer space should
he carried on for the benefit of all peoples irrespective of the
degree of their economic or scientific development,
Desiring to contribute to broad international co-operation
in the scientific as well as the legal aspects of the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Believing that such co-operation will contribute to the development of mutual understanding and to the strengthening of
friendly relations between States and peoples,
Recalling resolution 1962 (XVIII), entitled "Declaration of
Legal Principles Governing the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space", which was adopted
unanimously by the United Nations General Assembly on
13 December 1963,
Recalling resolution 1884 ( XVIII), calling upon States to
refrain from placing in orbit around the Earth any objects
carrying nuclear weapons or any other kinds of weapons of
mass destruction or from installing such weapons on celestial
bodies, which was adopted unanimously by the United Nations
General Assembly on 17 October 1963,
Taking account of United Nations General Assembly resolution 110 (II) of 3 November 1947, which condemned propaganda designed or likely to provoke or encourage any threat
to the peace, breach of the peace or act of aggression, and
considering that the aforementioned resolution is applicable to
outer space,
Canvinced that a Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, will further the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
H ewe agreed on the following:
Article I
The exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon
and other celestial bodies, shall be carried out for the benefit
and in the interests of all countries, irrespective of their degree
of economic or scientific development, and shall be the province
of all mankind.
Outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies,
shall be free for exploration and use by all States without
discrimination of any kind, on a basis of equality and in accordance with international Jaw, and there shall be free access to all
areas of celestial bodies.
There shall be freedom of scientific investigation in outer
space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies, and States
shall facilitate and encourage international co-operation in such
investigation.

Article II
Outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies,
is not subject to national appropriation by claim of sovereignty,
by means of use or occupation, or by any other means.

Article III
States Parties to the Treaty shall carry on act1V1tJes in the
exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon and
other celestial bodies, in accordance with international law,
including the Charter of the United Nations, in the interest

14

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

of maintaining international peace and security and promoting
international co-operation and understanding.

Article IX
In the exploration and use of outer space, including the

Article IV
States Parties to the Treaty undertake not to place in orbit
around the Earth any objects carrying nuclear weapons or any
other kinds of weapons of mass destruction, install such weapons on celestial bodies, or station weapons in outer space
in any other manner.
The Moon and other celestial bodies shall be used by all
States Parties to the Treaty exclusively for peaceful purposes.
The establishment of military bases, installations and fortifications, the testing of any type of weapons and the conduct of
military manreuvres on celestial bodies shall be forbidden. The
use of military personnel for scientific re~earch or for any
other peaceful purposes shall not be prohibited. The use of
any equipment or facility necessary for peaceful exploration
of the Moon and other celestial bodies shall also not be
prohibited.
Article V
States Parties to the Treaty shall regard astronauts as envoys of mankind in outer space and shall render to them all
possible assistance in the event of accident, distress, or emergency landing on the territory of another State Party or on
the high seas. When astronauts make such a landing, they shall
be safely and promptly returned to the State of registry of
their space vehicle.
In carrying on activities in outer space and on celestial
bodies, the astronauts of one State Party shall render all
possible assistance to the astronauts of other States Parties.
States Parties to the Treaty shall immediately inform the
other States Parties to the Treaty or the Secretary-General
of the United Nations of any phenomena they discover in outer
space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies, which
could constitute a danger to the life or health of astronauts.

Moon and other celestial bodies, States Parties to the Treaty
shall be guided by the principle of co-operation and mutual
assistance and shall conduct all their activities in outer space,
including the Moon and other celestial bodies, with due regard
to the corresponding interests of all other States Parties to the
Treaty. States Parties to the Treaty shall pursue studies · of
outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies,
and conduct exploration of them so as to avoid their harmful
contamination and also adverse changes in the environment of
the Earth resulting from the introduction of extraterrestrial
matter and, where necessary, shall adopt appropriate measures
for this purpose. If a State Party to the Treaty has reason
to believe that an activity or experiment planned by it or its
nationals in outer space, including the Moon and other celestial
bodies, would cause potentially harmful interference with activities of other States Parties in the peaceful exploration
and use of outer space, including the Moon and other celestial
bodies, it shall undertake appropriate international consultations before proceeding with any such activity or experiment.
A State Party to the Treaty which has reason to believe that
an activity or experiment planned by another State Party in
outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies,
would cause potentially harmful interference with activities
in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space, including
the Moon and other celestial bodies, may request consultation
concerning the activity or experiment.

Article X
In order to promote international co-operation in the exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon and
other celestial bodies, in conformity with the purposes of thi~
Treaty, the States Parties to the Treaty shall consider on a
basis of equality any requests by other States Parties to the
Treaty to be afforded an opportunity to observe the flight of
space objects launched by those States.
The nature of such an opportunity for observation and the
conditions under which it could be afforded shall be determined
by agreement between the States concerned.

Article VI
States Parties to the Treaty shall bear international responsibility for national activities in outer space, including the
Moon and other celestial bodies, whether such activities are
carried on by governmental agencies or by non-governmental
entities, and for assuring that national activities are carried
out in conformity with the provisions set forth in the present
Treaty. The activities of non-governmental entities in outer
space, induding the Moon and other celestial bodies, shall
require authorization and continuing supervision by the appropriate State Party to the Treaty. When activities are carried
on in outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies,
by an international organization, responsibility for compliance
with this Treaty shall be borne both by the international
organization and by the States Parties to the Treaty participating in such organization.

exploration and use of outer space, States Parties to the
Treaty conducting activities in outer space, including the Moon
and other celestial bodies, agree to inform the SecretaryGeneral .:if the United Nations as well as the public and the
international scientific community, to the greatest extent feasible
and practicable, of the nature, conduct, locations and results of
such activities. On receiving the said information, the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations should be prepared to disseminate
it immediately and effectively.

Article VII
Each State Party to the Treaty that launches or procures
the launching of an object into outer space, including the Moon
and other celestial bodies, and each State Party from whose
territory or facility an object is launched, is internationally
liable for damage to another State Party to the Treaty or
to its natural or juridical persons by such object or its component parts on the Earth, in air space or in outer space,
including the Moon and other celestial bodies.

Article XII
All stations, installations, equipment and space vehicles on
the Moon and other celestial bodies shall be open to representatives of other States Parties to the Treaty on a basis
of reciprocity. Such representatives shall give reasonable advance notice of a projected visit, in· order that appropriate
consultations may be held and that maximum precautions may
be taken to assure safety and to avoid interference with normal
operations in the facility to be visited.

Article VIII
A State Party to the Treaty on whose registry an object
launched into outer space is carried shall retain jurisdiction
and control over such object, and over any personnel thereof,
while in outer space or on a celestial body. Ownership of
objects launched into outer space, including objects landed or
constructed on a celestial body, and of their component parts,
is not affected by their presence in outer space or on a celestial
body or by their return to the Earth. Such objects or component parts found beyond the limits of the State Party to
the Treaty on whose registry they are carried shall be returned
to that State Party, which shall, upon request, furnish identifying data prior to their return.

Article XIII
The prov1S1ons of this Treaty shall apply to the activities
of States Parties to the Treaty in the exploration and use of
outer space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies,
whether such activities are carried on by a single State Party
to the Treaty or jointly with other States, including cases
where they are carried on within the framework of international intergovernmental organizations.
Any practical questions arising in connexion with activities
carried on by international intergovernmental organizations
in the exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon
and other celestial bodies, shall be resolved by the States
Parties to the Treaty either with the appropriate international

Article XI

In order to promote international co-operation in the peaceful

Resolution■

adopted on the reports of the First Committee

organization or with one or more States members of that
international organization, which are Parties to this Treaty.

Article XIV
). This Treaty shall be open to all States for signature.
Any State which does not sign this Treaty before its entry
into force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this article may
accede to it at any time.
2. This Treaty shall be subject to ratification by signatory
States. Instruments of ratification and instruments of accession
shall be deposited with the Governments of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America,
which are hereby designated the Depositary Governments.
3. This Treaty shall enter into force upon the deposit of
instruments of ratification by five Governments including the
Governments designated as Depositary Governments under this
Treaty.
4. For States whose instruments of ratification or accession
are deposited subsequent to the entry into force of this Treaty,
it shall enter into force on the date of the deposit of their
instruments of ratification or accession.
5. The Depositary Governments shall promptly inform all
signatory and acceding States of the date of each signature,
the date of deposit of each instrwnent of ratification of and
accession to this Treaty, the date of its entry into force and
other notices.
6. This Treaty shall be registered by the Depositary Governments pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the United
Nations.
Article XV
Any State Party to the Treaty may propose amendments to
this Treaty. Amendments shall enter into force for each State
Party to the Treaty accepting the amendments upon their
acceptance by a majority of the States Parties to the Treaty
and thereafter for each remaining State Party to the Treaty on
the date of acceptance by it.
Article XVI
Any State Party to the Treaty may give notice of its
withdrawal from the Treaty one year after its entry into force
by written notification to the Depositary Governments. Such
withdrawal shall take effect one year from the date of receipt
of this notification.
Article XVII
This Treaty, of which the Chinese, English, French, Russian
and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited in
th.e archives of the Depositary Governments. Duly certified
copies of this Treaty shall be transmitted by the Depositary
Governments to the Governments of the signatory and acceding
States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorized, have
signed this Treaty.
DONE in ............ , at the cities of London, Moscow and
Washington, the ............ day of ............ one thousand
nine hundred and .............11

2223 (XXI). Report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2130 (XX) of 21 December
1965 entitled "International co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space", which was adopted unanimously,
H avi,ng considered the report of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,12
11 The Treaty was signed in London, Moscow and Washington on 27 January 1967.
12 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twmty-firsl
Session, Anneses, agenda items 30, 89 and 91, document A/6431.

15

Reaffirming the common interest of mankind in
furthering the exploration and use of outer space for
peaceful purposes,
Recalling its resolution 1721 B (XVI) of 20 December 1961, in which it expressed the belief that the
United Nations should provide a focal point for international co-operation in the peaceful exploration and
use of outer space,
Believing that the benefits of space exploration can
be extended to States at all stages of economic and
scientific development only if Member States conduct
their space programmes in a manner designed to
promote the maximum international co-operation and
engage in the widest possible exchange of information
in this field,
I. Endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space concerning exchange of information, encouragement of international programmes, international sounding rocket launching facilities, and education and
training;
2. Welcomes the intention of the Committee on the
P~aceful Uses of Outer Space to increase the usefulness
of its activities in the exchange of information on outer
space matters by preparing expanded reports annually
on a specific date ;
3. Notes with appreciation that a number of Member
States have assisted the information programme of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space by
providing ample descriptive material on their national
space programmes, and urges all Member States to
provide this information to the greatest extent feasible
and practicable ;
4. Welcomes the decision of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to establish a working
group to consider the need, feasibility and implementation of a navigation services satellite system ;
5. Reiterates its request, contained in section III,
paragraph 1, of resolution 2130 (XX), to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to continue,
in co-operation with the Secretary-General and making
use of the available resources of the Secretariat and
in consultation with the specialized agencies and in
co-operation with the Committee on Space Research,
the preparation and consideration of suggestions for
programmes of education and trainin~ of specialists in
the peaceful uses of outer space to assist the developing
countries;
6. Expresses the desire that these considerations be
reported upon to the General Assembly at its twentysecond session ;
7. Endorses the guidelines adopted by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to be
applied where international support or sponsorship is
requested for the training of specialists of Member
States in the specialized fields of space science and
technology ;
8. Urges that space activities be carried out in such
a manner that States may share in the adventure and
the practical benefits of space exploration, regardless
of the stage of their economic or scientific development;
9. Commends the co-operative space programmes in
effect between many Member States and recommends
such programmes to the attention of others ;
10. Notes with appreciation that certain Member
States have continued to contribute to the objectives of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
as laid down in its reports, by establishing and
