A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/241
22 August 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 48
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/51/24, para. 15)]
51/241.

Strengthening of the United Nations system

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 49/252 of 14 September 1995, by which it
established the Open-ended High-level Working Group on the Strengthening of
the United Nations System,
Recalling in particular paragraph 2 of resolution 49/252,
Taking note of the report of the Open-ended High-level Working Group on
the Strengthening of the United Nations System,1
1.
Adopts the text contained in the annex to the present resolution
for implementation effective from 1 January 1998;
2.
Calls upon the relevant intergovernmental bodies to implement
fully the measures specified in the text to strengthen the work of the United
Nations system, in particular of the General Assembly and the Secretariat;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General, as part of his ongoing efforts to
improve the functioning of the Organization, to implement fully those measures
specified in the text that are within his competence;
4.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-second session on the implementation of the present
resolution;

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement
No. 24 (A/51/24).
97-77467

/...

A/RES/51/241
Page 2

5.
Invites other principal organs, the specialized agencies and other
bodies of the United Nations system to implement the measures for
strengthening the system that are specified in the text and that are within
their respective areas of competence, as appropriate;
6.
Decides that the Open-ended High-level Working Group on the
Strengthening of the United Nations System has completed its work as mandated
in resolution 49/252.
105th plenary meeting
31 July 1997
ANNEX
I.

PURPOSE

1.
The Open-ended High-level Working Group on the Strengthening of the
United Nations System has undertaken its work in accordance with the
perspective that its mandate for strengthening the United Nations system,
derived from General Assembly resolution 49/252 of 14 September 1995, is to
better enable the Organization to fulfil the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and to meet the aspirations of its Members. It
has focused on improving the capacity of the General Assembly to discharge
effectively its functions, role and powers and that of the Secretariat to
carry out effectively and efficiently the mandates of intergovernmental
processes with the necessary transparency and accountability.
2.
The Working Group has proceeded on the assumption that adequate
resources will be provided to support the United Nations system. It has not
seen its mandate as responding to the current financial crisis, which is being
considered by the High-level Open-ended Working Group on the Financial
Situation of the United Nations. It has also proceeded on the assumption that
any Secretariat resources that are freed up as a result of strengthening
measures proposed by the Working Group shall be reallocated according to
priorities set by the General Assembly, in particular to the economic and
social areas.
II.

REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON THE WORK OF THE ORGANIZATION

3.
The report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization
should be available not later than thirty days prior to the opening of the
regular session of the General Assembly in all official languages of the
Organization so as to permit due consideration.
4.
The introduction to the report of the Secretary-General on the work of
the Organization should be in the nature of an executive summary highlighting
main issues.
5.
The main body of the report shall be comprehensive, informative and
analytical in a way that will allow Member States to examine and assess,
inter alia, through the debate on the report, the extent to which mandates
given by the General Assembly have been fulfilled, as well as to set
priorities in the context of the major political, economic and social,
administrative and financial issues on its agenda.
/...

A/RES/51/241
Page 3

6.
The Secretary-General shall incorporate a new forward-looking section in
his report on the work of the Organization. It shall describe the specific
goals for the Secretariat in the year ahead in the context of the work plan
for the Organization in the coming year, taking into account the medium-term
plan and the fact that the responsibility for establishing priorities rests
with the Member States.
7.
The report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization
shall be considered in plenary meetings of the General Assembly immediately
after the general debate. The President of the Assembly should assess the
debate on this item. In the light of that assessment, informal consultations
shall be held, under the chairmanship of the President or one of the
Vice-Presidents of the Assembly, to discuss action that may be required by the
Assembly on the basis of the debate on the report.
8.
The General Assembly in plenary meeting may refer sections of the report
for more detailed consideration by the Main Committees.
9.
The report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization
shall, inter alia, contain an analytical and concise annex elaborating the
costs by major programmes and activities of all bodies of the United Nations
system, located both in and outside New York, according to their mandates, so
as to improve Member States’ overview of system-wide issues.
10.
The Secretary-General is requested to introduce the report orally at an
appropriate time under the agenda item entitled "Report of the SecretaryGeneral on the work of the Organization".
III.

GENERAL ASSEMBLY CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

11.
The agenda item entitled "Report of the Security Council" shall continue
to be considered in plenary meetings of the General Assembly.
12.
The President of the General Assembly shall assess the debate on this
item and consider the need for further consideration of the report of the
Security Council. In the light of that assessment, informal consultations
shall be held after the debate in plenary meetings, under the chairmanship of
the President or one of the Vice-Presidents of the Assembly, to discuss the
need and content of any action by the Assembly based on the debate.
13.
The agenda item shall not be closed but shall remain open to enable
further discussion as necessary during the year, bearing in mind, inter alia,
the submission of additional reports as and when necessary.
14.
The monthly forecast of the programme of work of the Security Council
shall be circulated for the information of members of the General Assembly.
IV.

GENERAL ASSEMBLY CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL

15.
The report of the Economic and Social Council to the General Assembly
shall be prepared in accordance with General Assembly resolution 50/227 of 24
May 1996. The report shall also contain an evaluation of the report of the
Administrative Committee on Coordination, taking into account the report of
the Committee for Programme and Coordination.

/...

A/RES/51/241
Page 4

V.

GENERAL ASSEMBLY CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE

16.
The report of the International Court of Justice shall continue to be
considered in plenary meetings of the General Assembly. The Assembly shall
continue to support the role of the International Court of Justice as the
principal judicial organ of the Organization, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations. The Assembly shall also continue to encourage the
progressive development and codification of international law.
VI.

TIMING OF THE PLENARY MEETINGS OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY

17.
The plenary meetings of the General Assembly shall be formally opened
every year on the first Tuesday following 1 September, with the election of
the President, Vice-Presidents and Chairmen of the Main Committees (the
General Committee). The General Committee shall then meet as soon as possible
after its election and shall present its report to the General Assembly before
the commencement of the general debate.
18.
The plenary meetings of the General Assembly shall reconvene in
mid-September to consider the report of the General Committee.
VII.

THE GENERAL DEBATE

19.
There shall continue to be only one general debate each year, beginning
in the third week of September.
20.
The preparation of the list of speakers for the general debate shall be
based on the following principles:
(a)
The general debate shall be organized over a period of two weeks
so as to maximize possibilities for interministerial contacts;
(b)
Member States shall be invited to indicate three preferences for
speaking times;
Member States wishing to organize or participate in group meetings
(c)
during the general debate period shall be encouraged to coordinate their
responses to the request for preferences and to indicate this transparently in
their responses;
(d)
The Secretariat shall be requested to prepare a list of speakers
based on existing traditions and expressions of preference to best accommodate
Members’ needs;
(e)
The list of speakers for each day shall be completed and no
speakers will be rolled over to the next day, notwithstanding the implications
for hours of work.
VIII.

TIME LIMITS

21.
There shall be no time limits or specified themes for the general debate
but the General Assembly will indicate a voluntary guideline of up to twenty
minutes for each statement.
22.
Outside the general debate there shall be a fifteen-minute time limit in
plenary meetings and in the Main Committees.
/...

A/RES/51/241
Page 5

IX.

THE AGENDA

23.
Bearing in mind rule 81 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, the requirements for reopening debate on an agenda item which the
Assembly had decided was completed will continue to be as at present and
should be made clear to delegations through a statement from the President of
the Assembly. A delegation wishing to reopen debate on an agenda item should
send a written request to the President of the Assembly. The President will
then undertake soundings to ascertain whether the request enjoys wide support.
In the light of these soundings, the President shall announce in the Journal
of the United Nations the date of the meeting of the Assembly to consider the
question of reopening debate on the item, bearing in mind the requirements of
rule 81.
24.
The General Assembly shall take further steps to rationalize and
streamline the agenda, based on the Guidelines on the Rationalization of the
Agenda of the General Assembly agreed to by the Assembly in annex I to its
resolution 48/264 of 29 July 1994, and in particular shall make greater use of
clustering, biennialization or triennialization of agenda items. Items that
could be considered at a later session shall be identified, taking into
account the priorities set by the medium-term plan.
25.
As a general rule, agenda items that could be considered in the Main
Committees shall be referred to the Main Committees rather than the General
Assembly in plenary meetings.
26.
The Main Committees shall give specific attention to rationalizing their
future agenda and shall consider recommending any possible clustering,
biennialization or triennialization of items.
X.

ORGANIZATION OF WORK

27.
The General Assembly is the highest political body with universal
membership of the Organization. Consideration of agenda items directly in
plenary meetings shall be reserved for urgent issues or issues of major
political importance, bearing in mind paragraphs 1 and 2 of annex I to General
Assembly resolution 48/264.
28.
The President of the General Assembly, with a view to ensuring that
there is a systematic and transparent process for participation by delegations
in discussions on action to be taken on items considered directly in plenary
meetings, shall assess the debate in plenary meetings and, where appropriate,
organize open-ended informal consultations, under the chairmanship of the
President or one of the Vice-Presidents of the Assembly, to discuss the need
for and content of any action.
29.
The Secretariat shall ensure, in consultation with the President, that
priority is accorded to the availability of a meeting room and services to
facilitate these consultations.
30.
All Main Committees shall hold brief organizational sessions once the
General Assembly has taken decisions on the agenda, before the commencement of
the general debate. Bureaux of the Main Committees shall meet earlier to draw
up recommendations on the organization and programme of work.
31.

The Main Committees shall meet in substantive session only after the end
/...

A/RES/51/241
Page 6

of the general debate.
32.
The number of reports requested shall be rationalized where possible so
as to permit more focused consideration of issues. All bodies shall exercise
restraint in making proposals containing requests for new reports and should
consider integrating, biennializing or triennializing the presentation of
reports, bearing in mind paragraphs 6 and 7 of General Assembly resolution
50/206 C of 23 December 1995.
XI.

THE GENERAL COMMITTEE

33.
The General Committee shall use its authority and competence, taking
into account rule 43 of the rules of procedure, by allowing Member States that
are not represented on the General Committee to participate in its
discussions. The process of decision-making will continue to be as at present.
34.
The General Committee may, each year, prior to the closure of the
session, prepare suggestions based on its experience for the consideration of
the incoming General Committee.
35.
The General Committee is requested to consider and recommend to the
General Assembly methods and procedures for streamlining and rationalizing the
Committee’s work. The General Committee shall, in this context, in relation to
each agenda item proposed, consider its rejection or its inclusion in the
provisional agenda, taking into account previous recommendations of the
General Committee and previous relevant decisions of the Assembly.
XII.

SUBORDINATE MACHINERY

36.
The First Committee and the Fourth Committee shall not meet
simultaneously and may consider meeting in a sequential manner during the
regular session of the General Assembly. This arrangement shall not apply if
it affects their respective identities, programmes of work and effective
consideration of their agendas.
37.
The Disarmament Commission should continue to consider ways to organize
its work better, including rationalizing the duration of its sessions.
38.
The General Assembly should invite the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the World Health Organization to consider the functions and role of
the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation and
to submit a recommendation to the Assembly at its fifty-third session.
Meanwhile, the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic
Radiation should be asked to submit its report to the International Atomic
Energy Agency and World Health Organization as well as to the General
Assembly. The Assembly would discuss the report along with any International
Atomic Energy Agency and World Health Organization evaluation of the report.
39.
The Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the General Assembly for the
Mid-term Review of the Implementation of the United Nations New Agenda for the
Development of Africa in the 1990s shall conduct its final review and
appraisal during the fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly.
XIII.

THE BUDGET PROCESS AND FULFILMENT OF MANDATES

40.
To ensure better transparency and accountability, the medium-term plan
shall be the framework for the budget process.
/...

A/RES/51/241
Page 7

41.
The budget process shall be carried out in accordance with relevant
General Assembly budget resolutions, in particular resolution 41/213 of 19
December 1986, and the relevant provisions of the Financial Rules and
Regulations. The importance of continuous and appropriate dialogue on the
improvement of current administrative and budgetary practices and procedures
is recognized.
42.
The Secretary-General shall continue to have flexibility, without
prejudice to the fulfilment of mandates, to redeploy, as necessary, within the
limits prescribed by the General Assembly budget resolutions and the Financial
Rules and Regulations, the human and financial resources necessary to fulfil
mandates.
XIV.

ROLE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY

43.
The President of the General Assembly shall be encouraged to take
appropriate opportunities to utilize the potential of the office of the
President, consistent with the Charter and the mandates of the Assembly, to
advance the purposes and principles of the Organization, including regular
consultations between the President of the Assembly and the presidents of
other organs, particularly the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council.
44.
In order to assist the President in the discharge of his
responsibilities, the General Assembly shall request the Secretary-General,
after consultation with the President, to include in the next programme budget
a proposal for adequate resources to be made available to the President,
including, if necessary, through enhanced administrative and personnel support
to the office of the President.
XV.

TECHNOLOGY

45.
The Secretary-General is requested to pursue an information technology
plan with a range of options to provide all permanent missions to the United
Nations and the wider public with on-line access to documents and relevant
United Nations information. Unless the General Assembly decides otherwise,
hard copies of documents shall continue to be distributed to permanent
missions in accordance with their needs. While welcoming the progress made by
the Ad hoc Open-ended Working Group on Informatics of the Economic and Social
Council, further efforts in this direction could be pursued within a specified
time-frame to harmonize and improve United Nations information systems. All
countries, in particular developing countries, shall be assisted in making
full use of this potential access. Adequate provision should be made for
training delegates. Facilities for such access by delegations within the
United Nations premises shall also be expanded as much as possible.
Availability of information in this manner should be ensured in all official
languages of the United Nations.
46.
The Secretary-General is encouraged to include information on the impact
of technological improvements in his report on the implementation of mandates,
by means of comparing outputs with objectives.
XVI.

SYSTEM-WIDE COORDINATION

47.
The Secretary-General is requested to elaborate further ways to
strengthen system-wide coordination and to report thereon to the General
/...

A/RES/51/241
Page 8

Assembly.
XVII.

OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY OF THE SECRETARIAT:
EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL MECHANISMS

48.
The Secretariat shall be held strictly accountable for implementing
mandates within allocated budgets.
49.
For the Secretariat to operate efficiently in fulfilling mandates,
micromanagement of the Secretariat by the General Assembly should be avoided.
50.
The Secretary-General is encouraged to submit proposals to the General
Assembly to improve the presentation of the programme performance report so as
to enable the Committee for Programme and Coordination and the Main Committees
of the General Assembly, without prejudice to the provisions of section VI of
resolution 45/248 B of 21 December 1990, as reaffirmed in resolution 51/221 of
18 December 1996, to consider the portions of the report related to their
substantive work with reference to the medium-term plan, with a view to
facilitating the consideration of the programme performance report by the
Fifth Committee.
51.
There shall be a more detailed and structured examination in the Main
Committees of the relevant reports of the Board of Auditors, the Joint
Inspection Unit and the Office of Internal Oversight Services in relation to
the substantive work of these Committees.
52.
Accountability and intergovernmental oversight shall be improved by
periodic coordination meetings between the Board of Auditors, the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Joint Inspection
Unit, with appropriate input from the Office of Internal Oversight Services.
53.
"Question time" in all Main Committees would enable a dynamic and candid
interchange with responsible Secretariat officials to facilitate the work of
the Main Committees in their assessment of fulfilment of mandates,
productivity and related issues.
54.
Every effort should be made to ensure that the measures referred to
above take into account and are mutually reinforcing of the programme
evaluation activities carried out by other competent intergovernmental bodies.
XVIII.

AREAS FOR MORE INTENSIVE WORK BY OVERSIGHT MACHINERY

55.
The relevant bodies should request the external and internal oversight
machinery to give early attention to, among others, the following areas and to
report thereon periodically to the General Assembly:
(a)

Practice and procedures in the employment of consultants;

(b)

Practice and procedures in short-term contract employment;

(c)

Practice and procedures with respect to recruitment;

(d)
Productivity gains actually achieved from investment in technology
and the impact of the postponement/deferral of upgrading technological systems
on the long-term functioning of the Organization;
(e)

Practice and procedures for appointments at the senior level;
/...

A/RES/51/241
Page 9

(f)
contracts;

Practice and procedures for procurement and the award of

(g)
An evaluation of conflict of interest issues, in particular for
personnel dealing with employment decisions and the award of procurement and
contracts;
(h)

Practice and procedures in the establishment and use of trust

funds;
(i)

Practice and procedures with regard to personnel on loan;

(j)

Any other issue recommended by the General Assembly.
XIX.

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL

56.
The process of selection of the Secretary-General shall be made more
transparent.
57.
The General Assembly shall make full use of the power of appointment
enshrined in the Charter in the process of the appointment of the
Secretary-General and the agenda item entitled "Appointment of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations".
58.
The duration of the term or terms of appointment, including the option
of a single term, shall be considered before the appointment of the next
Secretary-General.
59.
In the course of the identification and appointment of the best
candidate for the post of Secretary-General, due regard shall continue to be
given to regional rotation and shall also be given to gender equality.
60.
Without prejudice to the prerogatives of the Security Council, the
President of the General Assembly may consult with Member States to identify
potential candidates endorsed by a Member State and, upon informing all Member
States of the results, may forward those results to the Security Council.
61.
In order to ensure a smooth and efficient transition, the
Secretary-General should be appointed as early as possible, preferably no
later than one month before the date on which the term of the incumbent
expires.
XX.

SENIOR MANAGEMENT

62.
The senior management structure should be considered in the context of
the overall structure of the Organization, desired lines of authority and
decision-making.
63.
The Organization shall have a clear pyramid structure. To that end, the
functions and number of under-secretaries-general, special representatives of
the Secretary-General and assistant secretaries-general should be reviewed and
streamlined by the Secretary-General, and lines of authority and
decision-making made transparent.
64.
Member States note the Secretary-General’s decision to establish a
Policy Coordination Group as a means to enhance coordination in the terms
/...

A/RES/51/241
Page 10

explained by him to Member States.
65.
The principles of equitable geographical distribution and gender balance
shall be reflected in appointments to senior positions, including heads of
programmes, funds and other United Nations bodies.
66.
The principle enshrined in General Assembly resolution 46/232 of
2 March 1992 that there should be no monopoly on senior posts by nationals of
any State or group of States should be strictly observed and implemented. The
Secretary-General should keep the Assembly regularly informed of his/her
actions on those matters.
67.
The Secretary-General is encouraged to consider uniform terms and term
limits in his appointments to senior management posts.
XXI.

HEADS OF PROGRAMMES, FUNDS AND OTHER UNITED NATIONS BODIES

68.
Affirming the role of the General Assembly in approving appointments and
extension of terms, uniform terms of office of four years, renewable once,
should be introduced for the executive heads of programmes, funds and other
bodies of the Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
69.
The specialized agencies are also encouraged to consider uniform terms
and term limits for their executive heads.
XXII.

GENERAL STAFFING ISSUES

70.
It is essential for the successful functioning of the Organization that
it has a career international civil service for its core functions. There is
also an important role for term contracts for various categories of staff.
71.
The Secretary-General shall be encouraged, in accordance with
legislative mandates, to ensure a judicious mix of career and fixed-term
appointments, so as to have an appropriate balance between institutional
memory, long-term commitment and independence and the ability to bring in
fresh insights and expertise, and to dismiss non-performing staff.
72.
Short-term appointments should not be used as an entry to career
positions. A review should be undertaken of staff on short-term appointments.
73.
Staff development and training shall be encouraged along with a costeffective common training system to be developed for personnel of the
Secretariat, funds and programmes.
74.
The provisions of the Charter giving due regard to the importance of
recruiting staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible shall be
implemented. In this regard, the principle of gender balance shall be observed
within the Organization. In achieving gender balance, the principle of
equitable geographical distribution shall be respected.
75.
The quality of the language services shall be enhanced, including
through the provision of effective management practices, bearing in mind that
all official languages of the United Nations are of equal importance in this
regard.
XXIII.

PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT

/...

A/RES/51/241
Page 11

76.

The system of in-career promotion shall be made more transparent.

77.
A planned rotation among different departments as well as between
Headquarters and the field level, as appropriate, as endorsed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 49/222 A of 23 December 1994, as one way of
enhancing experience and skills, should be developed and submitted to the
Assembly.
78.
The performance appraisal system shall be subject to periodic review and
audit and comparative statistics should be maintained for review by the
General Assembly.
XXIV.

SECRETARIAT REMUNERATION

79.
The General Assembly shall request the International Civil Service
Commission to prepare proposals for a possible system of performance-based
remuneration for its consideration.
80.
The General Assembly shall reiterate that topping up of remuneration of
their nationals in any way by Member States is not acceptable and shall
request the Secretary-General to report on the matter.
XXV.

INDEPENDENCE OF THE SECRETARIAT

81.
Further efforts shall be made, consistent with Article 101 of the
Charter to pay due regard to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide
a geographical basis as possible.
82.
Compliance with Article 100 (2) of the Charter is of fundamental
importance and it would be timely to call upon Member States scrupulously to
observe Article 100 (2) and to request the Secretary-General to prepare
guidelines on what constitutes acceptable representations to him and his staff
on appointments.
83.
Consistent with Article 101 of the Charter, Secretariat guidelines for
staff members on financial interests shall include a requirement at all levels
of senior management for specified financial disclosures at the time of
appointment and on a regular basis. These financial statements shall be dealt
with on a basis of confidentiality.
