United Nations

S/PV.6710

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6710th meeting
Tuesday, 31 January 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Sangqu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Juppé
Mr. Link
Mr. Caballeros
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Amrani
Mr. Haroon
Mr. Portas
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Menan
Mr. Hague
Mrs. Rodham Clinton

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 24 January 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2012/71)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-21919 (E)

*1221919*

S/PV.6710

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

Sheikh Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. I thank you
and the members of the Council for convening this
meeting to allow us to report on the mission with
which we were entrusted.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 24 January 2012 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2012/71)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Qatar and the Syrian Arab Republic
to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr
Al-Thani, Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the State of Qatar, Chairman of the current
session of the Arab League Council at the Ministerial
Level, and request the Protocol Officer to escort him to
his seat at the Council table.
Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani,
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the State of Qatar, Chairman of the current
session of the Arab League Council at the
Ministerial Level, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite His
Excellency Mr. Nabil Elaraby, Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States, to participate in this meeting.
I wish to welcome the presence at today’s
meeting of the Ministers and the Deputy SecretaryGeneral. Their presence is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter to be addressed.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/71, which contains a letter dated
24 January 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Sheikh
Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani, Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of Qatar,
Chairman of the current session of the Arab League
Council at the Ministerial Level.

2

At a meeting held in Cairo on 22 January, the
Council of Ministers of the League of Arab States
adopted a resolution requesting that I, in my capacity
as Chairman of the Arab Ministerial Committee on
Syria, and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States brief the Security Council on the plan adopted
under that resolution and that we request the Council to
endorse the plan.
I wish to stress that our first and ultimate goal is
to serve the interests of Syria, which entails protecting
its sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity and ensuring its stability. I further stress the
importance of ensuring the solidarity and unity of the
Syrian people, harmony among its various components,
and the protection of all its ethnic, religious and social
groups. With its unique social fabric and intellectual
and cultural authenticity, Syria is dear to the hearts of
all Arabs. I address the Council today to brief it on the
resolution adopted by an organization representing all
Arabs.
We meet today under the watchful eyes of
bereaved orphans, widows, thousands of wounded,
detainees, displaced children, young people, the elderly
and women who continue to hope for the support of the
Security Council and thus to live a decent, free life
based on right, justice and good governance. It is up to
the Security Council — and its responsibility under
United Nations Charter — to realize the hopes of the
Syrian people. Indeed, we are entrusted with such a
burden by virtue of our humanitarian responsibility.
At the League of Arab States, we have worked
diligently, patiently and responsibly to find solutions
that will help us settle the Syrian crisis peacefully. On
27 August 2011, the League of Arab States adopted an
initiative to end the violence in Syria, launch an
inclusive national dialogue with the opposition to
prevent the situation from deteriorating further, and
introduce reforms in a secure and controlled
environment. The provisions and mechanisms of the
initiative were balanced, transparent and objective. It
was the only way to achieve a peaceful settlement of
the crisis based on the aforementioned goals.

12-21919

S/PV.6710

On 26 October 2011, at its extraordinary session
in Cairo, the League of Arab States reiterated the Arab
position in a resolution calling for an immediate and
complete end to the violence and killing, the
elimination of armed elements, and the rejection of a
security-based solution in a bid to avoid further
casualties and exacerbating the conflict among the
various factions of the Syrian people, preserve the civil
peace, protect civilians, and maintain the unity of the
Syrian people.
The resolution called on the Council of Ministers
of the League of Arab States to establish, at that
session, an Arab Ministerial Committee — under my
chairmanship and with the Foreign Ministers of
Algeria, Egypt, the Sudan and Oman and the head of
the Arab League as members — mandated to liaise
with the Syrian leadership in an effort to halt all acts of
violence and killing. The Committee requested the
Sudan and Egypt to persuade the Syrian leadership to
withdraw all military presences and launch a dialogue
between the Syrian people and opposition in order to
implement political reforms that would meet the
aspirations of the people. The resolution also called for
the establishment of necessary contacts with the Syrian
Government and opposition in order to prepare for a
conference of inclusive national dialogue at the
headquarters of the League of Arab States and under its
auspices that would realize the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people.
On 26 October 2011, the Ministerial Committee
held discussions in Damascus with President Bashar
Al-Assad. In a meeting held with the Syrian side in
Doha on 30 October 2011, the Committee agreed on a
plan of action that was welcomed at the resumed
extraordinary session of the League of Arab States,
held at the ministerial level at the League’s
headquarters on 2 November 2011. The agreement was
annexed to the resolution. The plan confirmed the
official Syrian approval of the following: first, to end
all acts of violence committed by all sources in order to
protect the lives of Syrian citizens; secondly, to free
detainees held as a result of the current events; thirdly,
to withdraw all military elements from the cities and
residential neighbourhoods; and fourthly, to provide
the relevant agencies of the League of Arab States and
Arab and international media free access throughout
Syria in order to report on developments there and
monitor the situation. The plan called on the
Ministerial Committee to conduct, in parallel with

12-21919

concrete progress made by the Syrian Government
towards meeting its commitments, necessary contacts
and consultations with the Government and various
factions of the Syrian opposition with a view to
convening a national dialogue conference within two
weeks of the date of the adoption of the resolution.
Unfortunately, the Syrian Government did not
fully or immediately meet its commitments to the
League’s initiative of 2 November 2011. Consequently,
the Ministerial Council decided on 12 November 2011
to adopt a host of measures, including the imposition
of economic and political sanctions on the Syrian
Government and calling on all opposition factions to
meet in Cairo for three days to agree at a forthcoming
conference on a transitional phase for Syria.
After the idea of dispatching an Arab observer
mission to Syria took shape — not to give any party an
opportunity to buy time but rather to stop the violence
and the bloodshed — the Ministerial Council approved,
at a meeting held in Rabat on 16 November 2011, a
draft protocol on the legal status of the mission, whose
mandate was to verify the implementation of the Arab
plan in order to solve the crisis and protect civilians.
Should the Syrian Government fail to sign the protocol
or violate any of its provisions — including those
calling for an end to the violence and killing and the
release of detainees — the resolution called for
convening the Economic and Social Council of the
League of Arab States to consider imposing economic
sanctions on Syria.
The resolution was communicated to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and requested
him to take necessary action in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations to support the League’s
efforts. On 27 November 2011, the Ministerial Council
adopted a package of sanctions, including halting
flights to Syria, that would not directly affect the
Syrian people. At a meeting held in Doha on
3 December 2011, the Ministerial Committee agreed on
the details of the sanctions and relevant action. It is
worth mentioning that the Arab Ministerial Committee
continued its meetings aimed at following up on
developments in the Syrian situation; it met in Doha on
17 December 2011 and in Cairo on 8 January 2012.
Despite all those efforts, including contacts with
the Syrian Government, the Syrian side resorted to
introducing one amendment after the other to the draft
protocol, and asking all kinds of questions, to which

3

S/PV.6710

the League of Arab States provided answers and
clarifications, for more than a month. It was clear that
the Syrian objective was to stall and prevaricate in order
to avoid taking the responsibility of implementing its
commitments, which reflected the Syrian Government’s
lack of political will to sign the protocol and commit to
implementing the provisions of the Arab plan.
Once the fear barrier came down and the people
started defending themselves in the face of military and
security oppression, the Syrian Government signed the
protocol on 19 December 2011. Immediately thereafter,
the Arab observer mission — the first of its kind in the
history of the League of Arab States — was deployed.
It is not unlikely that the purpose behind the Syrian
Government’s signing the protocol is to enforce the
military solution under cover of its commitment to the
protocol. In fact, the Syrian Government has failed to
implement major provisions of the protocol, notably
those related to the immediate implementation of the
Arab plan of action that it had agreed to.
In briefing the Council on the Arab efforts, I wish
to take fully into account the Council’s continuing
follow-up of developments in the Syrian crisis, so that
the Council will understand the reasons that prompted
the Arab States to adopt their resolution, which we
have been entrusted to convey to the Council.
At the last meeting of the Arab Ministerial
Committee in Cairo on 22 January, a comprehensive
review was conducted of the tasks accomplished by the
observer mission based on its findings. That meeting
adopted unanimously a resolution that included a
unanimously endorsed initiative on an integrated plan
for a peaceful settlement of the Syrian crisis that would
be acceptable to and implemented by all parties in
good faith and without stalling or reluctance. That
resolution has been circulated among the members of
the Security Council.
The plan constitutes a road map that is consistent
with the Charter of the United Nations and is aimed at
a rational, democratic, political solution to the crisis
and a peaceful transition of power. It provides for the
formation of a national unity Government within two
months, to be chaired by a mutually agreed figure and
to include members of the opposition. One of its tasks
would be to prepare for free and pluralistic
parliamentary and presidential elections, under a law
stipulating the conduct of such elections under Arab
and international supervision. The resolution extended

4

the Arab observer mission mandate by one month
despite the fact that the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States announced on 28 January the
suspension of the activities of the observer mission,
pending review of the matter by the League’s Council
of Ministers, given the serious deterioration of the
security situation as a result of the escalation of the
security-based option.
The League of Arab States began to discuss the
Syrian crisis six months after it started. We have come
before the Council today after five additional months
of effort to push the Syrian Government to find a
solution to the crisis with its own people, based on the
resolutions of the League. Throughout our efforts, we
have been eager to preserve the unity and stability of
Syria as an important member of the Arab family.
Our efforts and initiatives, however, have been
completely in vain, for the Syrian Government has
regrettably failed to make any sincere effort to
cooperate with us. It is unfortunate that its only effort
towards a solution have been to kill its own people.
The reality on the ground bears witness to the fact that
the bloodshed has not stopped, that the killing machine
is still at work and that violence has continued to spread
everywhere. That approach was clearly articulated in
the declarations made by the Syrian Minister for
Foreign Affairs at the press conference of 24 January.
After mocking the League of Arab States’ plan as an
invitation to internationalization, he confirmed the
Syrian Government’s rejection of the Arab solution and
declared that the security-based solution was a
necessity imposed by the situation on the ground.
The important question at this stage is: What is
the solution for a people that is being slaughtered? The
Syrian Government invokes the violence committed by
armed groups as justification. Could it not be that the
people are defending themselves after months of
killing, detention and torture? Could any leadership
continue its rule against the desire of its own people
who are calling for reform? We must not forget that the
crisis we are discussing was launched through
spontaneous, peaceful demonstrations by unarmed
citizens calling for rights that are enshrined in
international covenants and instruments. Those
demonstrators have faced live ammunition, heavy
weaponry, widespread detention and flagrant violations
of their human rights.

12-21919

S/PV.6710

The Syrian regime is promoting the idea of a
hidden agenda harboured by certain States against it.
That idea is untrue and belies the position of the
international community concerning the events in Syria
resulting from the Government’s policy. Many
thousands of people have died and many detainees
languish in prisons. The Government killing machine
continues effectively unabated. Sadly, funeral
processions have become scenes of massacres; schools
have been transformed into military headquarters and
even houses of worship have not been spared from the
shelling. Clearly such oppression has reached
unimaginable proportions when the throats of slogan
chanters have been slashed, as the killers of Ibrahim
Qaqoush did in Hama. Fingers of pro-freedom
cartoonists have been broken; the fate of Ali Farzat in
Damascus is a case in point.
The Council may well be aware of the adoption
by the Human Rights Council of three resolutions at its
sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth sessions, strongly
condemning Syria for the flagrant and systematic
violations committed by Syrian forces that may be
considered crimes against humanity.
In its resolution 66/176 of 19 December 2011, the
General Assembly condemned strongly and by a vast
majority the continuation by the Syrian authorities of
their serious and systematic violations of human rights.
The Secretary-General requested the Security Council
to shoulder its responsibilities and to adopt a unified
position with regard to the crisis. As for the rate of
killing taking place in Syria, the United Nations
declared that it was no longer able to keep count of the
thousands of victims and would consequently stop
doing so. A few days ago, UNICEF confirmed that the
death toll of children killed in Syria exceeded 384.
I do not believe that anyone would accept such a
number even if it were described as collateral damage.
I do not believe that any one of those children was a
member of an armed terrorist group. The Council may
well recall that human rights organizations, such as
Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, have
condemned the acts of oppression committed by the
Syrian regime against civilians and called for the
International Criminal Court to investigate the
perpetrated crimes. The International Commission of
Inquiry cited in its report issued in Geneva on
28 November 2011 that the Syrian security forces had
committed crimes against humanity. It reported
extrajudicial killings, arbitrary detentions, enforced

12-21919

disappearances and acts of torture, some of which had
been carried out in conjunction with acts of sexual
violence.
The Security Council has taken landmark
positions in supporting us, both at the national level in
our attempt to find solutions to the problems of Darfur,
Lebanon and the conflict between Eritrea and Djibouti,
or at the level of the League of Arab States with
relation to the war of Lebanon and the war in the Gaza
Strip. We look forward, in the same spirit, to the
Council’s taking a positive stance by supporting the
Arab position on the Syrian crisis.
Allow me to recall that in the past, I came before
the Council with a solution to the Lebanese crisis that
did justice to the occupied Lebanese territories.
Subsequently, in Doha we embarked on the Lebanese
reconciliation that with which all here are quite
familiar. Today, the League of Arab States comes
before the Council to request that it assume its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
to address the humanitarian tragedy unfolding in Syria
by adopting a clear resolution that supports the latest
Arab initiative endorsed in the resolution of the League
of Arab States Ministerial Council in Cairo on
22 January, to which I referred earlier. We also call on
the Council to undertake all measures based on the
resolutions of the League of Arab States, specifically
economic resolutions and bans on travel to Syria. We
are not calling for military intervention; we are
advocating the adoption of concrete economic pressure
to bring the Syrian regime to understand that it cannot
avoid meeting the demands of its people. We are not
after a regime change, because this is a matter that we
believe the Syrian people should decide.
The continuation of the current situation is a
threat to the entire region and might lead to grave
repercussions if we do not remedy it in a serious and
effective manner. We at the League of Arab States have
made sincere efforts to find a solution to the crisis and
hoped that the Syrian regime would be wise enough to
realize that its approach to governance has become
obsolete.
Consequently, and since the Syrian regime has
continued to use an approach that flies in the face of
today’s logic and that of the international community,
we cannot but resort to the rational solution to the
crisis that is set out in the plan that we have presented
to the Council. We hope that it will gain the Council’s

5

S/PV.6710

support. Only through this can we hope to do justice to
the aspirations of the Syrian people, their aspirations for
freedom and for the establishment of good governance.
We call on the Council to adopt the draft
resolution sponsored by the brotherly Kingdom of
Morocco. Otherwise, we will be sending a wrong
message to the Syrian regime, one that encourages it to
continue oppressing its people. That might have serious
consequences for peace, stability and security in Syria
and the entire region.
The President: I thank His Excellency Minister
Al-Thani for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Nabil
Elaraby, Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States.
Mr. Elaraby (spoke in Arabic): Allow me, Sir, to
thank you and the members of the Security Council for
your invitation to participate in this important meeting.
The Security Council convenes today at a time
when events in Syria are spiralling dangerously. This
requires that international efforts be concerted with
Arab efforts for a rapid, effective and decisive action,
first to ensure immediate cessation of violence in order
to protect the fraternal Syrian people, and secondly to
begin, as soon as possible, the implementation of the
road map for a peaceful political solution that rids
Syria of its grinding crisis and achieves the aspirations
of the Syrian people for change and reform — a move
to a peaceful democratic life in which all segments of
the Syrian people enjoy dignity and freedom, as called
for by every Arab country.
The security situation is increasingly grave and
urgent in light of the escalation that Syria has
witnessed in the past few days — the ongoing acts of
violence, the shelling and firing and counter-shelling
and counter-firing that have felled many innocent
civilians in the Syrian Government’s clear resort to an
escalation of the so-called security option, in complete
contradiction of the commitments it took on in the
Arab plan of action as well as in the protocol signed by
the Syrian Arab Republic and the League of Arab
States on 19 December 2011, on the mandate of the
League’s observer mission in Syria.
We therefore believe that the first priority now is
for the Security Council to adopt a resolution demanding
that all parties — I repeat, all parties — immediately

6

cease firing, protect Syrians and support the Arab plan
of action for a peaceful political settlement of the crisis.
Today’s meeting has been convened in
implementation of subparagraph 3 of Article 52 of the
Charter of the United Nations:
(spoke in English)
“The Security Council shall encourage the
development of pacific settlement of local
disputes through such regional arrangements or
by such regional agencies either on the initiative
of the states concerned or by reference from the
Security Council.”
(spoke in Arabic)
It is in that very context that the League of Arab States
has come to the Security Council.
I should like to thank the Council for having so
quickly responded to the request from the League of
Arab States to inform this Council on the outlines of
the Arab démarche. The issue has been set out in detail
by His Excellency the Prime Minister of Qatar. I shall
repeat some points but will attempt to be brief.
The latest decision by the League was on
22 January, on a road map for a peaceful settlement of
the Syrian crisis. Before taking up the details of our
initiative, I should like to stress some of the
fundamental principles of the Arab démarche.
First, the fundamental objective of our initiative
is an immediate cessation of all acts of violence against
and killing of Syrian civilians, as well as the realization
of the aspirations and demands of the Syrian people —
demands for economic, social and political change, a
move towards a correct political life in true democracy
in which all fundamental rights and the rule of law are
maintained, and a peaceful alternation of power.
Secondly, Arab States aim at taking up the Syrian
crisis in an Arab context. We are attempting to avoid any
foreign intervention, particularly military intervention.
Thirdly, the Arab endeavour proceeds from the need for
a peaceful political settlement and, as I have stated, a
rejection of any military or foreign intervention.
Fourthly, all the resolutions of the League of Arab
States — all the League’s resolutions — have always
stressed full respect of the security, sovereignty,
territorial integrity of Syria and unity of the Syrian
people.

12-21919

S/PV.6710

Our objective is therefore for the Security Council
to support our initiative, not to take its place. The Arab
plan is the fundamental mechanism for a peaceful
settlement of the Syrian crisis, with international
support and agreement from the Security Council.

Syria would make the necessary contacts and
hold the necessary consultations with the
Government and all parties of the Syrian
opposition in order to hold a national dialogue
within two weeks of that date.”

In our approach to the Syrian crisis, we have
taken up two fundamental pillars.

In order to verify the Syrian Government’s
implementation of its commitments under the action
plan, on 19 December 2011 the Arab League drew up a
protocol establishing the legal context for the observer
mission. Observers from all Arab States and relevant
institutions were deployed beginning on 24 December
2011. The mission continued to deploy to all areas
where demonstrations were occurring in 15 cities in
Syria.

One is immediate action for an immediate, full
cessation of all acts of violence against and killing of
the Syrian people, while at the same time maintaining
the right of the Syrian people to expression by peaceful
demonstration and for the Syrian security forces not to
confront the demonstrations.
The second pillar is a road map leading to a
peaceful political settlement of the crisis through a
national dialogue that includes all parties, all sects, all
political currents and all segments of Syrian society in
order to realize the aspirations of the Syrian people for
a life of true democracy.
In fulfilling that endeavour, since July 2011 the
League has taken several actions and has put a number
of initiatives to the Syrian leadership. The most
important was on 27 August. Mandated by the Council
of the League, I personally handed it to the Syrian
leadership on 10 September last year. Thereafter, an
Arab ministerial committee — again, mandated by the
Council of the League and chaired by the Prime
Minister of Qatar — visited Damascus and met with
the Syrian leadership on 26 October.
Based on that initiative and those contacts, the
Arab action plan took shape. The Syrian Government
promised to implement it, and it was then adopted by
the Council of the Arab League on 2 November. The
plan includes:
“First, the Syrian Government is to put an
end to all acts of violence, from whatever source,
to protect the Syrian citizens; second, the release
of those detained during, and because of, the
current events; three, withdrawal of all armed
elements from all cities and urban centres; and
four, opening the door to all institutions of the
League as well as Arab and international media to
move freely in Syria in order to ascertain facts on
the ground and monitor such events.
“Secondly, with concrete progress in the
Syrian Government’s implementation of its
commitments, the Arab Ministerial Committee on

12-21919

The head of the mission presented his first
technical field report covering the period from
24 December 2011, the date on which the team reached
Damascus, to 18 January of this year. The report was
transmitted to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on 22 January in order to inform him of the
situation on the ground and the cooperation and
consultations between our two organizations.
The Council of the League of Arab States decided
that, in the light of the conclusions presented in the
report, partial progress had indeed been made in
implementing some of the commitments undertaken by
the Syrian Government. However, progress was
incomplete and therefore insufficient. It was not what
was required or, indeed, what was wanted.
The resolutions of the League and the protocol
itself refer to the immediate and complete cessation of
acts of violence, the release of all detainees, the
withdrawal of all armed elements from cities and the
provision of unhindered access to Arab and international
media. In that context, I should like to take up some
fundamental points presented in the report in order to
provide the appropriate temporal and political context.
First, the Syrian Government should have met all
of its commitments before the monitors arrived, so that
the mission would merely verify implementation.
However, since it did not fully meet all its
commitments, the task of the team on the ground had
to change. The team sought to demand that the Syrian
Government immediately and fully implement its
commitments. It also sought to confront some painful
humanitarian situations that could not be ignored, even
though they exceeded the scope of the team’s mandate.
By way of example, the team delivered food to some

7

S/PV.6710

areas, recorded witness accounts of human rights
violations committed against Syrian citizens, and
assisted in the exchange of the bodies of the fallen.
Secondly, the report covers a limited and brief
time frame. It does not address events during the nine
months preceding the team’s arrival in Syria, between
15 March and 24 December 2011. During that period,
many events occurred, as did many violations that the
team did not address as they lay outside its remit. That
was not required of the mission. That must always be
taken into consideration when assessing the work and
findings of the observers.
Thirdly, the mission’s task was very specific and,
indeed, very complicated. As the Prime Minister of
Qatar stated, never in the past had a team of civilian
observers been dispatched to a State facing escalating
protests by civilians calling for regime change. The
mission was deployed to verify that the Syrian
Government was fulfilling its commitments to end the
violence and killing and to withdraw armed elements
from cities and urban centres at a time when the
political, military and security forces of that country
were in control.
It must be clearly stated that the mandate of the
mission was to verify the Syrian Government’s
implementation of its commitments, and not — I
repeat, not — to bring about disengagement or a truce
between warring parties, which is usually the case
when monitors or missions are dispatched by the
United Nations to any conflict area in the world.
Fourthly, the most important fact in the mission’s
report is the reference to the excessive use of force by
the Syrian security forces since last March, which
sparked a reaction from protestors and opposition
elements. Paragraphs 71 and 74 of the report refer to
the state of severe tension, injustice and repression to
which Syrian citizens were being subjected. The
opposition had taken to bearing arms as a result of the
excessive force deployed by Government forces since
last March. That is taken directly from the report.
Fifthly, although the presence of observers on the
ground did not lead the Syrian Government to fully and
immediately keep its promises, it nevertheless had
some positive effects. For example, the Syrian people
have been given greater freedom to express their
demands, as was clearly evidenced by the increased
number of protestors in many cities following the
mission’s arrival. Many Syrians found a mechanism by

8

which to directly express their own experience and
positions through witness accounts, which they provided
directly to the members of the mission. The mission
was able to monitor and record substantial information
regarding the human rights situation in Syria. The
mission was able to obtain lengthy lists of detainees
and missing persons through extensive contact with the
people in direct meetings and on the websites created
by the League of Arab States for that purpose.
In view of the conclusions presented in the
mission’s report, having studied developments on the
ground in Syria since the League began to address the
crisis — and with a view to complementing the efforts
to resolve the Syrian crisis without resort to foreign
intervention or lapsing into civil war and in respect for
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria, and the partial progress that was achieved by
the mission — on 22 January the Council of the
League, meeting at the ministerial level, adopted a
resolution in which it stressed several points.
The Council of Ministers underscored the need
for an end to all acts of violence and killing from all
quarters so as to protect Syrian citizens. It also called
on the Syrian Government to release all detainees,
withdraw all armed elements from the cities and
residential areas, and grant access to the relevant
League agencies and Arab and international media. It
highlighted the need to recall the Syrian Army and any
armed forces of whatever formation to their barracks
and original locations; to ensure the right to all forms
of peaceful demonstration and not to confront
protestors; and to facilitate the mission’s work and the
entry of equipment, in particular communications
equipment. The mission called on the Syrian
Government and all parties of the Syrian opposition to
enter into a genuine political dialogue under the
auspices of the League of Arab States within two
weeks of the issuance of that resolution in order to
implement a series of initiatives.
The first initiative is the formation of a national
unity Government within two months of the dialogue,
with the participation of the current Government and
opposition under an agreed leader. Its task should be to
implement the provisions of the Arab plan of action
and prepare for free, multiparty parliamentary and
presidential elections, in accordance with a law
specifying the procedure under Arab and international
supervision and authorizing the Vice-President to
negotiate and cooperate with a unity Government to

12-21919

S/PV.6710

facilitate the transitional period. I should like to stress
that the road map adopted on 22 January can in no way
be interpreted as calling on the Syrian President to
renounce power.
There is a precedent. I visited Damascus on
13 July last year and talked with the President of the
Republic on the need for true political reform. The
President said that he would entrust Mr. Farouk
Al-Shara, his first Vice-President, who is responsible for
the necessary fundamental reforms and that he would
inform me of those political reforms. That is similar to
the current demand of the League of Arab States.
Once formed, the national unity Government
would state that its aim is to establish a democratic and
multiparty political system that ensures the equality of
all citizens irrespective of their affiliation or sectarian
or religious identity, as well as the handover of power.
The national Government should restore security and
stability to the country, and reorganize the police force
so that it can perform security functions of a civilian
nature, with Arab States undertaking to fund such
efforts in coordination with the League of Arab States.

Therefore, allow me to reiterate that the League
of Arab States looks forward to a supporting resolution
of the Security Council that calls on all parties to
immediately cease all acts of violence in order to protect
the Syrian people and to engage in a serious national
dialogue, under the aegis of the League of Arab States.
Such a resolution should adopt the Arab initiative as a
basis for resolving the crisis and should support the
Arab League’s mission when it decides to resume.
As Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, I must also stress the importance of the prompt
cooperation of the United Nations and relevant
international organizations with the Arab League in
order to alleviate the worsening humanitarian
conditions of the Syrian people.
In conclusion, allow me once again to thank the
Security Council for having responded so rapidly to
our request and for its support of the Arab initiative. I
hope that such support will give a strong impetus to the
Arab League’s efforts and serve as an example of
positive interaction between the United Nations and
regional organizations.

An independent commission should be established
to investigate the violations to which citizens have
been subjected. Within three months of its formation,
the national unity Government should hold free and
fair elections under Arab and international monitoring
in order to establish a constituent assembly.

I urge the Council not to fail the Syrian people in
their plight. The violence and killing, whatever their
source, must stop. We need a clear resolution in
support of the Arab League’s initiative. I would seek
the Council’s support for the draft resolution submitted
by the Kingdom of Morocco.

In reporting to the Security Council on all such
developments, I should like to state that immediately
before coming to New York, I was compelled to take
the urgent step of suspending the work of the Arab
observers in Syria owing to the recent serious
deterioration of the situation in the country after the
Syrian Government openly declared that it would
resort to a security-based option. That led to some
observers being withdrawn until I take the matter to the
Council of the Arab League in a few days.

The President: I thank Mr. Elaraby for his
briefing.

As can be seen from the brief report on the Syrian
crisis, the Arab League has consistently tried to find a
peaceful political settlement to the Syrian crisis that
would spare the lives of the Syrian people and meet
their demands and aspirations. Furthermore, the League
is fully aware that the international community’s support
for the Arab plan as the necessary mechanism to resolve
the Syrian crisis is pivotal and crucial to its success
and to achieving its objectives.

12-21919

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I, too, will speak in Arabic and am honoured
to do so.
I recall that the Syrian Arab poet Nizar Qabbani,
who is known and read by all Arabs, imagined, if not
predicted, such a scenario and meeting years before his
death in a very famous poem that begins: “Damascus,
the treasure of my dreams, shall I bemoan to you
Arabism or bemoan my fellow Arabs to you?”
I and my generation clearly remember that when
we were at secondary school in the late 1950s and early
1960s, we used to sing the national anthem of the
Algerian revolution in the morning instead of reciting
the Syrian national anthem. We also used to give — or

9

S/PV.6710

donate, as we say in the Syrian dialect — our few
pennies of pocket money to Arab liberation movements
in the Gulf that were fighting for their freedom from
British colonialism. As children, we were happy to
donate our pocket money, little as it was, to help liberate
our brothers in the Gulf from colonial control. That was
long before the oil boom. At that time, Arabism was
different from how some people perceive Arabism today.
Allow me to begin by expressing our appreciation
to South Africa and to you personally, Mr. President,
for your wise guidance of the work of the Security
Council for this month. We take this opportunity to
underscore once again the pride that we feel in the
victory of your people and the peoples of Africa over
the discriminatory policy of apartheid and in
questioning the positions of some States that pay lip
service to democracy and human rights. We ask them
whom they supported during South Africa’s struggle,
which was crowned with success.
Syria is facing decisive and historic challenges.
We wish for such a period to meet the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian population as a result of the
will of our people, not of anyone else. While such
events have broken the hearts of every Syrian, it
compels Syrians of all affiliations and attitudes to
choose the path of wisdom and to be guided by their
resolute patriotic feelings so that the entire homeland,
not part of it, can be victorious.
The Syrian people, who gave the world its first
alphabet, are more familiar with the scent of jasmine
than with the smell of blood in Damascus. The Syrian
people have throughout the ages always been able to
resolve their crises and domestic problems alone. It has
never accepted any form of foreign intervention in the
internal affairs of its homeland, Syria. It stood proud,
refusing to undermine its cultural and national assets.

that Syria’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity are a red line. Syrian patriotism stresses that
Syrians will stand as one against dissent and disorder,
rejecting violence and resort to arms, while calling for
reform. Homelands are built by all their citizens.
We Syrians have an opportunity to launch a
sincere national dialogue and expedite the pace of
reform in order to establish a genuine national
partnership that preserves the security of the homeland
and the citizen. That is the only way out of the crisis —
a solution that responds to the legitimate aspirations
and demands of the Syrian people without undermining
the homeland. Future generations will hold accountable
everyone who squandered this opportunity.
The Arab people would have very much hoped
that the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
and current Chairman of its Council of Ministers had
come to the Security Council to request the Council to
shoulder its responsibilities to end the Israeli occupation
of Arab territories and escalating settler activities and
killing. How strange it is for us to see some members
of the League of Arab States resort to seeking the
Security Council’s support against Syria — Syria,
which has never thought twice about making the
ultimate sacrifice in defence of Arab causes.
Those who believe that the States that I am
referring to; who have always stood for just Arab
causes in the Council and beyond; who demonstrate
their enthusiasm for the Arab League out of respect for
its decisions; and who believe that these States are with
us are truly deluding themselves. The fact is that this
enthusiasm has emerged in a context diametrically
opposed to the rightful interests of Arab causes.

The Syrian people will do so once again through
the participation of all Syrians to lead them away from
the crisis and to contribute to the march of national
reconstruction, with the primary objective of meeting
the supreme interests of the homeland and nothing else,
in an atmosphere of reconciliation among all. The
homeland is the property of all.

What is new today, however, is that the Arab
League has decided to take its decisions to the Security
Council, which has imposed hundreds of vetoes against
Arab causes. What is new is that the Arab League has
transferred these unjust decisions to Syria behind
Syria’s back, as it were, and without consulting with its
leadership, in a way that runs counter to the Charter of
the League of Arab States and paves the way for an
ongoing scenario of aggressive interference in the
internal affairs of Syria.

In Syria we do not have a majority and a minority.
There are only Syrians in Syria. I say the homeland is
owned by all, and it is the property of all. It is a trust,
even if some are misled and defy what is right. Syrian
patriotism rejects external intervention and stresses

These plans have cross-fertilized with other
schemes and interests of non-Arab States that seek to
destroy and destabilize Syria. This has happened for no
other reason than that Syria does not want to depend on
anyone and will not allow its sovereignty to be

10

12-21919

S/PV.6710

compromised, and because it insists on the
independence of its decisions and on the preservation
of its sovereignty and the interests and security of its
people.
After some powerful circles imposed on this
international organization a policy of double standards,
which it incorporated into every aspect of its work,
howsoever tacit or unwritten, we are now witnessing
the onset of a new phase based on creating illusory
terms of reference and on a policy of distortion and
imposing false facts. Some try to convince world
public opinion that those who seek to defend the
independence of their countries — following in the
footsteps of such great leaders, such as Simón Bolívar,
Gandhi, Dmitry Donskov, Mandela, George Washington,
Mossadeq, De Gaulle, Nasser, Emir Abdul Qadir
al-Jazairi, Sultan Basha al-Atrash, Ho Chi Minh and
Sun Yat-sen — are classified as terrorists and pariahs,
working outside international legitimacy.
Those who are trying to preserve their country
and save it from creative chaos and terror have become
violators of human rights and killers of their own
people. Those who win the support of the majority of
their people have lost legitimacy and have to step down.
It is really strange these days to find certain oligarchic
States that sponsor draft resolutions promoting the
alternation of power, the freedom to demonstrate,
democracy and the protection and promotion of human
rights, do not even have a constitution, let alone a
genuine electoral system, and only exercise democracy
through satellite stations and fancy conference halls.
Those same countries unfortunately resort to the
Security Council to ask Syria for reform and for
democracy. Syria had a parliamentary Government in
1919, one year after the fall of the Ottoman Empire,
while Lawrence of Arabia was wreaking havoc with the
destinies and resources of our region and trying to turn
the clock back on obscurantism.
Syria signed the protocol admitting the Arab
observers because we were eager to keep this issue
under the Arab roof. Syria proved its full and unerring
commitment to the Arab plan of action and the protocol
signed between it and the Secretariat of the League of
Arab States. The report of the observer mission
(S/2012/71, enclosure 4) confirms that fact in
paragraphs 37, 38, 39 and 73. It confirms clearly what
we have been saying. It confirms that there is a
misleading, deliberate, systematic and politically

12-21919

motivated media campaign to distort and fabricate facts
on the ground. I would refer in particular to
paragraphs 29, 68 and 69 of the report. The report also
notes in paragraphs 26, 27, 71 and 75 the presence of
terrorist groups that have exploited the legitimate
demands of the Syrian people for reform to destabilize
Syria, undermine its security, and undertake terrorist
attacks against the institutions of the State and against
civilians and military personnel alike.
Furthermore, paragraph 44 of the report clearly
indicates that Gilles Jacquier, the French journalist,
was killed as a result of mortar attacks fired by the
opposition. Syria finds it strange that this tragic event
did not move the French diplomacy to indignation,
particularly given that Syria established a committee of
inquiry to investigate the details of the event, chaired
by a judge and with the participation of a representative
of the French television channel at which the journalist
used to work.
The Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States read out some paragraphs in his statement. I
regret that he selected some items from the report (see
S/2012/71, enclosure 4) and left out others. I would
like to read from paragraph 26:
“In certain situations, Government forces
responded to attacks against their personnel with
force. The observers noted that some of the
armed groups were using flares and armourpiercing projectiles”.
The Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, who is a dear colleague, objected to requests by
members of the Council to invite General Al-Dabi to
participate in today’s meeting. The report of the Arab
observers was not sent to the Council as part of the
documents that were dispatched from the headquarters
of the League of Arab States.
The decision by the League of Arab States to go
to the Council is but an attempt to bypass the success
of the mission of the Arab observers and to ignore its
report. The report, unfortunately, went against the
schemes of some Arab and non-Arab parties who falsely
claimed a commitment to the Arab role in settling the
Syrian crisis while they simultaneously worked, using
different means, to abort the observer mission while
waging a fierce political and media war against it.
Certain Arab officials and some Europeans have
questioned the usefulness of the mission, including the

11

S/PV.6710

Prime Minister of Qatar, who visited New York,
Washington and other capitals only two weeks after the
mission began its work, making statements to the effect
that the continuation of the observer mission was
useless and asking that the Syrian issue be transferred
to the Security Council. That occurred while Syria was
fully committed to the provisions of the protocol,
despite a twofold increase in the number of
Government forces killed and a threefold increase in
the number of acts of aggression against public and
private property. That was all due to instructions to
armed groups from outside the country to use the
mission’s presence as a time for escalation.
Syria rejects any decision outside the agreed Arab
plan of action and the protocol that it signed with the
League of Arab States. It considers the resolution
adopted by the meeting of the Council of the League of
Arab States a violation of its national sovereignty, a
flagrant interference in its internal affairs and a blatant
violation of the purposes for which the League of Arab
States was established. It is also a violation of article 8
of the Charter of the League of Arab States. Strangely
enough, the League of Arab States requested the Syrian
Government to extend the observer mission for another
month. Damascus agreed immediately. However, the
League of Arab States soon contradicted itself, ignoring
the findings of the mission’s report, attempting to
transfer the crisis of an Arab country to the Security
Council, and halting the continuing work of the
observer mission.
The unbridled tendency of certain Western States
to interfere in our internal and external affairs by
various means is neither sudden nor novel. It has
frequently and systematically occurred since the
Sykes-Picot Agreement of 1916 and the Balfour
Declaration of 1917, not to mention the limitless
support provided to Israel’s aggressive and hostile
policies and its occupation of Arab lands.
We all know that the international legal
framework within whose parameters States operate is
based on respect for national sovereignty and
non-interference in internal affairs. Those two principles
are enshrined in Article 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations, not Article 52, to which Mr. Elaraby referred,
as well as in article 8 of the Charter of the League of
Arab States. In that context, we stress the exclusive
responsibility of the Syrian Government in the
preservation of civic peace and security and in
protecting its citizens from acts of destruction and

12

sabotage undertaken by armed groups, not by peaceful
demonstrators, in accordance with Syrian law as well
as with the international agreements to which Syria is a
party, including the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights.
Regrettably, instead of respecting those established
principles of international law, and in the context of
feverish attempts to interfere in the internal affairs of
Syria by co-sponsors of the French resolution against
Syria, certain officials have suddenly fallen in love
with the Syrian people after centuries of emotional
hibernation towards them. Such people foolishly dream
of the return of colonialism and hegemony through
these resolutions. They concoct new terms to justify
interference in Syria’s internal affairs by misleading
global public opinion. They are doing exactly what they
did when they misled the world when 130,000 Libyan
civilians were killed, and when 1 million Iraqis were
killed under the pretext of looking for weapons of mass
destruction that were never there to begin with, and
under the pretext of promoting democracy. That is what
they did with respect to the destruction of Afghanistan,
under the pretext of fighting terrorism, or when they
established clandestine prisons and detention centres in
Guantanamo and Abu Ghraib, under the pretext of
promoting freedom.
We stress that Syria draws its strength from the
strength of its people and that it will stand firm in
confronting the enemies of its people. We call upon all
those Arabs and non-Arabs who are fomenting the
crisis and who are bent on exacerbating it to reconsider
those policies and to stop massacring Syrian civilians.
One cannot be an arsonist and a fire-fighter at the same
time. We call on them to support national dialogue and
the Syrian political reform process, as implemented by
the Syrian leadership in response to the legitimate
demands of the people.
By way of example, in February we will hold a
referendum on a new, finalized constitution for the
country that guarantees party and political pluralism as
well as alternation of power. Parliamentary elections
will also be held in the first half of the year, leaving the
final say to the democratic ballot box.
In conclusion, we expect the Security Council to
be a platform for encouraging dialogue as a way to
settle crises. We do not expect it to create or aggravate
crises. We believe that an exacerbation of the crisis
will undermine, not preserve, international peace and

12-21919

S/PV.6710

security. In that regard, we welcome the recent initiative
of the Russian Federation to sponsor an all-Syrian
dialogue in Moscow to find a solution to the crisis.
The President: I now give the floor to members
of the Security Council.
Mrs. Rodham Clinton (United States of
America): Let me begin by thanking Prime Minister
Hamad bin Jassim and Secretary-General Elaraby for
their thorough briefings.
The Arab League has demonstrated important
leadership in this crisis. For many months, the people
of the region and the world have watched in horror as
the Assad regime executed a campaign of violence
against its own citizens. Civilians are gunned down in
the streets, women and children tortured and killed —
no one is safe, not even officials of the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent. According to United Nations estimates,
more than 5,400 civilians have already died and that
number is rising fast. The regime also continues to
arbitrarily detain Syrian citizens, such as the activists
Yahia al-Shorbaji and Anas al-Shogre, simply for
demanding dignity and universal rights.
To date, the evidence is clear that Al-Assad’s
forces are initiating nearly all of the attacks that kill
civilians. But as more citizens take up arms to resist
the regime’s brutality, violence is increasingly likely to
spiral out of control. Already the challenges ahead for
the Syrian people are daunting: a crumbling economy,
rising sectarian tensions, and a cauldron of instability
in the heart of the Middle East.
Fears about what follows Al-Assad, especially
among
Syria’s
minority
communities,
are
understandable. Indeed, it appears as though Al-Assad
and his cronies are working hard to pit Syria’s ethnic
and religious groups against each other, risking greater
sectarian violence and even descent into civil war.
In response to this violent crackdown on peaceful
dissent and protest, the Arab League launched an
unprecedented diplomatic intervention, sending
monitors into Syria’s beleaguered cities and towns and
offering President Al-Assad many chances to change
course. These observers were greeted by thousands of
protesters eager to share their aspirations for their
universal rights and also the stories of what had
befallen them and their families. But as the Arab
League report makes clear — if one reads the entire
report — the regime did not respect its pledges or the

12-21919

presence of the monitors, and instead responded with
excessive and escalating violence.
In the past few days, the regime’s security forces
have intensified their assault, shelling civilian areas
and homes in other cities. This weekend, the Arab
League suspended its monitoring mission, pointing to
the regime’s intransigence and the mounting civilian
casualties.
So why is the Arab League here before the
Security Council? It is because it is seeking the support
of the international community for a negotiated,
peaceful, political solution to this crisis and a
responsible, democratic transition in Syria. We all have
a choice. We can stand with the people of Syria and the
region or become complicit in the continuing violence
there.
The United States urges the Security Council to
back the Arab League’s demand that the Government
of Syria immediately stop all attacks against civilians
and guarantee the freedom of peaceful demonstrations.
In accordance with the Arab League’s plan, Syria must
also release all arbitrarily detained citizens, return its
military and security forces to their barracks, and allow
full and unhindered access for monitors, humanitarian
workers and journalists. We urge the Security Council
to back the Arab League’s call for an inclusive, Syrianled political process to effectively address the
legitimate aspirations and concerns of Syria’s people,
conducted in an environment free from violence, fear,
intimidation and extremism.
I know that some members here may be
concerned that the Security Council could be headed
towards another Libya. That is a false analogy. Syria is
a unique situation that requires its own approach,
tailored to the specific circumstances occurring there.
That is exactly what the Arab League has proposed —
a path to a political transition that would preserve
Syria’s unity and institutions. This may not be exactly
the plan that any of us ourselves would have designed.
I know that many nations feel that way. But it
represents the best efforts of Syria’s neighbours to
chart a way forward, and it deserves a chance to work.
I think it would be a mistake to minimize or
understate the magnitude of the challenge that Syrians
face in trying to build the rule of law and civil society
on the ruins of a brutal and failed dictatorship. This
will be hard. The results are far from certain. Success

13

S/PV.6710

is far from guaranteed. But the alternative — more of
Al-Assad’s brutal rule — is no alternative at all.

failure of our shared responsibility, and shake the
credibility of the Security Council.

We all know that change is coming to Syria.
Despite its ruthless tactics, the Al-Assad regime’s reign
of terror will end and the people of Syria will have the
chance to chart their own destiny. The question for us
is: How many more innocent civilians will die before
that country is able to move forward towards the kind
of future it deserves?

The United States stands ready to work with
every member in this Chamber to adopt a resolution
that supports the Arab League’s efforts, because those
are the efforts that are well thought-out and focused on
ending this crisis, that uphold the rights of the Syrian
people, and that restore peace to Syria. That is the goal
of the Arab League; that should be the goal of the
Security Council — to help the Syrian people realize
the goal of the future that they seek.

Unfortunately, it appears as though the longer this
continues, the harder it will be to rebuild once
President Al-Assad and his regime are transitioned and
something new and better takes its place. Citizens
inside and outside Syria have begun planning for a
democratic transition, from the Syrian National
Council to the courageous grass-roots local councils
across the country, which are organizing under the
most dangerous and difficult circumstances. But every
day that goes by, their task grows more difficult.
The future of Syria as a strong and unified nation
depends on thwarting a cynical, divide-and-conquer
strategy. It will take all Syrians working together —
Alawis and Christians hand in hand with Sunnis and
Druze, side by side with Arabs and Kurds — to ensure
that the new Syria is governed by the rule of law, that it
respects and protects the universal rights of every
citizen, regardless of ethnicity or sect, and that it takes
on the widespread corruption that has marked the
Al-Assad regime. If this is to work, Syria’s minorities
will have to join in shaping Syria’s future, and their
rights and voices will have to be heard, protected and
respected.
Let me say directly to them today: “We do hear
your fears and we do honour your aspirations. Do not
let the current regime exploit them to extend this
crisis.” The leaders of Syria’s business community,
military and other institutions will have to recognize
that their futures lie with the State and not the regime.
Syria belongs to its 23 million citizens, not to one man
or his family. Change can still be accomplished without
dismantling the State or producing new tyranny. It is
time for the international community to put aside our
own differences and send a clear message of support to
the people of Syria.
The alternative — spurning the Arab League,
abandoning the Syrian people and emboldening the
dictator — would compound this tragedy, mark a

14

Mr. Juppé (France) (spoke in French): We meet
today so that the Security Council can shoulder its
responsibility towards a people that is suffering, in a
region where peace is threatened by the bloody
downward spiral of a regime gasping its last. The
months-long silence of the Council is no longer
acceptable. To its credit, the League of Arab States is
here today to urge the Council to return to its
responsibilities. France solemnly calls on the Council
to live up to the mission entrusted to it by the United
Nations Charter, by coming to the aid of a people and a
region that want nothing more than peace and respect
for their dignity.
The Arab League has taken action and done all it
can to meet the demands of the situation by suspending
Syria from the League, sending an observer mission
and proposing a plan for political transition. I
commend the League’s courageous engagement in the
Syrian conflict. I welcome the presence here today of
its Secretary-General, Mr. Nabil Elaraby, and of the
Prime Minister of Qatar, Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin
Jabr Al-Thani, and I thank them for the briefings they
just gave us. I also commend the Kingdom of
Morocco’s decision to place a draft resolution before
us, which France fully supports. I commend the
collective efforts of all the States of the Arab League. I
am well aware that decisions on the Syrian situation
are particularly difficult to make and to put into action
for some of them, if only because of their proximity to
Damascus.
Today, I repeat, we meet to put an end to the
scandalous silence of the Security Council. Indeed, I
call it scandalous, and I will try to explain what I mean
by that.
What is the current situation in Syria? A people
has risen up to defend its liberty. Words are inadequate
to describe the horror of the brutal repression. To say

12-21919

S/PV.6710

that it is worsening or that it is tragic does not come
close to the reality. According to the United Nations,
5,400 are dead. According to UNICEF, 384 children
have been murdered. There are 15,000 prisoners,
15,000 refugees and daily torture.
I have long called some of the regime’s actions
crimes against humanity. The international commission
of inquiry of the Human Rights Council corroborates
that view. Beyond the statistics, the faces of children
tortured, the bodies of women violated and the
thousands of human victims of repression should guide
our actions. The humanitarian situation is deteriorating
day by day. What level of horror must be reached for
the Council to enforce a stop to human rights violations
and ensure free access to humanitarian assistance?
Every State has the responsibility to protect its
civilian population. Not content with not protecting its
civilians, the Syrian regime shamefully massacres them
without restraint. That behaviour has direct
consequences on international peace and security.
Thousands of refugees are fleeing the violence; the
sovereignty of neighbouring States is being violated;
inter-community tensions are on the rise — all of
which has a direct impact on the stability of an already
fragile region. Even without reference to the
responsibility to protect, those regional consequences
are enough to establish the Council’s responsibility.
How can this even be up for discussion? France
has not stopped calling for the Council to work towards
decisions and to put them to the vote. Those calls have
been unsuccessful, with the exception of presidential
statement S/PRST/2011/16 of 3 August 2011. Is that
acceptable? I do not think so. Is it scandalous? I am
certain of it.
Of course, we have continued our efforts despite
the Council’s silence. The European Union has 11 times
increased the sanctions on the regime and its leaders.
France has worked a great deal on that. We have
established relations with the peaceful opposition. I
have met many times with the Syrian National Council,
a legitimate entity whose efforts to unify the opposition
I commend.
However, the actions of the European Union or
the Arab League, no matter how resolute, cannot
replace action by the Council. By virtue of the
legitimacy conferred on it by the United Nations
Charter, it is the Council that can express
authoritatively the will of the international community.

12-21919

The Security Council is the keystone of international
peace and security. If it is to remain so, it has the
responsibility to pronounce cases as serious as Syria’s.
How can it do so? It can do so by promptly and
with broad support adopting the draft resolution
introduced by Morocco. That text delivers the Council’s
support to the Arab League, which, strengthened by the
crucial involvement of regional actors, is currently the
only body to offer a realistic approach to a political
resolution.
There are two essential elements to the draft
resolution. First, it unequivocally condemns the
repression carried out by the regime, without falling
into the trap of a false comparison between that
repression and the actions of the opposition on the
ground. If a minority resorts to violence, the vast
majority of Syrians who demonstrate do so barehanded
in the streets, as compared with the indiscriminate
violence of the regime. We respectfully pay tribute to
those Syrian men and women who every day march for
their freedom, knowing that the repression’s bullets
could kill them at any moment.
Because it was mentioned, I want to honour the
memory of Gilles Jacquier, the French journalist killed
as he carried out his work. I will not allow his death to
be exploited. The Syrian authorities had the duty to
provide him all necessary protection; clearly, they did
not do so. The report of the observer mission before us
(S/2012/71, enclosure 4) does not go into the exchange
of fire that caused the death of my countryman. Yes,
the report says that the journalist was killed by lethal
fire from the opposition, but that idea is not endorsed
by the Arab League and we are still waiting for the
Syrian authorities to shed every possible light on the
incident.
The second essential element of the Arab League’s
proposal is that it offers the Council’s support to the
Arab League’s initiative in all three of its main aspects:
the demand for an end to violence, the call for free
access for the observers, and, especially, for the first
time, the articulation of a credible political transition
process. It will be up to the Arab League to implement
it. Our responsibility is to help it by sending the clear
message to the Syrian regime that the international
community is united in support of the Arab efforts.
Of course, we would have liked to see the
Council go further, but we need a rapid response to
finally open the way to a resolution to this horrifying

15

S/PV.6710

crisis. We are therefore prepared to vote now on the
text proposed by Morocco.

United Kingdom and, I think, with the support of the
majority of Security Council members.

Some have drawn an analogy with the conflict in
Libya. That is a pretext. It is alleged that there is a plan
for a military intervention in Syria. That is a myth.
Absolutely nothing in the draft resolution distributed to
Council members by the Permanent Representative of
Morocco can be construed as an authorization of the
use of force. The draft does not fall under Chapter VII.
We are not preparing any military operation.

If implemented in full, the Arab League plan
would lead to an end to all violence against Syrian
civilians and attacks against Syrian State institutions. It
would remove the major stumbling blocks to reform
and give confidence to the Syrian people. It would start
an inclusive Syrian-led political process that would
allow the Syrian people to determine their future
peacefully, and it would lead to a national unity
Government and elections.

The tragedy of the Syrian people is sufficient
justification for our action. Our goal is simple — to
find a peaceful way out of the crisis that would allow
the Syrian people to freely express their aspirations.
Syrian society and its various components — and no
one else — must freely determine the future. We have
no intention of imposing a political regime from the
outside. The Arab League offers the only viable
prospect for achieving that goal. Let us grasp it. Let us
rise above our differences and support the plan
submitted today. Let us live up to our responsibilities
and to the political and moral duty that falls to us from
the peaceful uprising of the Syrian people inspired by
the momentum of the Arab Spring.
There is no time to lose. In less than a year, more
than 5,000 lives have been lost to the repression. Each
week squandered means hundreds more deaths — each
day, dozens more. In the memory of all the victims, I
urge the members of the Council to vote immediately
in favour of the text so that a political process can
begin to put an end to the Syrian nightmare.
Mr. Hague (United Kingdom): I, too, thank the
Prime Minister of Qatar and the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States for their reports and their
powerful words, and we are all grateful to you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this debate.
Our task as a Council is clear: we must address
the horrifying violence that has engulfed Syria for the
last 10 months, which is an unmitigated tragedy for the
people of that country and a real threat to international
peace and security, and we must do so in a way that
gives the greatest possible chance of a peaceful and
lasting solution. The League of Arab States has
proposed a way to achieve this, and it should be
congratulated and supported in doing so. Its plan is at
the heart of the draft resolution put forward by the
Kingdom of Morocco, with the full support of the

16

Syria needs a path out of conflict and misery, and,
with this plan, the Arab League has provided one that
is credible and viable. It has done so after three months
of engagement, described by the Secretary-General,
with all sides in Syria; after multiple visits to
Damascus by ministerial delegations from Arab nations;
on the basis of the work of over 150 Arab League
monitors inside Syria; and in the light of their own
deep understanding of their own region.
The Arab world is now asking the Security
Council to put its weight and authority behind the plan.
This is not the West telling Syria what to do. It is not
the permanent members of the Security Council
seeking to impose their view. This is the Arab nations
calling on the Security Council to help address the
crisis in Syria and the threat that it poses to the
stability of their region. The Secretary-General has
come here and urged us not to let the Syrian people
down in their plight.
Members of the Council have often called for
Arab leadership in the past, and that should be
respected now by all nations of the world. Can any
member of the Council today claim to be in a better
position to judge how best to support peace and
stability in Syria than these Arab nations themselves?
The draft resolution does not propose imposing
change on Syria from outside; it calls for the Syrian
people to be allowed to make their choices for
themselves. It does not call for military action and
could not be used to authorize it. Indeed, the SecretaryGeneral has stressed that the plan of the Arab League
specifically does not include any outside intervention.
It does not contain coercive measures. It is not a
Chapter VII draft resolution. But it should, in our view,
put the leaders of Syria on notice that measures will be
considered by the Council if there is not an immediate
end to the violence and if the Arab League plan

12-21919

S/PV.6710

continues to be ignored. That warning is important. For
too long the Syrian Government has promised reform
and continued the violence.
At any time over the last 10 months they could
have stopped the bloodshed; they could have seized the
initiative; they could have introduced bold and lasting
reform that meets the aspirations of Syrians for greater
political freedom.
But the facts over recent months speak for
themselves. When the Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2011/16) on Syria in August last
year, the death toll stood at approximately 1,000. When
a draft Security Council resolution was put forward in
October and vetoed here (see S/PV.6627), 3,000 people
had died.
We believe that today, nearly 6,000 Syrians have
died in appalling circumstances. That includes, as we
have heard, 384 children. Between 30 and 100 people
currently die every single day from the violence in
Syria. They will be dying as we speak. Thousands
more are enduring torture, imprisonment and sexual
violence, including the rape of children.
The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
spoke about the idealism of children in his country in
the 1950s and 1960s, without noting the irony that the
descendants of those children, the children of 2012, are
now being tortured and murdered in the name of their
own Government. It is not acceptable to try to blame
the situation in Syria on everyone else, from outside
intervention to the Gulf States, to French diplomats, to
Lawrence of Arabia — this does not excuse such
repression and violence, which is shame on any nation.
We know about those crimes because they have
been documented by impartial bodies of the United
Nations. How long will Syrian families have to live in
fear that their children will be killed or tortured, before
the Security Council adopts a meaningful resolution?
How many people need to die before the consciences
of all world capitals on this subject are stirred?
The people of Syria cannot afford to wait while
more false promises and half-measures from their
Government are accompanied by brutality on the
ground. There will be no reform or political progress in
Syria while such violence continues. There can be no
doubt that the violence is worsening; the risk of civil
war is intensifying; and the threat to the stability of the
region is growing.

12-21919

With each day that passes, finding a way back
from the brink will be harder, and innocent lives will
be needlessly and wrongfully lost — deaths which the
Council could help to avert by acting in a united
manner.
Today, as I understand it, we all agree around this
table that the Security Council has a role to play. We
all want a peaceful political solution that ensures the
stability, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria.
We all agree that this process should be led by the
people of Syria themselves, with the support of their
region and the international community. We all agree
that the rights of minorities in Syria must be
safeguarded and respected. We all agree that military
action would not be an appropriate response to the
complex situation in Syria, something this draft
resolution makes absolutely clear. We all welcome the
work of the Arab League. So, based on agreeing on all
those things, now we must have the will to match such
agreement by being able to agree on a draft resolution.
Even as we meet, the gravest of crimes are being
committed in Syria. Responsibility for those crimes
lies overwhelmingly at the door of the Syrian
authorities. But if the Council cannot agree to adopt a
resolution condemning the violence, backing the Arab
League and enabling a peaceful resolution, then that
failure of the Council will be judged by the people of
Syria and of their region.
We should unite behind the Arab League plan,
and that is what I urge all members of the Council to
do this week. We should remain seized of the situation
in Syria, returning to the matter if the violence still
continues. To fail to do so would be to undermine the
credibility of this institution, betray the Syrian people,
snub the Arab League and fail in the Council’s
responsibilities.
Mr. Caballeros (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin my statement on a personal note. I
represent the Government of President Otto Pérez
Molina, who took office barely two weeks ago. My
presence here today reflects our commitment to the
United Nations and our intention to responsibly carry
out our role as a recently elected member of the
Council. We have come here fully committed to
building consensus for the maintenance of international
peace and security. We appreciate the convening of this
important meeting in response to the request made by
the League of Arab States in its letter dated 22 January

17

S/PV.6710

addressed to
(S/2012/71).

Secretary-General

Ban

Ki-moon

We are especially pleased at the presence of and
information provided by Mr. Nabil Elaraby, SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States, as well His
Excellency Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani,
Chair of the current session of the Arab League
Council at the ministerial level. We also listened
attentively to the statement made by Ambassador
Bashar Ja’afari of the Syrian Arab Republic.
In addition to the information provided today, we
have previously had access to the decisions adopted in
recent weeks by the Council of Ministers, the protocol
concluded between the League of Arab States and the
Government of Syria on 19 December 2011, and the
text of the report prepared by the head of the observer
mission, General Mustafa Al-Dabi. All of this has
improved our capacity to understand what is happening
on the ground, and has at the same time contributed to
our growing alarm at a clearly deteriorating situation.
The events of the past few days, and the decision of the
League of Arab States to suspend its mission, have
only served to heighten our apprehensions.
Once again, the Council is addressing the
possible management on the part of the community of
nations of the amazing changes occurring in the Middle
East and North Africa. As with all change, especially
when it arises from the grass roots of society, its final
outcome tends to be unpredictable. We commonly
affirm that those changes are the sole and exclusive
purview of the citizens of each country, but it is
undeniable — and events confirm this to be the case —
that the wave of change does not recognize borders,
and that whatever happens in one nation has an impact
on the rest. This explains the presence of the League of
Arab States in the case we are addressing today — the
situation in Syria.
We have listened attentively to the different
narratives offered on the matter, which, among other
aspects, try to assign quotas of responsibility to
different actors, domestic and foreign. While the facts
of what actually is happening are sorted out — a task
made more difficult by the lack of access to the media,
and in spite of the presence until a few days ago of the
mission of observers — two realities overshadow the
rest. First, the toll of human life and the general
suffering imposed on the population are on the rise.
Secondly, the spiral of violence points at the real

18

possibility of a civil war between Syrians. The
immediate task at hand, then, is to put an end to
violence and to reverse the trend towards even greater
misery.
The League of Arab States must be commended
for occupying the front lines that pursue these two
objectives. We also sympathize with that organization’s
initiative to seek what is termed an “Arab solution” to
the crisis. Our delegation is prepared to accompany the
League of Arab States in the fulfilment of said
solution, whose prime objective is humanitarian in
nature, but whose broader goal is viewed in the
framework of a firm and longer-term political solution.
Some question whether this initiative is realistic, given
the immediate rejection it provoked from the
Government of the Arab Republic of Syria, but for our
part we are willing to give the League of Arab States
the opportunity to pursue its initiative within a
predetermined time frame.
Should this initiative not bear fruit, we believe
that, whether we like it or not, we would be failing in
our obligation if we were to permit an already grave
situation to deteriorate even further, with the foreseeable
domestic and international repercussions on peace and
security. We are more than aware of the serious
dilemmas to which this gives rise. Non-intervention in
the internal affairs of sovereign States and respect for
their territorial integrity are cardinal principles of our
foreign policy, but we also acknowledge the obligation
of all States to observe certain norms of conduct in
relations to their own populations.
We understand that peacefully expressed popular
demands cannot be equated with a Government that
uses force to address those demands. That is why, in an
era when the principle of the responsibility to protect is
being called into question, we are not ashamed to
affirm that, with some nuances that we have explained
in other forums, we support that principle. Our position
is far from inviting interventions; what we demand is
the strict observation of the norms of conduct to which
I have referred. In its absence, Governments that
flagrantly violate those norms naturally expose
themselves to the consequences, whose precise shape
and scope are susceptible to a wide spectrum of
possibilities.
In summary, we appeal to all parties to make a
last effort to find a way out of the Syrian crisis. The
initiative of the League of Arab States, or variants

12-21919

S/PV.6710

thereof, offer the potential for such a way out. Should
it fail, the escalation of violence, which has assumed
dramatic proportions in recent days, has not left many
options to this Council to carry out its own
responsibility in accordance with the Charter.
Mr. Portas (Portugal): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this important meeting. I wish to
welcome His Excellency Sheikh Hamad Al-Thani,
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Qatar, and
Mr. Nabil Elaraby, Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States, to the Council. I would also like to thank
them for their comprehensive and very useful
briefings, and commend them both for their tireless
efforts to resolve the crisis in Syria.
I decided to participate in this meeting of the
Security Council for the simple reason that what is
happening in Syria is of such seriousness; that the
inaction of the international community is so shocking;
that an Arab solution is so urgent; and that a decision
of the United Nations is so essential that I felt
compelled to participate in this debate and to do
whatever I can to transform deadlock into solution,
hesitation into will.
The situation in Syria is both unacceptable and
untenable. For 10 months now, we have witnessed the
most brutal repression of civilians and the most
flagrant and systematic violation of their fundamental
human rights. The brutality of the Syrian authorities
has left in its wake thousands of dead and many more
thousands maimed, imprisoned and tortured. They have
shown their contempt for basic human rights and their
unwillingness to protect their population. According to
UNICEF, nearly 400 children have lost their lives in
Syria. This is indeed a measure of the atrocities
committed.
The only aspiration of the Syrian people, inspired
by their brethren in other Arab countries, was simply to
voice their protest and to pave the way for a
democratic society. They did so peacefully and
unarmed, only to be met by bullets, beatings and
arrests. These victims and their families merit our full
solidarity. As deadly violence goes on unabated, the
situation in Syria continues to spiral dangerously
towards civil war, with serious risks for peace and
security in the region.
And yet, the Security Council has not been able
to fully meet its responsibilities regarding Syria and
the Syrian people, or to play its role as the primary

12-21919

body entrusted with the maintenance of international
peace and security. Allow me to be clear. The argument
voiced during these 10 months that the choice in Syria
was between inaction or civil war does not hold, given
what we see, hear and read every day. The country is
descending into civil war. The real option now is
between an escalation of the conflict or a controlled
and negotiated political solution.
Portugal fully supports the efforts of the League
of Arab States to find a peaceful solution to the Syrian
crisis that both promotes the end of violence and the
implementation of a serious political process that will
establish a free and democratic Syria. We have
commended the deployment of the Arab observer
mission and the decision to extend its mandate.
Notwithstanding the deployment of the mission, the
regime continues with its violent oppression against
peaceful voices of dissent and its widespread,
systematic and gross violations of human rights, as
documented by the commission of inquiry of the
Human Rights Council.
The Commission’s accounts are horrifying, and
all those responsible for these brutal violations and
abuses must be held accountable. We were appalled by
the killing last week of an official of the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent. We must reiterate, firmly, that the
deliberate targeting of humanitarian personnel is
simply a form of barbarism.
By persistently ignoring numerous appeals to put
an end to its bloody crackdown, the Syrian authorities
have fuelled escalation and violence. Yet, even under
the repression they are subject to, we trust that the
Syrian opposition movement will maintain the peaceful
nature of its legitimate objectives.
I cannot adequately stress the urgency of an
immediate end to all violence. Equally pressing is the
undertaking of a serious political process leading to a
democratic, plural political system where all citizens,
regardless of affiliation, ethnicity or belief, are treated
equally and can fulfil their legitimate aspirations.
Some months ago, President Al-Assad announced
reforms. Yet, he did not fulfil either those promises or
his commitments to the Arab League. In situations of
that nature, the old principle that it is enough to change
only a few things so that everything stays the same is
inapplicable. Quite to the contrary, the lesson of history
is the following: Where there is no reform, there will
be revolution.

19

S/PV.6710

Portugal remains committed to the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria. The
longer the crisis persists, the deeper the scars on Syrian
society will be.
My country values highly the role of regional
organizations and their contributions to peace and
security. We believe that the League of Arab States is
best suited to lead the efforts aimed at solving a crisis
that entails direct risks and threats to many of its
member States.
As I said, we fully support the efforts of the
League of Arab States. We supported without hesitation
the request for this meeting. We have staunchly
supported the League’s decision of 22 January and the
political road map therein as the only viable path
towards establishing a credible political dialogue among
all Syrians, leading to a peaceful political transition.
We urge all Syrian parties, factions and
stakeholders to respond positively to that proposal.
Portugal fully subscribes to the need for the formation
of a national unity Government and strongly appeals to
President Al-Assad to delegate full authority to his
deputy in order to carry out a peaceful political
transition in accordance with what has been underlined
by the Prime Minister of Qatar.
To cut a long story short, Portugal appeals to all
members of the Council not to look at Syria with the
eyes of the past, in the light of old divisions. What is at
stake in Syria is an Arab initiative for a problem that is,
first and foremost, an Arab one. It is a crisis that the
world and the United Nations cannot ignore. All
members of the Council should feel comfortable with
the initiative of the Arab League because no member of
the Council is comfortable with the daily massacres in
Syria.
Inaction is not only unacceptable but also
irresponsible. It is high time to live up to our
responsibilities and to address the legitimate demands
of the Syrian people and the expectations of the
countries of the region. We must unite behind a strong
and clear message to the Syrian authorities. It is also
the credibility of the Security Council that is at stake.
We must tell the Syrian authorities, unequivocally, that
the killing must stop and that a political solution must
be sought, based on the proposals of the Arab League.
It is for those reasons that Portugal commends
Morocco for submitting a draft resolution with those

20

objectives in view. We will continue to engage in good
faith with all Council members in order to
expeditiously adopt the draft resolution. The situation
in Syria has already brought serious disruption to its
neighbours. I wish, in that context, to express my
country’s deep appreciation for the assistance that
countries of the region — Turkey in particular — have
been providing to those fleeing violence, persecution
and repression.
But let us be clear. If we do not act, not only will
we be condemning the Syrian people to yet more
violence and repression; we will be increasing the
threats to the peace and security of the whole region.
There is no more time to lose.
A year ago, the people of Tunisia set in motion a
wave that quickly changed the face of the Arab world.
After decades of silence and dread, ordinary people
broke away from the shackles of fear. They found their
voice, bravely took to the streets and made themselves
heard. They strove for freedom, for equality and for
their rights to build a democratic State and to
citizenship. They refused to cower in submission. Those
are also the aspirations of the Syrian people, who also
refuse to submit to disproportionate brutal force.
President Roosevelt included among his four
famous freedoms the freedom from fear. It is our duty
to help the Syrian people to free themselves from the
fear inflicted daily upon them. To put a stop to the
killings and allow for a peaceful solution, we must act
and we must act now. As Dostoyevsky said, “to live
without hope is to cease to live”. It is up to us to give
hope to and protect the lives of the Syrian people.
Mr. Amrani (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me thank you, Sir, for convening this
important meeting of the Security Council. My thanks
go also to the other members of the Council for
providing Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani,
head of the Arab Ministerial Committee on Syria, and
His Excellency Mr. Nabil Elaraby, Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States, with the opportunity to
enlighten the Council on the tragic situation in Syria
and on the League’s determined efforts to address the
crisis.
My delegation has listened carefully to the two
briefings on the crisis in sisterly Syria and the
consequences of a confrontation that has claimed
innocent lives, led to the severe suffering of civilians

12-21919

S/PV.6710

and caused the displacement of families within Syria or
to neighbouring countries.
We have noted in particular that the two Arab
officials have stressed the importance, utility and
viability of the Arab initiative for addressing the
situation in Syria and laying the ground for a solution
based on dialogue and national reconciliation and
concord. We have also noted their emphasis on calling
upon Council members to endorse the Arab plan and
extend to it the support necessary to ensure its earliest
possible implementation in order to end the
increasingly painful situation in Syria. We express our
sincere hope that the Security Council will support the
Arab plan, allowing Syria to regain its national
harmony, tranquillity and stability.
The phenomenon now commonly called the Arab
Spring has highlighted the aspirations of Arab peoples
to entrench democracy and respect for human rights
and to live in dignity and social justice. The Arab
countries have responded to those legitimate demands
according to their respective specificities, abilities and
experience. Building on their active solidarity with
those aspirations, the Arab countries have contributed
when necessary, through the League of Arab States or
subregional groupings, to resolving intractable crises,
which cannot be likened to interference in the internal
affairs of the concerned countries. Such involvement
has been undertaken in accordance with the provisions
of the United Nations Charter, which calls on regional
organizations to strive to prevent conflicts and their
escalation and to seek their resolution by available
peaceful means, without prejudice to the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In that regard, while we applaud the efforts made
by the members of the mission, who worked devotedly
under very difficult and dangerous conditions, we fully
understand the motivations and reasons that led the
States of the Gulf Cooperation Council to withdraw
their own observers from the mission. We also consider
the decision of the League of Arab States to suspend
the mission as being fully justified. That decision was
prompted by the dangerous escalation of the situation
and by Syria’s choice of the security option, which has
claimed an increasing number of victims.
We believe that the mission afforded a good
opportunity to establish conditions conducive to the
calm required to turn the page and begin a new period
free of violence. However, the Council of the Arab
League, at its ministerial meeting of 22 January,
concluded in its assessment that Syria’s implementation
of some of its commitments was insufficient.
The presentation of the report of the observer
mission (S/2012/71, enclosure 4) has coincided with a
very serious escalation of violence and an
unprecedented increase in the number of victims,
including children and sometimes entire families. That
led the League of Arab States to reassess the situation
and launch an Arab initiative that addresses all aspects
of the crisis. It is a political approach based on the
non-use of force, dialogue, the formation of a national
unity Government and preparations for democratic
elections.

Thus, in view of the escalating situation in Syria
and the thousands of victims felled, the widening
confrontations and the absence of dialogue between the
parties, the League of Arab States took the initiative to
stop the bloodshed by sending a team of observers to
monitor the Syrian Government’s implementation of its
commitments and to protect unarmed Syrian civilians.

It is worth recalling that, during all phases of the
Arab endeavours, the Arab countries have consistently
stressed the following cardinal principles. The first
involves the immediate and full cessation of all acts of
violence and use of force, as well as the promotion of
political dialogue. The second principle is to allow the
Syrian people to fulfil their legitimate aspirations to
build their national institutions. The third is to preserve
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and the
cohesiveness of its pluralistic society. Finally, the
fourth principle is to exclude any foreign military
intervention.

Morocco was among the first countries to
contribute to the Arab League’s observer mission,
which had access to areas where confrontations had
been taking place. Morocco kept its observers in the
field until the end of last week, despite the difficulties
and obstacles they faced in fulfilling their humanitarian
mission.

In accordance with paragraph 7 of the latest
decision of the Council of the Arab League, taken at its
ministerial meeting of 22 January, and in its capacity as
the Arab member of the Security Council, Morocco has
introduced a draft resolution that enjoys the support of
Member States both inside and outside the Security
Council.

12-21919

21

S/PV.6710

The objective of the draft in particular is to seek
Security Council endorsement of the road map adopted
by the Arab League in order to reach a political
solution to the crisis in Syria. It also seeks the
Council’s support for Arab decisions aimed at ending
all acts of violence and the bloodshed in Syria.
We sincerely hope that negotiations on the draft
will produce consensus in the Security Council that
gives impetus to the launching of a political process
involving both the Syrian Government and the
opposition, through serious and responsible dialogue
that leads to a new era in the great history of our
brotherly Syrian people.
Mr. Link (Germany): I would like first to thank
His Excellency Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr
Al-Thani and His Excellency Mr. Nabil Elaraby for
their briefings. I commend the efforts of the League of
Arab States towards resolving the crisis in Syria. It was
important for the Council to listen to them today.
The Arab Spring has demonstrated that the people
of the region want to shape their future peacefully
through negotiations and discussions, not at gunpoint
and not in an atmosphere of fear and violence.
More than 10 months have passed since events in
Deraa and Damascus sparked peaceful protests in Syria
against the Assad regime. The regime reacted with a
brutal crackdown on its own people that has left
thousands dead and is still ongoing. That violence must
stop immediately. The Syrian people have been calling
for freedom of expression, association and peaceful
assembly and the ability to freely choose their leaders.
President Al-Assad has been responding by sending his
tanks.
The Arab League has heeded the calls of the
people of the region. Three months ago, it elaborated a
working plan to resolve the crisis, to which the Syrian
Government committed. However, the Al-Assad
regime did not substantially comply with the
agreement. There was no cessation of violence, not all
of those arrested were released, and there was no
withdrawal of the military from the cities and
residential areas. On the contrary, there has been a
notable increase in the regime’s violence over the past
few days. That has forced the observer mission to
suspend its activities. The country stands at the brink
of civil war, with implications for peace and stability in
the region. The Council has been silent too long. It has
to step up to its responsibilities.

22

We must not forget that the majority of the
demonstrations in Syria have been overwhelmingly
peaceful, whereas the reaction of the authorities has
been excessive. Those facts have been recorded by the
international commission of inquiry established by the
Human Rights Council. That is why we also advocate a
Security Council commission of inquiry.
As the report of the commission of inquiry
(A/HRC/S-17/2/Add.1) concludes, the systematic human
rights violations perpetrated by the Syrian regime have
been conducted pursuant to deliberate State policy.
Members of the Syrian military and security forces
may have committed crimes against humanity.
On 22 January, the Arab League set out a political
framework for the way forward that includes the
formation of a transitional Government. The Arab
League has turned to this Council to ask for support.
We hereby lend our voice to its demands, and we fully
support its plan and all its previous efforts. We must
seize this opportunity. Now is the time for the Security
Council to act. The draft resolution endorsing the
demands made by the Arab League is on the table. The
text is the product of fruitful cooperation between
members of this Council and Arab countries, and was
introduced to the Council by Morocco. It has
Germany’s full support.
We have to work for a political solution with
regional ownership. We owe it to the Syrian people not
to close our eyes in the face of the ongoing repression.
It is our responsibility as members of the Security
Council. Countries all over the world, especially those
of the region, have expressed their support. Let us act.
Above all, let us act without further delay.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): At the outset, let me
extend a very warm welcome to His Excellency Sheikh
Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani, Prime Minister of
Qatar, and His Excellency Mr. Nabil Elaraby, SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States, and thank them
for sparing their valuable time to brief the Council.
Pakistan enjoys long-standing and close brotherly
relations with all members of the League of Arab
States. That relationship is underpinned by a common
heritage and shared values. We greatly value the role of
regional organizations such as the League of Arab
States in promoting the cause of peace and development.
We also support regional processes leading to the
peaceful resolution of disputes. That is a good example
for the United Nations. We therefore highly appreciate

12-21919

S/PV.6710

the efforts of the Qatari Prime Minister and the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States.
By seizing the moment and by deploying the
observer mission, the League of Arab States has indeed
proved that great strides can be made in the resolution
of regional issues through regional mechanisms. We
hope that the efforts of the League will bear fruit
through the return of peace and normalcy to Syria
through a process of dialogue and negotiation and
without any resort to force and coercion.
The security situation in Syria continues to be a
source of serious concern to us all. The reports of
continuing violence and bloodshed cannot and should
not be taken lightly by anyone. We strongly condemn
the use of force against any peaceful protesters. The
killing and injuring of innocent people must stop. We
call on both sides to shun violence, pursue the path of
dialogue and reconciliation, and engage in a resultsoriented and inclusive political process leading to the
peaceful resolution of the problem.
We must be mindful of the fact that whatever we
decide in this Chamber in the coming days will have
long-term implications not only in Syria, but in the
Middle East as a whole. That region can ill afford
further instability. The situation therefore requires a
collective analysis towards obtaining a solution.
We also want to emphasize that while we in the
Security Council are and should remain the upholders
of the principles enshrined in the United Nations
Charter, the discussion must remain in full cognizance
of and respect for the independence, unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Syria. It also should remain
within the framework of Chapter VI of the Charter and
the principles of the pacific settlement of disputes.
We support the Arab League’s efforts, including
the deployment of observers. We also commend and
support the services rendered by members of the
observer mission, who are performing their duties to
the best of their abilities despite working in difficult
and sometimes dangerous circumstances.
We take hope for peace from the words of the
Prime Minister of Qatar in his capacity as Chairman of
the Arab Ministerial Committee on Syria when he says
that we are not calling for a military intervention and
that we are not for a regime change either, for that is a
matter that is up to the Syrian people to decide. All
that, in reaffirmation of the sovereignty and integrity of

12-21919

Syria, was also voiced by Secretary-General Elaraby
and reiterated by the French and British representatives.
I am hopeful that that will be explicitly and adequately
reflected in the draft resolution being brought before
the Council. We hope that other members of the
Council will join us in commending the Arab League.
We also hope that the mission will continue its work.
Let me be absolutely clear. All the grief vented in
the Council might result in fruition only if we swiftly,
with cohesion and consideration, replace mere rhetoric.
Therefore I conclude by saying that, in terms of the
Council’s action, we should strive to achieve consensus,
for a unanimous message will always be better and
essential to promote our objectives and peace in Syria.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the initiative of the League of
Arab States for the convening of today’s meeting with
the participation of the Prime Minister of Qatar and the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States.
Today we meet at a crucial moment, which is
perhaps the last opportunity to break the vicious circle
of violence into which Syria and its people have been
sucked. Worsening of the crisis and its plunging into
the chaos of a full-scale conflict would not only be a
tragedy for the Syrian people, but would also
inevitably destabilize the neighbouring countries and
further stir up the strategically important region of the
Middle East.
What is the solution? What can the international
community do to prevent a fatal development of events?
The answer is as complex as it is simple. Security
Council members found the key to it essentially at the
beginning of the crisis, when on 3 August 2011 it
adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/16). In
it are two fundamental provisions: violence by all sides
must cease, and the crisis can be resolved only through
a Syrian-led inclusive political process. If all key
players of the international community had concentrated
their efforts on implementing these provisions, then,
we are convinced, the crisis would have long since been
overcome. Unfortunately, this has not been the case.
Russia, which for years has enjoyed close and
friendly partnerships with the Syrian people and the
Arab world, fought from the very beginning to ensure
that the Syrian people would be able to define for
themselves, without bloodshed and violence, a course
and a format for the necessary social, economic and
political transformations. We are convinced that at a

23

S/PV.6710

time of extreme internal political crisis, the role of the
international community should not be to exacerbate
conflict or meddle by using economic sanctions or
military force. Instead, it should foster dialogue to seek
an optimally effective and smooth resolution.
With a view to halting the violence and
establishing a Syrian-led inclusive political process,
Russia has stepped up its diplomatic efforts with
Damascus, the Syrian opposition and the League of
Arab States. In our view, the League has an important
role, with the international community, in resolving the
Syrian crisis. Russia did much to ensure that the
League and Damascus agreed on the deployment of the
League’s monitoring mission in Syria.
At the first stage of its work the mission was
already playing a useful role from the standpoint of
lowering the violence somewhat, so that — and this is
of key importance — there was more objective
information on the nature of the events unfolding in
Syria, in spite of pressures on the mission. In the
mission’s report on the results of its work between
24 December and 18 January 2012 (S/2012/71, annex,
enclosure 4), it is clearly confirmed that in a number of
Syrian neighbourhoods armed elements are attacking
Syrian security forces and peaceful civilians. That led
to the conclusion that all sides in Syria, not just the
Government, must take on obligations to cease all
forms of violence.
We know from different sources what is going on
in Syria. For example, after the city of Zabadani came
under the control of fighters, murders, looting and
beatings began. The country residence of the Russian
ambassador was looted. Some thousand peaceful
residents deserted the city.
It should be noted that the last section of the
mission’s report contains a conclusion that a dialogue
among the various Syrian sides should run in parallel
with the mission’s work, and there must be a political
process as well.
The fraternal ties that we enjoy with the League
of Arab States allow us not only to support our Arab
friends, but also, when necessary, to criticize them for
inconsistencies. We did not conceal our belief that the
League’s decision to suspend the membership of
Damascus and to impose sanctions on Syria was
counterproductive. The League’s position with respect
to the monitoring mission could have been more firm.
On the one hand, the League decided to continue the

24

mission; on the other, some countries have begun
withdrawing their observers.
We are concerned with the recent decision to
suspend the work of the mission. As we understand,
according to the mission’s leadership, this was a
consequence of a recent burst of violence and of a
fatwa broadcast on a Saudi television station by a
Salafi preacher of Syrian origin, giving his blessing to
spilling the blood of observers. We think that the work
of the mission in the near future should continue, with
appropriate support from all sides.
Of particular importance in the context of efforts
to settle the crisis is the League’s initiative of
22 January 2012 to call on the Syrian Government and
all Syrian opposition groups to join in dialogue under
the League’s aegis. Engaging with one’s opponents
should not be the duty of diplomats only, but also of
politicians, especially when the fate of one’s country is
at stake.
Russia continues to act in unison with the League.
We appeal to the Syrian authorities and all opposition
groups to send their representatives to Moscow at a
mutually agreed time for informal contacts, without
preconditions. This would allow the Syrian parties to
discuss many issues on the national agenda without any
limitations, including the task of preparing an interSyrian dialogue under the aegis of the League of Arab
States.
Now it is more important than ever to engage in a
dialogue that leads to a necessary agreement on the
political future of the country. Can the Security Council
play a constructive role here? We think so. That is why
on 15 December 2011 the Russian delegation submitted
to the Council a draft resolution, which drew on the
political thrust of the presidential statement of 3 August
(S/PRST/2011/16). The draft received a measure of
support in the Council. We circulated an updated
version among our colleagues yesterday.
We suggest that in drawing up its decision the
Council should be guided by the principle of causing no
harm. We reject any sanctions, any attempts to employ
the Council’s instruments to fuel conflict or to justify
any eventual foreign military interference. But that is
not the only matter at hand. The Council cannot impose
parameters for an internal political settlement. The
Charter gives it no such authority. The sides must be
encouraged to engage in dialogue rather than be
intimidated into doing so.

12-21919

S/PV.6710

We therefore have taken into account the draft
resolution presented recently by the delegation of
Morocco. We found some of the elements of the text of
our draft in it. This gives rise to hope. A consensus
position among Council members on Syria is not only
possible, but necessary.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome to our meeting His Excellency Sheikh Hamad
bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani, Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Qatar, the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States, and the
Ambassador of Syria. I welcome their briefings to the
Council.
Syria is an important country in the Middle East.
Its stability affects the security and stability of the
entire Middle East region. Like other members of the
Security Council, China has closely followed the
developments in Syria.
China is of the view that the Syrian people’s
request for reform and safeguarding their interests
should be respected. It is imperative to put an
immediate end to all violence in Syria and to stop the
killing of innocent civilians. At the same time, an
inclusive political process for the wide participation of
all Syrian parties must be started without delay, to
speed up reform and resolve differences and disputes
peacefully through dialogue and consultations, so as to
restore stability to Syria and to enable it to embark on
the path of all-around development.
We believe that Syria and its people are capable
and resourceful enough to find a way to resolve their
issues and to find a political system and a degree of
economic growth suited to Syria’s national conditions.
The international community can play a positive and
constructive role in this regard and can provide
assistance for a peaceful political settlement of the
Syrian issue through dialogue.
Syria is a member of the Arab world. China hopes
to see a proper settlement of the Syrian crisis within
the framework of the Arab League. We support the
League’s efforts to seek a political solution of the
Syrian issue and to maintain stability in the region. We
hope to see the success of its mediation efforts.
The Arab League observer mission plays a
significant role in helping the international community
learn about the real situation in Syria. We attach
importance to the report submitted by the that observer

12-21919

mission (S/2012/71, annex, enclosure 4). We hope the
mission will continue to fulfil its mandate and carry
out objective and impartial investigations. We call on
the Syrian Government and other parties concerned to
provide full cooperation to the mission in that regard.
China has repeatedly stressed that the actions of
the Security Council on the Syrian issue should comply
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, help ease tensions in Syria, promote
political dialogue and defuse disputes, and help
maintain peace and stability in the Middle East region.
In the meantime, China has consistently taken a
cautious approach to sanctions. Sanctions, rather than
assistance in resolving an issue, often lead to further
complications of the situation. We firmly oppose the
use of force to resolve the Syrian issue, as well as
practices, such as forcibly pushing for regime change,
that violate the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter and the basic norms that govern
international relations.
China supports the draft resolution proposed by
Russia on the Syrian issue and takes note of the new
text that has been distributed by Morocco in the
Security Council. China is ready to act in accordance
with the aforementioned principled position, to engage
actively and constructively in consultations, and to
work with all parties concerned to push for an
appropriate settlement of the Syrian issue through
peaceful dialogue.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
meeting. We are grateful to the Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister of the State of Qatar, His Excellency
Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani, and to the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, His
Excellency Mr. Nabil Elaraby, as well as to the
Permanent Representative of Syria, His Excellency
Mr. Bashar Ja’afari, for their briefings.
Azerbaijan is deeply concerned by the continuing
destabilization and widespread violence in Syria, which
have led to the death of many people. On 3 August
2011, the Security Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRS/2011/16) condemning the widespread
violations of human rights and the use of force against
civilians by the Syrian authorities. The Council, inter
alia, called for an immediate end to all violence and
urged all sides to act with the utmost restrain and to
refrain from reprisals, including attacks against State

25

S/PV.6710

institutions. Related resolutions were adopted also by
the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council.
Despite all those steps and repeated calls of the
international community, the situation in Syria
continued to deteriorate, causing scores of deaths and
injuries. The suicide terrorist attacks that occurred in
Damascus on 23 December 2011 and 6 January 2012,
which the Security Council condemned in the strongest
terms, were a striking illustration of dangerous
escalation with unpredictable consequences.
From very beginning, Azerbaijan has supported the
efforts of the League of Arab States. We look forward
to their continuation with a view to ending the violence,
overcoming the crisis and achieving stabilization by
peaceful means and through dialogue. We pay tribute
to the League’s observer mission to Syria and to all its
members for fulfilling their functions in the face of
complex challenges. It should be noted that the
Mission’s presence in Syria had some positive effects
and that it contributed to addressing a number of issues.
We note with regret that, under the circumstances, the
League was compelled to suspend its mission, and we
hope it will resume its function soon.
As the Security Council pointed out in its
presidential statement of 3 August 2011, the only
solution to the crisis in Syria is through an inclusive
and Syrian-led political process, with the aim of
effectively addressing the legitimate aspirations and
concerns of the Syrian people. That process should
include democratic and free elections and enable the
participation of all political forces of the country.
It is indisputable that unity and a coordinated
approach within the Security Council are vital if it is to
fulfil its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Proceeding from this
understanding, Azerbaijan has been and continues to be
supportive of and open to timely consultations with all
members of the Security Council on initiatives
concerning the situation in Syria. We look forward to
constructive dialogue and discussions on the relevant
draft proposals, as well as to the report of the League
Arab States observer mission, and we believe in
achieving the compromise that will contribute to
ongoing efforts aimed at overcoming the crisis in Syria
and at putting an end to human suffering there.
It is clear that the international community must
not only demand certain steps from the Syrian
Government, but also focus its efforts on persuading

26

the opposition to reciprocate. Only measures adequate
to the situation, that conform with Chapter VI of the
United Nations Charter and pay due regard to the role
of the League of Arab States, can be considered.
Whatever the differences, it is crucial that
obligations with respect to the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Syria and all
other States of the region be fully observed and
respected. We note the position unambiguously
expressed in that regard by the Security Council and
the General Assembly, as well as by the League of
Arab States, which in its Council resolution on Syria of
22 January 2012 supported efforts towards ending the
Syrian crisis without foreign intervention.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank the Chairman of the Ministerial Committee on
Syria of the League of Arab States, His Excellency the
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Qatar, as well as the Secretary-General of the League
of Arab States, for their briefings to the Council, as
well as for the praiseworthy efforts that they continue
to undertake to bring peace to Syria.
Since mid-March 2011, Syria has experienced a
serious crisis, with adverse impacts on neighbouring
countries that are hosting thousands of refugees. The
observer mission to Syria, deployed by the League of
Arab States on 26 December 2011, sought to put an end
to the repression of protesters and to bring all forms of
violence, whatever their source, to a halt.
Unfortunately, the violence, far from being rooted out,
continues. Until recently, we spoke of protesters with
bare hands; today they have become a rebellion, having
begun to take up arms.
Faced with such a situation, it is hardly surprising
that the mission of the League of Arab States did not
achieve the expected results and that the mission itself
had to be suspended. My country deplores the fact that
the members of the mission were unable to conduct
their work freely and without hindrance. Even worse,
the violence continued while the mission was still on
the ground.
Togo
condemns
the
violence,
murders,
kidnappings, extrajudicial executions, rapes and
violations of human rights that have been perpetrated
in Syria. My country calls on the Syrian Government to
put an end to the violence, lift the siege of certain
neighbourhoods or cities, and order the military and its
tanks to return to their barracks.

12-21919

S/PV.6710

The League of Arab States has proposed a road
map that includes the formation of a Government of
national unity with the essential goal of preparing and
convening general and presidential elections in the
country in the near future. President Bashar al-Assad
would transfer his mandate to the Vice-President, who
would work with a Prime Minister elected by consensus
and who would manage the transitional Government.
The implementation of the road map presupposes
an end to the violence and engagement in honest, open
and inclusive dialogue. However, this all depends on
the goodwill of the Syria authorities in its
implementation. Unfortunately, we have seen that the
current Government is not prepared to step down,
much less take part in the transition process as
recommended by the road map. That is why Togo is
concerned about the likelihood of the implementation
of the League of Arab States’ far-reaching road map,
elaborated in the framework of Chapter VI of the
Charter.
Could the Security Council not take action on this
initiative — the outcome of the efforts of a regional
organization authorized to propose ways of ending the
crisis — without being accused of supporting the
violence? On the other hand, could the Council, given
the current situation, call upon the President of Syria to
step down, without being accused of supporting one of
the parties to the conflict? This body, which is
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, must be able to engage in honest and
heartfelt discussions so as to arrive at the best way to
help Syria find a way out of the difficult situation
facing its people, a situation that the delegation of
Togo believes has gone on for far too long.
However, at this stage it is imperative that the
violence stop. The Council must speak with a unified
voice, leaving aside narrow interests, and launch an
urgent appeal to the Syrian authorities to stop the spiral
of violence. Togo believes it is now utterly clear that
we must not put in the same category acts of violence
perpetrated by the Government and those of protesters.
Nevertheless, so as to ensure that peace and the
inclusive dialogue we are hoping to see remain
possible, the Syrian opposition must stand by its initial
approach of achieving democracy without violence.
Togo believes that the endeavours of the Arab
League should be supported and that it should be
encouraged to make greater efforts to bring about a

12-21919

rapprochement between the Syrian regime and the
opposition, with a view to enabling direct negotiations.
Such negotiations should be held under the auspices of
the Arab League and with the support of the United
Nations, with a view to finding a lasting solution to the
crisis and thereby averting the potential civil war that
looms on the horizon.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this meeting at the request of the League of
Arab States. I also take this opportunity to welcome in
our midst today the Chair of the League’s Ministerial
Council, the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Qatar, His Excellency Sheikh Hamad bin
Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani; and the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States, Mr. Nabil Elaraby. I would
like to thank them for their comprehensive briefings on
the League’s efforts to resolve the crisis in Syria. I
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Syria for his statement.
The participation in the Council’s deliberations
this afternoon by the Secretary of State of the United
States of America, the Minister of Foreign and
European Affairs of the Republic of France, the
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Guatemala, the Minister of State and
Foreign Relations of the Republic of Portugal, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Morocco and the
Minister of State at the Federal Foreign Office of
Germany testifies to the importance of the discussions
and also deserves our great appreciation.
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter
provides for the Council’s cooperation with the regional
organizations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In that context, we welcome today’s
meeting and think that it provides us with a good
opportunity to understand the role that the League of
Arab States is playing in the resolution of the problem
in Syria.
The Syrian Arab Republic has historically played
an important role in the Middle East by virtue of its
geographic and strategic location, its diversity and the
genius of its people. Developments in Syria have
implications for peace and stability in the wider region.
We have therefore called for a peaceful and inclusive
political process to address the grievances of all
sections of Syrian society since the beginning of the

27

S/PV.6710

protests in March 2011. The problem in Syria is not
merely security-related; it is primarily political and
economic and emanates from the Syrian people’s desire
to play a greater role in shaping their destiny. The
resolution of this problem cannot be found in violence
or armed struggle and its violent suppression. Nor can
a solution be reached through prescriptions from
outside. The Syrian people demand and deserve
empowerment, so that a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political solution can be found in an atmosphere free of
violence and bloodshed.
Unfortunately, during the past 10 months we have
witnessed an increasing level of violence that has taken
a heavy toll on civilians and the security forces and has
destroyed civilian infrastructure. We unequivocally and
strongly condemn all violence, irrespective of its
perpetrators, no matter what justifications are proffered.
We also condemn all violations of human rights and of
the rights of expression and peaceful assembly. India
holds those rights among the fundamental values that
should be respected while ensuring the stability and
security of society. India, along with its IBSA (India,
Brazil and South Africa) partners, conveyed this
message clearly to the Syrian leadership when an IBSA
delegation visited Damascus in August 2011. That
message was also contained in the presidential
statement issued by the Security Council in August
2011 (S/PRST/2011/16), under India’s presidency.
We see the efforts of the League of Arab States in
Syria in the light of our own support for a political
resolution of the crisis. We had noted that the
deployment of the League’s observer mission across
several areas of the country had had a calming effect,
and we are disappointed that the mission was
suspended on 28 January owing to deteriorating
security conditions and continuing violence. The report
of the observer mission (see S/2012/71, enclosure 4)
that the League has made available to the Security
Council clearly states that there is an armed element to
the opposition, which is also responsible for a number
of violent acts. The continued presence and
deployment of the observers could have helped reduce
the violence and present a more accurate picture of
developments, especially since the monitors had also
confirmed that a great deal of information in the media
is exaggerated and misleading. The report of the
observer mission also made an important point: that the
mission needs to be accompanied by a political process

28

to address the grievances of the Syrian people,
something that we strongly support.
We are firmly of the view that all sides need to
cooperate with the League of Arab States. A political
process must begin without any further delay. The
process should be led by the Syrians and should respect
Syria’s sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. The
League of Arab States, as an important regional
organization, should play its required and historical
role in promoting political dialogue among the Syrian
parties. That dialogue can build upon the package of
political reforms already announced by the Syrian
leadership and also bring about the necessary changes
to that package, so that it can find acceptance among
all segments of Syrian society. The outcome of this
dialogue cannot be prejudged. The outcome should also
be acceptable to the widest segment of Syrian society if
it is to resolve the present crisis and be enduring.
The international community, including the
Security Council, should play a constructive role in the
process of political dialogue among the Syrians. In this
context, we welcome the submission of a draft
resolution to the Security Council. We will engage with
fellow Council members so that the Council can speak
with a unanimous voice in support of the initiative of
the League of Arab States to expeditiously resolve the
Syrian crisis.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to welcome Their Excellencies
the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Qatar and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, who have come to the Council today to make
their contribution to our consideration of the situation
in Syria. The terms in which they have appealed to the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities deserve our full
respect. I believe it is highly significant that we have
with us the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the United
States, France, the United Kingdom, Guatemala,
Portugal, Morocco and Germany.
Colombia attaches the greatest importance to this
meeting of the Security Council because we believe that
together we can work to create conditions conducive to
finding a political solution to the crises in Syria and try
to put an end to the unjustified repression and violence
inflicted on the country for more than 10 months.
Respect for individual freedom and the protection
of the fundamental rights of all citizens are the
responsibility of all Governments. The Syrian authorities

12-21919

S/PV.6710

have the duty to fulfil their responsibilities under
international law and to ensure the protection and
respect of the human rights of the population as they
set about restoring social order and stability. Colombia
condemns and rejects the violent crackdown on
demonstrations by civilians exercising their right to
free association, free expression and peaceful assembly.
We are therefore alarmed at the ongoing deterioration
of the situation in Syria, the wanton violence and the
death toll, with more than 5,000 lives lost in the
protracted crisis.
We favour regional initiatives in quest of a
peaceful solution to situations that may jeopardize the
maintenance of peace and security. We therefore
support the efforts of the League of Arab States to
provide a political solution to the situation in Syria. As
we have mentioned previously, a long-term solution
requires a process led by Syrians, taking into account
the legitimate aspirations of the people and the various
political actors, and respecting Syria’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity. We regret the fact,
expressed in the report of the Arab League’s observer
mission (S/2012/71, annex, enclosure 4), that the
actions of the Government have been insufficient for
the effective fulfilment of the commitments the Syrian
Government undertook with the League. It is also
regrettable that, given the resurgence of violence and
the lack of guarantees for its safety, the mission had to
suspend its activities.
Concerning the draft resolution submitted by
Morocco on Friday, 27 January, my delegation
considers the text to be an apt response to the Arab
League’s concern that the Council endorse elements of
the League’s plan, and we lend it our full support. The
gravity of the circumstances demands a pronouncement
by the Council that will help create a basis and
conditions for the restoration of order and the
implementation of the institutional reforms necessary
to end the violence and to reach an understanding
leading to peace in the country.
My delegation believes — and all members of the
Council agree — that the Arab plan contains elements
that could lead to an accord, such as the call on the
Syrian Government and all the various opposition
groups to enter into a genuine political dialogue; an
end to all violence, no matter on whose part, so as to
protect the civilian population in Syria; the release of
those detained in the course of recent events; and

12-21919

access for relevant agencies of the League and Arab
and international media to establish the facts.
Colombia hopes that a consensus on those worthy
proposals will be possible and that the Council will
adopt a decision inspired by the guiding principle of
the United Nations — the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of South Africa.
South Africa expresses its appreciation to His
Excellency Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr
Al-Thani, Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of the
State of Qatar, and His Excellency Mr. Nabil Elaraby,
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, for
their briefings to the Council today. We also thank the
Permanent Representative of Syria for his briefing to
the Council today.
South Africa is deeply concerned about the
deteriorating political, security and humanitarian
situation in Syria. We condemn the continued and
violent loss of life in Syria and call for maximum
restraint on the part of all the parties to the conflict. We
emphasize that there is an urgent need for the violence
to cease immediately. It is our hope that this situation
will be resolved in a peaceful manner in accordance
with the will of the Syrian people. We reiterate that any
solution to the Syrian crisis should be Syrian-led, based
on genuine national dialogue, devoid of any form of
intimidation and free of interference from outside.
We urge the Syrian authorities to initiate an open,
transparent and all-inclusive political process with its
people to address their legitimate demands and in order
to guarantee their fundamental political rights and
freedoms, including their rights to freedom of
assembly and speech. We also encourage the
opposition to participate in this political process with a
view to ensuring sustainable peace in Syria.
A comprehensive political solution must be found
that will lead to political reform based on respect for
democratic principles, rule of law, justice and human
rights. It should also address the socio-economic
development needs of the people of Syria in order to
ensure long-term peace and stability.
We appreciate the League of Arab States’ efforts
aimed at achieving a peaceful resolution of the crisis in
Syria. On 12 January, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2033 (2012), which focused

29

S/PV.6710

attention on enhanced cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. South Africa
therefore welcomes this engagement by the Council
with the League of Arab States, which, due to its
proximity and knowledge of the region, is able to play
a meaningful role in assisting the Syrian people to
overcome their challenges. We hope that this
engagement will lead to a peaceful political solution to
the conflict in Syria. We strongly believe that any
solution should respect the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria, and at the same
time uphold the purposes and principles enshrined in
the United Nations Charter.
We thank the Secretary-General of the Arab
League for providing us with the report (S/2012/71,
annex, enclosure 4) of the head of the League of Arab
States observer mission to Syria, General Al-Dabi. The
report, which is a first-hand account of developments
on the ground, provides us with an invaluable
assessment of the situation. As noted in the report,
Syrian citizens also believe that the crisis should be
resolved peacefully, through Arab intervention alone
and without international intervention, as it would
allow them to live in peace and complete the reform
process and bring about the change they desire. It is
imperative that there be an end to violence from all
sides, as it is apparent from the observer mission report
that the opposition is also armed. Consequently,
civilians bear the brunt of the violence perpetrated by
the Government and armed opposition groups.
The critical question at this juncture is what
positive contribution we can make as the international
community, and the Security Council in particular, to
assist the Syrian parties to resolve their conflict. Any
action we take should be geared towards bringing the
parties towards a peaceful resolution of their conflict
rather than widening the gap between them. We
therefore welcome the Arab League’s and all diplomatic
efforts aimed at resolving the crisis in the country, and
we encourage Syrian parties to explore all opportunities
to find a political solution. We must avoid any action
that may run the risk of further polarizing the parties
and lead to an escalation of the violence.
Military intervention to resolve political conflicts,
as we have seen in other parts of the world — most
recently in the Libyan situation — has unintended
consequences not only for the country in question but

30

for the wider region. That is something the Middle East
can ill afford.
We welcome the consideration of the situation in
Syria through draft resolutions before the Council. We
call for all the commitments and principles expressed
by the delegations of the Arab League and others today
to be better and more fully expressed in future drafts.
South Africa shall engage constructively in those
negotiations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Sheikh
Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani to make a further
statement.
Sheikh Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
apologize for asking to speak once again. I wish to note
that our mission here is not to request military
intervention from the Security Council or to take a
decision in favour of military intervention. Moreover,
we are not interfering in Syria’s internal affairs. It is a
matter for the Syrian people to decide who shall govern
them.
I do, however, have a comment to make
concerning the statement made by the representative of
Syria. He referred to a poem by the late poet Nizar
Qabbani. We all know that Nizar Qabbani was a bard
of liberty, but we do not know what he would have to
say about this situation if he were still alive. The
representative of Syria talked about the colonialism
under which the countries of the Gulf, especially Qatar,
had suffered. Qatar was in fact never colonized but had
signed a treaty with the United Kingdom that expired
in the early 1970s, and had never had to resist
colonialism because it and the other Gulf States lived
in dire poverty until God blessed us with oil. Today, we
are proud to stand by our Arab brothers who need our
assistance, and we will help them without reminding
them of our generosity.
I should also like to raise the question of
democracy. We in no way wish to interfere; we wish to
work alongside the Syrian people in implementing
reforms and relaunching democracy. Democracy in
Syria began in 1919, and we hope most earnestly that it
will prevail once again and bless the entire Syrian
people with its benefits.
With respect to Israel, we have no open front with
that country, but our position is unequivocally

12-21919

S/PV.6710

manifested in the support we extend to our Palestinian
brothers, be they in Gaza or elsewhere. History will be
the judge of that.
As for Iraq and the million who have died there, I
recall that we all — including Syria, whom we
thank — contributed to the liberation of Kuwait from
the Iraqi occupation, and participated in all decisions
taken by the Arab League and the Security Council.
As for Libya, almost 50,000 people have died
there, and had Al-Qadhafi remained in power there
would have been far more deaths. The League of Arab
States adopted a resolution on that issue which Syria
endorsed as well.
As to the statement made by the representative of
the Russian Federation concerning Saudi Arabia, I note
that the King of that country is a true Arab who has
always demonstrated his concern for his fellow Arabs
by giving priority to their interests and not his own. It
was his sincerity that led him to withdraw his observers
from Syria because he did not want to be a false
witness to what was happening there.
The President: I give the floor to the Syrian Arab
Republic to make a further statement.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): It is true that Syria participated in the
liberation of Kuwait when the former Iraqi regime had
made a bad decision. We never participated in the
invasion of Iraq, however, or in the invasion of Libya.
We have never been involved in a conspiracy against
any Arab country.
I welcome the statement and clarifications made
by the Prime Minister of Qatar. Some of his comments
were accurate, but others were not. I would ask him, in
the presence of Council members, whether Qatar is a
member of NATO or of the League of Arab States?
How is it that Qatar went to NATO’s assistance in
destroying Libya?
Some speakers have said that they would not
move towards military intervention in Syria and that a
decision of the Council would not necessarily lead to
military intervention. That is all well and good, but can
anyone assure us that what was done to Libya,
Somalia, Iraq, the former Yugoslavia and Kosovo will
not be repeated in the case of Syria?
At any rate, we are very sorry about the innocent
victims. They were sons and daughters of our

12-21919

homeland. I am an Ambassador of the Syrian President,
and proud to be here in that capacity. I am also the
Ambassador of my people, and proud of that, too. I
cannot speak here in any way that would constitute an
attack on my own people or hurt them. The grief of
others over the deaths of innocent victims can never
equal that of ours in Syria. They are all innocent
victims. We know that the blood that has been spilled
cannot be recovered. We know that the sadness of the
victims’ families can never be assuaged.
I and the people whom I represent have the
responsibility to ensure that the violence comes to an
end, to protect Syria for all its inhabitants, and to save
lives endangered by media incitement. We must also do
nothing to exacerbate the situation or promote the
smuggling of weapons across our borders or the
hosting of an armed opposition and conferences in
neighbouring countries. My country has sent dozens of
letters containing detailed information on that subject.
Only two days ago, a British newspaper that I
shall not name published an article written by their
correspondent in Syria, stating that Qatar and Saudi
Arabia had financed shipments of weapons to Syria.
All Council members are aware that, unfortunately,
there are other countries with which we had a close
relationship before the current crisis. They are now
sheltering armed opposition groups in their territories.
The opposition is engaging in military operations along
our borders, bombing our oil refineries and oil and gas
pipelines. Trains transporting fuel oil were bombed
during what is a very cold winter. The Al-Jazeera and
Al-Arabiya networks should stop fanning the flames
and thereby truly help to end the bloodshed.
In his briefing, the Prime Minister of Qatar
mentioned that he would announce the decisions
reached by the organization representing all Arabs.
However, that organization is not currently speaking on
behalf of all Arabs. Without Syria, there is no Arab
League. We will never allow anyone to adopt a
decision that undermines our fate and future on our
behalf or without our participation.
The targeting of humanitarian workers is clearly a
criminal act, as mentioned by the representative of
Portugal, but perhaps he could tell us how he deduced
that it was the Government authorities who had killed
the doctor who was working for the Red Cross.
There is a neighbourhood in Damascus known as
Al-Hariqa, which means “the fire”. Do Council

31

S/PV.6710

members know why it was given that name? Surely
not. It was thus named because in the 1940s French
forces bombed it using air and artillery strikes, killing
thousands of innocent civilians living there. That is
how the neighbourhood gained its name, Al-Hariqa,
which means “the fire”.
The Syrian parliament building was also bombed,
killing everyone inside except for one person, whom
Syrians have come to call al-shahid al-hai — “the
living martyr”. To all of that we would add that
45,000 Algerians were killed in a single hour in the
capital, Algiers, in 1945, because they unfortunately
believed that the end of the Second World War, the
defeat of Nazism and Fascism and the victory of the
values associated with freedom could bring the
Algerians independence.
A wise man once said to his son, “When you
know where you came from, then you will know where
you will end up.” As the proverb says, a book can be
judged by its cover. Intentionally or otherwise, that
applies to the Arab League, which is trying to harm
Syria and the whole Arab nation.
One day at the end of the nineteenth century,
Émile Zola, the famous French writer whose work I
like very much, defended a case in which a French
army officer had suffered an injustice. He wrote a letter
in French — with which I am familiar but have not
spoken for some time — the French title of which is
“J’accuse”. Today, before the Council, I am quoting
Émile Zola, in the sense that I say the same thing:
“J’accuse”. I accuse a few people, whom I will not
name so as not to embarrass them. I accuse them of
working to undermine Syria’s stability and sovereignty
and the unity of the Syrian people by incitement and
fanning the flames.
In 2003, we opened our doors to 2 million Iraqi
refugees who had fled the British and American
invasion of Iraq. At the time, no one helped us shoulder
the resulting economic burden. Subsequently, two or
three years later, fully one third of the Lebanese
population came to Syria after the Israeli aggression
against them in 2006. No one helped us at that time.
After that, economic cooperation with Turkey — our
neighbour, which we hold in high regard — led to
disastrous economic consequences for small-scale
artisans in the countryside around Aleppo and
Damascus. We had an economic partnership agreement
with Turkey that cost us billions of dollars, and as a

32

result, thousands
livelihoods.

of

Syrian

villagers

lost

their

The representative of India was right when he
spoke of the economic reasons behind what is
happening in Syria, but that is not our fault. Mistakes
have been made, that is true. It is true that mistakes
have been made; President Al-Assad has admitted as
much. He drew up a road map designed to help us
move beyond the crisis. He cannot do everything alone,
however. He needs help from the Arab League, Turkey,
brotherly nations and the Security Council.
When the Secretariat of the Arab League sent this
document (S/2012/71, annex) to the Council, they said
on the last page that there were other annexes, such as
the Al-Dabi report, which would be sent by courier.
Why will the Al-Dabi report be sent by courier later
and why was it not included in the documents currently
before the Council? Why was the Al-Dabi report not
submitted with the extra annexes?
For our part, we have done all that is necessary.
We sent a letter to the President of the Security Council
outlining the main points of the Al-Dabi report. As
Council members are aware, however, the Secretariat
of the Arab League rejected the request made by some
Council members to invite Mr. Al-Dabi to speak before
the Council. I think that I have spoken quite enough.
The President: I give the floor to the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Elaraby (spoke in Arabic): I do not intend to
enter into an argument. However, the Ambassador of
Syria raised an issue that I feel compelled to clarify.
When you contacted me, Mr. President, you
mentioned that some members wanted General Al-Dabi
to attend this meeting. I said then that the Prime
Minister of Qatar and the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States would attend at the request of
the Ministerial Council of the League of Arab States in
order to inform the Council about what had happened.
General Al-Dabi was not requested to appear before the
Council; his job is on the field and his report is before
the Council (S/2012/71, annex, enclosure 4).
The President: There are no further names
inscribed on the list of speakers. I would like to
express my delegation’s appreciation to members of
the Council, especially my colleagues, the Permanent
Representatives, their respective staffs and the Council

12-21919

S/PV.6710

secretariat for all the support that they have given us
during South Africa’s presidency this month of January.
Indeed, it was a busy month. We could not have
done it alone and without the hard work, support and
positive contributions of every delegation and
representatives of the Secretariat, as well as the
interpreters, translators, meetings services and sound
engineers.

12-21919

As we end our presidency, I know that I speak on
behalf of the Council in wishing the Togolese
delegation good luck for the month of February.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

33
