305th

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING

Thu'i"sday, 16 Not'~mbe'" 1950, tlt 10.45 a.m..

FIFTH SESSION
Flushing Meadow;; 1Vew¥ork

Official Records

CONTENTS
Page

Tribute to the memory of the President of the Military Junta of Venezuela. . .. 383
Installation of the Assistant Secretary-General in charge of the Department of
Conference and General Services. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . .. . . . . • .. . . . . . .• 383
Organization of a' United Nations' postal administration: report of the Fifth
Committee (A/ISO?)
384Expenses of the Permanent Central Opium Board. Ass'essment of non-members
of the United Nations1 signatories of the Convention of 19 February 1925
relating to narcotic drugs: report of the Fifth Committee (A/1497) .... 384Pennanent financial regulations of the United Nations: report of the Fifth
Committee (A/1496) .............,............................. 384Budget estim~tes for the financial year1951: reports of the Fifth Committee .. 384
Reservations to multilateral conventions: report of the Sixth Committee
(A/1494 and Corr.l) .•..........................•............... 384Convention on the Declaration of Death of Mis.sing Persons: reports of the
Secretary-General (A/1329) and the Fifth Committee (Aj1506) ••...• 388
Question of the representation of China in the United Nations: membership of
.the special committee •... ~
~
390
11

•

•••••••

•

•

••

••

•

••

•

•

.,.

,.

•

l;.

11 '• • • • -_ . • • - 11

••

11

e.

Former Italian colonies: (a) reports of the United Nations Commissioner in
Libya and (b) reports of the administering Powers in Libya: reporl;,~ of
the Ad Hoc Political Committee (A/1457)anJ the Fifth CommiUi;e
(A/1509 and Cort.!)
393

President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEZAM (Iran).
those of the Government of Venezuela and of my deleTribute te the memory of ilie President of the
~Military Junta of Venezuela.
- -gation for the tribute paid to the memory of the Presi..
dent of the Military Junta of Venezuela, l\Tho was
-1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): We
vilely assassinated on 13 November.

learned with horror and indignation of the assassination
.of the President of the Military Junta of Venezuela.
Although I have already sent a telegram to the government of that country expressing the condolences of the
United Nations, I should like to repeat today to the
delegation of Venezuela the expression of our sincere
sympathy; I invite representatives to rise and observe
one minute of silence in memory of the deceased.

The representatives rose and observed one minute's
silence.
2. Mr. GONZALEZ (Venezuela) (translated from
Spanish) ~ I wish to t'xpress to the President and to
the members of the Assembly my personal thanks and

3. The tribute is the _more deeply appreciated by
Venezuela because for us this grievous event Iltepresents
the first occasion in the whole annals of the history of
Venezuela that a President or any other public official
has been struck down by the treacherous bullets of an
assassin.
Installation of the Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of the- Department of ConfeJ."ence and.

General Services
[Agenda item 18]

At the invitation of the President, thePice-Presidents
took- their places on the ftJstrum.
-

383
. A/PV.305

General Aoentbly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetinf;8

384

The Secretary-Gen~al accompanidd Mr. Sltat'I'UJld..
haree r.all, Assista'nt Secretary..General in charge o~f
the r ~rtment of Conference and General Services,
to t~~ rostrum, and introduced him to the General
Assembly.
. At thq request of the Presiden~r Mr. LaU took the
oath in accordance with regulatic'f;Js 2 and 3 of the
provisional staff regulations.
.
4. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
. 1 congratulate the Secretary-General on his excellent

8. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): It
is indicated in paragraph 6 of the report that the draft
resolution was approved by 34 votes to 1, with ,5 abstentions. Since the Committee's cleci~ion was not unan...
imous, the request of the representative'· 0); the Soviet
Union is quite justifi4'>d and I shall put the draft resolution contained in the Fifth Cominittee's report to
the vote.
The draft· resolution wets adopted by 48 votes to
110ne, with 6 abstentions.

choice and you, Mr. Lall, on, your appointment; you
have had a long and brilliant career and you are therefore particularly qualified to undertake the responsi..
bilities of this high office. As an Iranian, I am very glad
to see a, son of India appointed an Assistant Secretary..
General of the United .Nations, and I sincerely wish
you success in your post.
5. Mr. LALL (Assistant Secretary-Genel.'Oal in <:harge
of the Department of Conference and General Services) :
Thank you, Sir.
6. The PRESIDENT (translated from Frenc~): If
there is no objection, I suggest that instead of gomg on
to the second item on our agenda for this meeting, we
should deal with the third, fourth, fifth, sixth and
seventh items; those items concern reports of the Fifth
Committee whkh it should be possible, I think, to
approve in a few minut.~s. ,

COMPENSATION TO MEMBERS OF COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES OR SIMILAR BODIES IN CASE OF INJURY OR
DEATH (A/1508)

It Wa/ii so decided.
Organiza~ion of a Un!teil Nations postal administration: report of t~e E'ifth Committee (A/IS07)
(Agenda item 46]

The draft resolution contained in the report of the
Fifth Committee was adopted unanimously.
.
Expenses of the Permanent Central Opium Board.

Aese~sment of non-members of the Uoited Nations, signatories of the Convention of 191Feb·
mary 1925 relating to narcotic d..-uga: report of ~
the F'ifth Committee (A/1497)

[Agenda item 45] ,

Thti draft rp-solution contained in the report of the
Fifth Committee was adopted ,uuanimously.
Pennaneni financial regulations of the United Na..
tions; rertl0rt of the Fifth Committee (A/1496) .
[Agenda item 41]

The draft resolution contained in the report of the
Fifth Committee was adoptea 1manimously.
Budget estimates for the financial year 1951:
,

renorts
of the Fifth Committee
...

.

[Agenda item 39]
ApPt.ICATION OF'l'RE UNITED NATIONS FOOD ,AND AGRt..
CULTURE O.R.GANI;~ATION FOR A LOAN F~O:M THE
WOl1lKIN'G CAPITAL FUND (A/1498)

Mr. MALIK (Un~on of Soviet Soda~igt R(~puh1ic$)
(translated from Russ'tan) : The USSR delegat10t:l pro.
poses. that the draft resolution on this question should
be put to the vote.

7.

,

. .

The draft resoluUon contained in the report of the
Fifth Committee was adopted unanimously.
Reservations to multilateral conventions; report
of the Sixth Committee (A/1494 and' Corr.l)
[Agenda item 56]
9. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon the Rapporteur to present the Sixth Committee's report on reservc.dons to multilateral conventions.
10. Mr. KURAL (Turkey), Rapporteur of the Sixth
Committee, (translated from French): I have the'
honour to submit to the General Assembly the Sixth
Committee's report on its study of the question of reservations to multilateral conventions.
11. The question was placed before the General As. sembly by the· Secretary-General, who desired guidance
concerning the procedure which he should follow regarding reservations made by States as a condition for
acceding, to multilateral conventions.

12. At the time the question was placed before the
General AssemblY$ it had acquired a certain practical
urgency in view of the special circumstances created by
the possibility of the entry into force of the Convention
for the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide. Those circumstances made it imperative to
decide whether States which had made reservations
to which objections had been raised were to be counted
among those whose accession was necessary for the
entry into force of the convention.
13. It was only n.atural that during the debate onsuch
a question certain important: and general problems
should have been raised and discussed. Among them.
was the problem of the right of States to make reservations and the effect of such reservations; there were also
certain closely reIat~d problems, such as the competence
of the Committee to give an opinion on the l~rger aspects of the problem, the organ of the United Nations
to which the problem might be referred and the need
for giving provisional instructions to the SecretaryGeneral.
1--'

14. All these problems are of considerable interest
from the general viewpoint of the development of internationalla:w and from the particular viewpoint of the
procedure to be followed in the United Nations with
regard to reservations to multilateral conventions.
15. During a particularly interesting debate which
lasted two weeks, very divergent points of view and a
number of different shades of opinion became apparent

30SthMeeting-;16 November 1950.
38S
-------,-----.,..-----_
----------_ _------------.._......;;.........

in the Committee. The broad outline of the discussion
may be found in the Committee's report [A/1494 and
Corr.1]. The summar~'r records of the meetings contain
a more detailed description of the debates and show the
various shades of opiniQ1n more clearly.1
16. At the 222nd meeting of the Sixth Committee,
held on' 16 Octobel', the Assistant Secretary~General in
charge of the Legal Department announced that the
Convention for the Pr,wention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide had received a sufficient· number of
instruments of ratification and accession to make up
the twenty required to permit its entry into force,
whatever the theory adopted to determine the. validity
of instruments containing r(~servations. The majority
in the Sixth Committee considered that the problem
had thus lost some of its urgency and were indined to
favour the adoption of a compromise. solution thanks to
which the 'Committee would be able, for the' time being,
to defer a solution on the substantive problems which
had been rais~d.
17. The draft resolution which waS approved and
which may be found at the end of the report provides
that the International Court of Justice·.ghould be requested for an advisory opinion on certain questions
concerning reservations made to the convention on
genocide; it further provides that. the International
Law Commission should Le invited to study the q~es­
tion of reservations both from the point of view of codification and from that of the progressive deYelQpment
of international law, and to submit its report to the
General Assembly at the next session.
18. On behalf of the Sixth Committee, I urge the Assembly to adopt this draft resolution.
19. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : In
conformity with rule 67 of the rules of procedure and
with the practice of the Assembly, I shall take a vote
on whether the Assembly wishes to discuss the draft
resolution.
It was decided, by 38 votes to 6" with 7 abstentions"
not to discuss the draft resolution.
20. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : We
shall therefore proceed to the vote without discussion.
There are two documents before the Assembly; the
draft resolution submitted by' the Sixth Committee
[A/1494 and Corr.1] , and an am~ndment submitted by
thirteen delegations [A/1495] which calls for theaddition of a paragraph to the draft resolution.
21. I shall put the amendment to the vote first. !fit
is adopted, I shall put to the vote the draft .resolution
as amended. If the amennment is rejected, I shall put
to the vote the draft resolution as it stands.
The amendment wC's adopted by 36 votes to 6" with
9 abstentions:
22. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution as
amended by the addition of this paragraph.
23. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The Soviet Union
delegation. proposes that a separate vote Should be taken
on paragraph 1 of the operative part of' the draft re-

- See Official Records of the General A:ssembly" Fifth Ses1

sion, Si~th Committee, 217th to 225th meetings inclusive.

.........

solution, dealing with a request to the International
Court of Justice.
24. The PRESIDENT (translated from .French):
The request for division is in order•. I shall therefore
put the preamble to the vote and then the im::1ividual
paragraphs of the operative part.
The preamble was adopted by 49 votes to 1, with
5 abstentions.
Paragraph 1 of the operative part was adopted by 40
votes to 10, with 7 abstentions.
Paragraph 2 of the operative part was adopted by 48
votes to 2, with 8 abstentions.
The draft resolution as a whole) as ame1uled" was
adopted by 47 votes to 5, with 5 abstentions,
25. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Before'considering the ne:x:t item on the agenda; I r.all
upon the representative of the Soviet Union to explain
his vote.
26. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from R1f,ssian) : The USSR dele. gation wishes to explain the reasons for its vote on the
draft resolution of the Sixth· Committee dealing, with
reservations to- multilateral conventions. The delegation
of the Soviet Union voted against the draft resolution
as a whole and also against that part which relates to
the request to the International Court of Justice for an
advisory opinion; it also voted against the adoption of
the' amendment submi~ed by a group of delegations
[A/1495].

27. In the opinion of the USSR delegation, the part
of the resolution which requests the International Court
of Justice to give an advisory opinion on questions connected with reservations to the Convention for the Pre~
vention and Punishment .of the Crime of .Genocide
should have been excluded. As we know, the question
of reservations to multilateral conventions was submitted by the. Secretary~General for the consideration
of the Assembly after certain States had objected to the
illegal practice of the Secretary-General; who had stated
that if even a single party to the convention on genocide
objected, he would refuse to receive instruments of ratification in respect of that .convention which contained
reservations [A/1372, annex 1, seclion IV].
28. When this matter was discussed in the Sixth Committee, the delegation of the Soviet Union pointed out
that such an attitude was contrary to the convention on
genocide, which did not establish any. limitations or any
special procedure for the receipt of ratifications' by the
depositary.
29.· The fact that the convention on genocide does not
establish any limitations regarding reservations is wholly
in accordance with .the principle of State sovereignty.
According to that principle, a State is free to dttermine
its attitude towards any matter dealt with in a multilateral international convention. This principle is also
confirmed by the practice followed in connexion with the
conclusion of multilateral international conventions. One
may cite such instances as The Hague conventions ot
18 October 1907, to which some sixty reservations were
made when they were signed, and the ratifications con..
taining those reservations were accepted without any
special requirements for the consent of other parties to

!

I

386

Genell.td Aeeembly-Fifth SeBsion-Plenary Meetin,;s
------------_--..:=-------------_--.:..---...:.:;.._.
. . . ._--_..--..---

text of the convention on genocide does not require
the conventions. ""hen the' Geneva conventions of 1949
any clarification in respect of the submission of reservaon the protection of war victims were signed, the
tions; consequently, in the opinion of the delegation of
United States, the Ut1i~€d Kingdom, the Netherlands,
the Soviet Union, there were no grounds for requesting
Canada, Argentina, Brazil, Hungary, Italy, Poland, the
the International Court of Justice to give an advisory
USSR and a number of other countries made a series
opinion on this m~tter. The USSR delegation therefore
of resel~va.tio.ns. Neither the depositary of the Geneva
considered that the paragraph in the resolution relating
conventions of 1949-'the Swiss Governm~nt--nor the
to the request to the Court for an advisory opinion
parties to the conventions claimed that such reservashould be deleted, and it therefore voted against the
tions could be presented only with the consent of the
adoption of that paragraph.
other parties.
30. These facts, and many others, show that the sub~
35. As I have said, the USSR delegation also voted
mission of reservations when signing or ratifying inter~
~gainst the amelldtnent to the draft repolution of the
national conventions is the inalienable right of every
Sixth Committee introduced by the delegations of the
State, a sovereign right which cannot be disputed by
Unii-<.!d States, the United Kingdom and other States
other States.
[A/149S] ; I shall explain why it did so.
31. The proposal that reservations by a party to a
36. Article XVII of the Convention on Genocide
convention should be made conditional upon the consent
deals in detail with the Secretary-General's duties as
of all the other parties is also wrong for this reason,
depositary of the Convention, and provides that he shall
namely, that reservations are usually made because a
notify i.~e States concerned of all ratifications. The SecState which was in a minority during the consideration
retary-General must do that irrespective of whether such
Qf the text of a convention, but which agrees with the
ratifie~ ticns contain reservations or not. The Convention
basic provisions of the convention, continues to hold tha t
cl~~:; not, however, place upon the Secretary-General
~ertain minor provisions which were included in th~
the duty of soliciting the approval of the parties to the
text of the convention despite its arguments are anConvention in respect of reservations made by other
accl~ptable. Consequently, the adoption of a proposal of
parties, as is proposed in the amendment. The delegathis 'kind can only weaken international co-operation.
tion of the Soviet Union considered that this approval
32. This fact should be particularly stressed since in
could not be adopted, since the Assembly is not comthe case in point we are dealing with an important conpetent to take decisions which might impose on parties
vention-the Convention for the Prevention and Punto multilateral conventions already signed and ratified
ishment of the Crime of Genocide. There is no need to
by several States, such as the Convention on Genocide,
prove that the United Nations is undou~tedly interested
obligations which are not prescribed in those conventions.
in seeing that as many States as pOSSible assume the
obligation to take measures for the prevention and pun37. The USSR delegation regarded the amendment as
isl11'nent of so heinous a. crime against the honour and
unacceptable
also because, as I have already pointed
conscience of nations as genocide. Consequently, in the
out,
the
convention
on genocide clearly lays down the
the case of the convention on genocide, it is particularly
duties of the Secretary-General as depositary and does
impossible to agree to measures at variance with that
not establish any limitations or special procedure for the
convention and calculated primarily to restrict the numsubmission
of reservations when the convention is
ber of parties to the convention by setting up artificial
ratified.
'
barriers that may prevent a numher of States which ac- ,
cept all its basic provisions, but m~,ke reservations re-' 38. For these reasons the delegation of the Soviet
garding certain minor provisions, from acceding to the
Union regards the resolution adopted by the General
convention.
Assembly on the recommendation of the Sixth Committee
as contrary to the real aims of the Organization,
33. Despite the fact that there is no provision in the
which
~re to develop and strengthen international coconvention on genocide which prevents the submission
operation.
of reservations, some delegations have maintained that
the General Assembly should establish various limita39. The USSR delegation urges that the greatest postions and set them forth in the form of provisional insible number of States, both Members and non-members
structions to the Secretary-General. Such action is in
of the United Nations, should be parties to so important
conformity-neither with the text nor with the spirit and
a convention as the Convention for the Prevention and
purposes of the convention on genocide; it is merely
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, that heinous
an attempt to make arbitrary additions to the convention
crime against lrumanity.
which has already been signed by laying down condi40. The PRESIDENT (translated from Fretteh):
tions whereby new legal relationships would be created
Two delegations, those of Peru and Poland, have asked
among the parties to the convention. It is obvious that
to
speak to explain their votes. I shall limit the time
the General Assembly has no power to do that. Natallowed for each explanation to seven minutes.
t1rally, the proposals to that effect which were introduced
by the delegations of the United States and the United
41. Mr. MAURTUA (Peru), (trmJslated front SpanKingdom in the Sixth Committee had to be withdrawn,
ish): My delegation abstained from voting on para...
as most delegations refu~ed to support such a view.
graph 1 of the operative part of the resolution proposed
34. As regards the proposal that the International
by the Sixth Committee, because it considers that the
Court of Justice should be requested to give an adv~sory
function of the International Court of Justice is not to '
opinion on reservations to the convention on genocide,
legislate or to create new rules but merely to apply the
that proposal, too, was and is unacceptable 1:0 the USSR
ex:isting law, whether in the form of accepted norms"
delegation. It follows from what I have l3aid that the
general principles or established custom.

305th Meeting-16 November 1950
42. Paragraph 1 of the resolution, under which an
advisory opinion of the Court is requested, appears to
be an unnecessary addition to the text of the resolution,
which might perhaps be regarded, in view of its possible
consequences, as ereatiJ:lg a precedent in the matter of
reservations.
43. My delegation considers that as the International
Law Commission will give priority to the question of
reservations, the preamble and paragraph 2 of the
operative part of the resolution logically form an organic
whole and that, as regards the implementation of those
provisions, the Secretary-General will merely be guided
by the instructions we have approved in the joint amendment, that is, will in practice permit governments to
use either of the two main systems for the formulation
of reservations.
44. Mr. LACHS (Poland): In explaining my vote
on behalf of the Polish delegation, I want to stress at
the very outset that both the Charter·and practice have
made the Unit~d Nations into a centre in which international treaties are drafted, conventions prepared and
international instruments concluded. If this is so-and
no one can deny the fact that it is so-the United Nations, in performing its functions, should act in accordan('e with the principles of the Charter and the principles
of international law in general.
45. One part of the problem is the :tight of every State
to enter into international instruments and to adhere
to them whenever it sees fit to do so. It should of course
be the goal of the Organization to try to bring together
in whatever treaty it prepares the greatest possible
number of States, both Members and non-members of
the United Nations.
46. During the debate in the Sixth Committee on the
subject of reservations to multilateral conventions, the
delegation of Poland strongly maintained that every
State was free to write into a treaty reservations com"
patible with its national interests. This indeed is a substantive rule of law well established in international
relations.. Our view is substantiated by practical legal
opinions, and in particular by the long-standing practice
of the States of the American continent.
47. Our view is that the principle of the freedom of
reservations is a rule of law and cannot be altered by
any decision of the General Assembly. We have therefore opposed any decision on the substance of the issue,
and have particularly been opposed to any reference
being made to the International Court of Justice.
48. The request made in this particu~ar case concerns
a convention drafted, signed and ratified by several
States, but not all of them Members of the United
Nations. The request to the Court, to our mind~ amounts
to an attempt to revise a document drafted and approved
by the United Nations, because the procedure provided
for in the resolution is not laid down in the te:x:t of the
convention itself. What is more, it is a well established
principle of international law that the right to interpret
a treaty or to ask for an int,erpretation is reserved only
to the p~rties which have sig:ned and ratified the treaty.
49. For this very reason, we opposed. the reference of
the case to the International Court of Justice. We also
opposed any decision on the substance of the question,
since no such decision can change the basic rule of law........
the right of every State to write into an international
I

387

instrument those reservations which it thinks suitable
and compatible with its national interest.
50. Mr. INGLES (Philippines): Two separate but
closely interrelated issues are raised in the resolution
whir> has just been adopted. The first issue relates ·to
the particulaR" problem of the legal effect of reservations
to the Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Get.ocide. The second issue relates to the
general problem of the legal effect of reservations to
multilateral conventions, especially those of which the
Secretary-Gene~'alis the depositary.
51. The resolution just adopted by the General Assembly submits the first issue, that iSJ the particular
problem of reservations to the convention on genodde,
to the International Court of Justice for an acJ.";tsory
opinion, and, at the same time, it refers the secolldis15Ue,
that is, the general problem of reservations to multi~
lateral conventions> to the International Law Commis...
sion for study.
52. In order to explain the votle of my delegation
against paragraph 1 of the operative part of the resolution, my delegation deems it nec{$sary to discuss briefly
what was the real problem presented to the General ,
Assembly as a result of the item proposed by the
Secretary-General. The Secretary-General submitted·
the general question of reservations to multilateral conventions [A/1372] to the attention of the General Assembly because, as the depositary of conventions
adopted by the General Assembly and multilateral agreements concluded under the auspices of the United Nations, he desired guidance concerning the procedure he
should follow regarding ratifications and accessions to
such· conventions or multilateral agreements made conditional upon reservations. The Secretary-General
argued that the problem had acquired curr~nt importance in connexion with the convention on. genocide
because a dispute might arise as to the date of its entry
int& force.
.
53. While the question was pending in the Sixth Committee, however, .the Secretary..General announced that
a sufficient number of ratifications· had been received
to permit the entry into force of the ~o' lVention on
genocide, even disregarding those ratifications andaccessio~s with reservations. The Secretary-General noted
that the problem of the entry into force of the convention had thus been solved. He noted further that the
problem of the legal consequences deriving from the
deposit of the instrument of ratification of the Philippines and the instrument of accession of Bulgaria,
which included reservations which had met with objections from one Member State, still remained to be ,
settled. That problem, however, had ceased to have
any urgency.
54. One would have thought that the cunvention on
genocide no longer posed .any special problem for the
Secretary-General, apart from the general problem of
the legal effect of reservations to multilateral conventions of which he is the depositary. So that the only
problem that was in fact before the Sixth Committee,
and before the General Assembly when the resolution
was vo~ed as a result of the item proposed by the
Secretary-General, was the general problem of the
legal effect of reservations to multilatetal eonventions.
55. My delegation was in favour of the re~olution

General Assembly-Fifth Se!slon-·-Plenary Meetin~8
adopted by the Assembly only in $0 far as it invited the
International Law Commission to give priority to the
study of the general problem, especially as regards multilateral conventions of which the Secretary-General is
the depositary, and to report to the General Assembly
at its next session. But my delegation was opposed to
the inclusion in the resolution of the particular problem
of the legal effect of reservations to the convention on
genocide as a separate proposition, independent of the
problem of the legal effect of reservations to multilateral conventions in general" and to the submission of
that problem to a different organ, namely, the International Court of Justice, for an advisory opinion. In
the view of my delegation, such a procedure not only
confused the real issue before the Assembly, but invited
conflicting or contradictory opinions from two different
organs.
56~ Apart from these logical and practical considerations.. however, my deleg-a.tion had strong legal objections to having the General Assembly take the initiative
in referring specific questions relating to the application
of the convention on genocide to the International Court
of J1-1stice. My delegation merely wishes to reiterate the
legal aTguments it advanced in support of its position in
the Sixth Committee, which is that it should be left to
the contracting parties themselves to submit any disputes as to the interpretation or application of the convention on genocide to the International Court of
Justice, as is provided in article IX of the convention,
and that it is not for the General Assembly but for the
parties directly concerned to formulate the issues to be
submitted to the judgment of the Court.
57. The PRESIDENT: I should like to remind you
that each speaker is permitted seven minut~s only.
58. Mr.INGLES (Philippines) " My delegation only
wishes to put on record the fact Ij,hat it voted against
paragraph 1 of the operative part of the resolution
in Qrder to safeguard its position.

Convention on the Declaration of Death of Missing'
Persons: reports of the Secretary-General
(A/1329) and the Fifth Committee (Aj1506)
[Agenda item 48]

59. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
wish to point out that the General Assembly is not l'iequired to reach a decision on this item. Pursuant to
resolution 369 (IV), a United Nations Conference on
Declaration of Death of Missing Persons was convened
and met at Lake Success from 15 March to 6 April
1950. A convention was established and opened for
accession by States.
60. Article 8, paragraph 1 of that convention provides
for the establishment within the framework of the
United Nations of an international bureau for declarations of death, the seat, composition, organization and
method of operation of which shall be determined by the
Secretary-General. Article 15 of the convention-the
part in which we are interested-states that the estab. lishment of the bureau provided for in article 8 shall
require the approval of the General Assembly of the
United Nations. All that the Assembly need do, therefore, is to approve or not approve the establishment of
the bureau.

61. The problem .' 1£ the expenditure which the establishment of the bureau will entail, which is dealt with
in the Fifth Committee's report, will probably not come
up until next year, because the convention is not likely
to come into force in the immediate future.
62. As this item of the agenda has not been examined
in committee, delegations will perhaps desire to express
their views before the General Assembly. I drawattention to the draft resolution submitted by the ~elegations
of Belgium, Demnark, Sweden and Uruguay [A/1510],
which invites the General Assembly to approve the
establishment of the international bureau for declara...
tions of death.
63. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translatod from Russian) : The proposal contained in the draft resolution submitted by Belgium, Denmark, Sweden and Uruguay [A/1510] for the establishment within the framework of the United Nations. of an
international bureau for declarations of death, on the
ground that this is provided for in article 15 of the Convention on the Declaration of Death of Missing Persons,
should, in the view of the Soviet Union delegatlOll, be
rejected. I shall give the reasons for that view.
64. In the Ad Hoc Committee of the Economic and
Social Council, which met in Geneva in June 1949, the
USSR representative pointed out2 that the conclusion of
an international convention on the declaration of death
of missing persons was inexpedient inasmuch as the
problem connected with su(~h declarations of death
should and could be solved by providing the governments of countries which had suffered enemy occupation during the first part of the war with full information
as to the whereabouts of those of their nationals who fell
within the category of displaced persons.
65. It was pointed out in the Ad Hoc Committee
that these problems could also be solved by means of
internal legislative measures to be adopted by each of the
States concerned.
66. It was accordingly proposed at the time that States
should be invited to adopt and to put into effect the following practical measures:
(a) States on whose territory refugees and displaced
persons we,re to be found should communicate lists of
such persons to the governments of the countries where
they had been permanently domiciled before the war;
and
( b) States in which the question of the procedure for
declaring the death of missing persons had not been
regularized by legislation should introduce appropriate
legislative measures in accordance with their constitutional processes.
67. The USSR delegation considers that if those proposals had been adopted and implemented, they could
have settled the entire question under ~iscussion.
Nevertheless, the majority in the Ad Hoc Committee
and in the Economic and Social Council [resoluti(m 249
(IX)] and later the majority in the General Assembly
[resoluti01t 3.69 (IV)] took a different path.
68. The conference which met in New York in the
sprik1g of 1950 drafted and adopted the Convention ott
the Declaration of Death of Missing Persons. '
2

See documentE/1368.

305th Meeting-16 N-.vem.ber 1950
69. It should be observed that doubts as to the expediency of concluding the convention were expressed
not only by the delegation of the Soviet Union but also
bya number of other delegations of Member States.
Those doubts were reflected, for instance, in the fact
that when the draft convention was discm,sed at the
fourth session of the General Assembly [266th meeting] I
fifteen delegations abstained from voting and one delegation voted against it. Furthermorel the conference
which was cOllvened to draft the convention in New'
York in March 1950 was attended by only twenty-five
States, or less than half the number of Member States.
Lastly, and this too is a most striking factI the convention was opened for accession on 6 April 1950, tl~at is
to saYI more than seven months ago, yet not a smgle
State has acceded to itl not even any of the States
which took part in the conference and approved the text
of the convention.
70. These circumstances speak for themselves and, in
the view of the Soviet Union dele~ationl would constitute sufficient grounds for avoiding haste in considering
the question of establishing the international bureau for
declarations of death of missing persons l at least until
the convention comes into force.
.
71. This is not all l however. Quite apart from the fore~
going considerationsl the establisbment of this bureau
within the framework of the United Nations is notessential even from the point of view of the provisions of
the convention itself. Under articles 81 9 and 10 of the
convention, the bureau is called upon to act. primarily
as an information office on matters connected with the
action taken by the competent tribunals of the various
States with regard to declarations of death of missing
persons. These articles of the convention show that the
bureau is, in particularl to record and register all applications for declarations of death ofmissing persons which
are being dealt with by the tribunals of the States signatories to the conventionl to record and register the
decisions of those tribunalsl and to provide the organizations and persons concerned with information concerning that material.
72. There can be no doubt that if the governments
concerned arrange to exchange information at the
proper time on steps taken under the convention for
the issue of declarations of death of missing persons
and on the decisions of the tribunals on such matters,
there will be no need to set up a special organ such as
the above-mentioned bureau. If tliat one condition is
fulfilled l all the work .which is to be done by the proposed bureau can certainly be performed directly by the
competent judicial or administrative authorities of the
States concerned.
73. Incidentally, the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, dated
6 November 1950 [A/1489], shows that the establishment of the bureau would involve considernbleexpense.
At a very tentative estimatel the cost of maintaining the
bureau during the initial period alone would be at least

$40,000.

74. It should also be noted thatlalthough article 8 of
the convention provides for the establishment of the bureau, the General Assembly is not l of course, bound
by that provision in the sense that it must automatically
approve the establishment of the bureau. That is the

389

construction that must be placed, for instance, on article
15 of the convention, which states that the establishment of the bureau provided for in article 8 shall reguire the approval of the General Assembly of the
United NabOllS.
75. Taking into account all these consideration~, as
well as the circumstance that nO Member State of the
United Nations is really interested at this time in the
establishment of the bureau, sincel as we have already
notedl not a single State has acceded to the convention,
the USSR delegation will vote against the draft resolution submitted by Belgium, Denmark, Sweden and Uruguay; it feels that that draft should be rejected for the.
reasons already explained.
76. Mr. PETREN (Sweden) (translated from
French): The draft resolution now before the General Assembly has been submitted by the delegations of
Belgiuml Denmarkl Sweden and UruguaYI that is, by .
the same delegations whose proposal 8 led the General
Asse~blYI last year, to decide [resolution 369 (IV)]
to convene the conference that drew up the Convention
on the Declaration of Death of Missing Persons.
77. The President has already put the essence of the
question far more succinctly than I could do. I should
like, however, to say a few words about what the Soviet
.
.
Umon representative has just said.
78. I should like first to point out to him that, under
this cOllVentlOn, various kinds of tribunals are competent to issue declarations of death. The following tribunals are hsted inartlcle 21 . paragraph 2 :
'I (i) The tribunal of the place of the last domicile
of. the mIssing person or of his last vqluntary or
involuntary residence;
U(ii) The tribunall in the country of which the
missing person was a national, competent under ap..
plicable domestic law orl in its absence, the tribunal
of the capital of that country;
U ( Hi) The tribunal of the place of the situs of
propel ty of the missing person;
it (iv) The. tribunal of the place of decease of the
missmg person;
u ( v) The tribunal of the place of domiciie orresidence of the applicant in the case of an application
filed by allY ot the following relatives: ascendants,
descendants, adopted child.ren and their issue,
brothers and sisters and their issue, uncles, aunts~ or
spouse.':
79, It is therefore possible for several tribunals to
deal with· a matter. There is consequently a~eed for a
co-ordinating body that will prevent duplication. Under
article 9, the bureau provided for in article 8 of the
convention will have the duty of co-ordinating information in the following manner: a tribunal to which an
application for declaration of death is made Oft which
has initiated such a proceeding on its own rnotionl shall,
within hfteel1 daysl communicate to the bureau such of
the following information as it possesses: full name,
nationalitYI place and date of birth of the missing pet..
S011, his habitualresidencel his last voluntary or
voluntaty residence, the names and addresses of his

in..

8 See OJjicial Records of the Getzeral A.ssembly, Fourth Session, Pltnary Meetings, Anne~, doc!Jment Al1l92..

390

General Assembly-Fifth Seeeion-Plenary· Meetin,;s

closest relatives, the last known date on which he was
probably alive according to the application, the name
and address of the applicant, his interest and relationship, if any, to the missing person, and the date of
institution of the proceedings. This system of information and communication is thus vital and absolutely
necessary for the proper functioning of the convention
and for the purpose of avoiding duplication.
80. It may also be said that this convention is a part
of the general humanitarian activities of the United Nations. Its purpose is to tacilitate the remarriage of
spouses, proceedings for the distribution of estates, and
the adoption of children of missing persons.
81. My delegation and the delegations of Belgium,
Denmark and Uruguay have accordingly submitted the
draft resolution which is now before the General
Assembly.
82. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
think that we may now vote on the matter. I put to the
vote the draft resolution submitted by Belgium, Denmark, Sweden and Uruguay [A/1510], which reads as
follows:
((The Ge·ne1'al AssemblYl
({Having regard to article 15 of the Converition
on the Declaration of Death of Missing Persons established by the United. Nations Conference on
Declaration of Death of Missing Persons (A/Conf.

1/),
"1. Decides to approve the establishment of the
International Bureau for Declarations of Death pro"
vided for in article 8 of the aforementioned convention;
"2 Decides that the expenses of the International
Bureau should be assessed upon such non-member
States as may become parties to the convention, in
accordance with the principle adopted in this respect
in connexion with the expenses of the International
Court of Justice/'
•
The draft resolution w(;;s adopted by 38 votes to 6
with'13 abstentions.
83. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
call upon the representative of Poland, who wishes to
explain -his vote.
84. Mr, KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): The delegation
of Poland wishes to put it on record that it opposed
the conclusion of the Convention on the Declaration of
Death of Missing Persons. 111 accordance with the
Charter and the general principles of law, the problem
involved is one which is essentiaHy within the domestic
jurisdiction of States and should b~ decided by internal
legislation only. The delegation of Poland holds, therefore, that there is no need to establish. the organ en"
visaged in the convention. Poland is undoubtedly one of
the States concerned with the problem and, unfortunately, is familiar with it. But our practice has shown
that the competent organs of the State, in the normal
course of their activities, can deal with it adequately.
85. We therefore voted a.gainst the establishment of
the International Bureau for Declarations of Death.
The points raised by the representative of Sweden can"
not change the situation, as the existing conflict of
legislation can never be solved by this type of bureau.
1

86. Mr. BARTOS (Yugoslavia) (translated from
French): I have asked to speak in order to explain
my vote.
87. My delegation considers that this convention is
res inter alios acta for those States which have con"
cluded it, since it has never been examined or approved
by the General Assembly. No general conclusions can
therefore be drawn from it.
88. Secondly, and without repeating the arguments
which my delegation has already adduced, we cannot
support the text of this convention. We hold it to be contrary to established principles concerning the competence of courts in disputes on the delicate question of the
status of persons.
89. Thirdly, we feel that this convention is harmful
as regards the general principles and international practice g'overning such matters. We think it would cause
a kind of anarchy since it provides for five different
tribunals which are all to have competence' in the
matter.
90. In conclusion, I wish to say that we are opposed
to this convention and to the establishment of these tribunals and that we do not consider ourselves bound
even by the general principles embodied in the convention. Furthermore, applicants may always bring questions concerning the settlement of such matters before
the Yugoslav courts in accordance with the principles
of private international law.

Question of the representation of China in the
United Nations: membership of the special
committee
91. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We cannot proceed to take up the ninth item of our
agenda for today, as it concerns a report of the Ad Hoc
Political Committee, which is in session at this time.
I should like to take advantage of the few minutes
remaining to us to discharge a duty placed upon me by
the Assembly.
92. At the first meeting of this session, on the proposal of the Canadian delegation~ the Assembly adopted
a resolution on the representation of China instructing
the President to nominate seven members to form a
special committee, such nominations to be submitted to
the General Assembly for approval. With your permission, I should like to submit for your approval the
list I have in mind.
93. I propose that this special committee should be
made up of representatives of the following States:
Belgium, Canada,. India, Iraq, Mexico, Philippines,
Poland.
94. Are there any objections to the proposed compoM
sition of this special committee?
95. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian) : The USSR delegation
considers that, in order to approach this question fairly, .
it is necessary to select the members of the committee
on a different basis from the one referred to by the
President.
.
96. A cursory study of the list of States which, at..
cording to the President, should be included in this
committee shows, unless I am mistaken, that only two

305th Meeting-16 November 1950

391

104. Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): The committee
have recognized the People's ReJ?ublic of China. Such
whose appointment is proposed at this meeting of the
a ratio of five to two in the committee will, clearly, conGeneral Assembly has to fulfil an enormously important
siderably hamper from the start any objective and comtask. It has to deal with the problem of the representaprehensive consideration of this question and the adoption of an unbiased decision. That decision must take
tion of the Chinese people in the United Nations, a
into account all the circumstances that have arisen; it
problem which has caused many difficulties in this
must take into account the fact that, as a result of the
Organization for quite a long time. We know that the
action, in the United Nations and outside it, which has
great and historic events which have taken place in
been taken by certain States in order to prevent the
China, a new government has been established, which
justly claims-as the representative of one of the origproper representation of China in this Organization is
inal Members of the Organization and one of the
responsible for the many difficulties which this OrganStates which participated directly in preparing for its
ization and the world at large faces today.
establishment-that it has the right to take part in
105. I think, therefore, it is most important that,
the work of the United Nations and its organs.
before appointing the committee, 1110st careful con97. At the present time China is not represented in
sideration should be given to its composition. That conthe Organization. Its place has been usurped by the
sideration should not concern arithmetic or figures but
representatives of a political group which represents no
should face the issue squarely. We know that two viewone but itself. That point was quite clear at the very
points are represented in connexion with this problem.
first ~eeting of the General Assembly at this session.
One view, although a minority view in the General Assembly, is at the same time a view ·held by an enormous
98. It is quite clear that with a committee composed
majority in the world; it is that the only government
in this way it will be difficult to reach the just decision
legally
qualified to represent China in the United Nawhich is required. The position, on this issue, of the
tions
is
the Central People's Government of the People's
overwhelming majority-five to two-will presumably
Republic of China. There is a group of States-at the
not favour a rapid settlement of this acute and painful
moment
a majority-which prevents the entry of repproblem confronting the United Nations, a problem
resentatives
of that country into the United Nations
which so vitally affects the cause of international coand
maintains
in the Organization a fictitious political
operation and the strengthening of peace and security.
'group, obedient to it, which claims to represent a State.
99. The delegation of the Soviet Union therefore
106. I do not think that the problem should be dealt
considers that the President of the General Assembly
with on the basis of the number of countries which have
should give further thought to the composition of the
committee and suggest, if possible, a somewhat different . recognized the Government of the People's Republic of
China, or that the degree of recognition extended to that
composition, particularly as his proposal today was
glivernment
should decide the proportion Qf the prorather unexpected and was made rather suddenly. The
posed committee. That is the only basis on which that
question is not 011 the agenda and I imagine that a
list seems to have been drawn up, and that is why my
number of delegations which intend to submit their
delegation has grave dou.bts as to the wisdom of apown proposals are possibly not prepared to do so
pointing
a committee composed of such States.
forthwith.
100. It would therefore be expedient not to consider
107. If the General Assembly wants to fact~ the issue
this question ar..d to discuss it either at the afternoon
Rnd wants to give real consideration to the matter with
some degree of impartiality, quite a different approach
meeting today, or tomorrow.
must be adopted. We all know that such a composition
101. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
of
the proposed committee, with two States recognizing .
I should explain why I decided on that proportion. It
the Central People's Government and five States not
is true that on the list I have submitted there are only
recognizing that government-although by mathemattwo St&tes which have recognized the Peking Governical
calculations that would be in proportion to the .
ment. But I took as a basis the proportion of Member
number
of States· which have recognized that gov~ni­
States of the United Nations which have recognized
ment-prejudges the issue. It shows wheJ,t th~ ii',:ult oj,
that government. Seventeen States out of sixty have
the
deliberations of the proposed cOP"xaittee will .bt~.
done so. Unless I am mistaken, that is less than oneThat
is something that should be a'tmiued by the Gener.al
third and, in a committee of seven members, the C6rresAssembly.
ponding proportion would be two. That is the proportion I adopted.
108. The problem of the l'epre';entation o~ China, in
the
first place, should never havu come up. Had j'i not
102. Under the resolution adopted by the General
been for certain sinister political ptlrposes which are
Assembly ·on 19 September 1950, the President is to
contrary
to the principles of the Charter, that problem
make nominations; but, as in the case when someone
never
would
have come up. But if we hci.·;~ to .i~1,ce it,
is proposed for the chairmanship of a committee, you
let
us
ensure
a certain amount of lmparHality in the
are free to elect or not to elect those proposed by the
composition of such a committee. Lee Uf· ensure that
President. I am merely making a proposal; it is for the
both views expressed in the Genera~ Assembly are
Assembly to decide.
equally
represented and therefore give equal represen103. There are two possible solutions. Either you are
tation to each. In that way, each view will have a chance
prepared to approve my suggestion or-and this seems
of prevailing. To do anything else is to prejudge the
to me the only alternative--we can proceed to a secret
issue.
ballot, each delegation putting on its baUot paper the
109. r must repeat that the problem of the representanames of the seven States it wishes to elect to the
tion of China is an important one. Its solution in the
special committee.
0

I

l

892

Geuel'rdlUaembly-FUth See.lon-Plenal'Y MeetinR8

spidt tmd letter of the Charter will help. this Orgali1iza,..
timt to pri,)ceecl with the soluti<)11 of many problems; the
contiuuatiol1 of the prese11t stateo£ affairs, even if jiusti..
fif.~cl and subseribed to by SOllle committee, the composi..
don of which prejudges the issue, will surely not help
tllis. Organization in the solution of those problems.
110. Th'e 1)RESIDEN1~ (tran~'lated fram Fr8nl~h):
t
f 1
·
.
1 Id p~:.laps
..I S10U
re 'res ~ 1'epresentatlVes' men10fles a
little. As I bave said already, the resolution was adopted
at the first meeting of the session. ~ehe committee We
~\re now to appoint is 1l0t to settle the question of the
rept·esentation of China. The resolut:iol1 says that the
comm.ittee is Uto considel' the qt.1estion of Chinese representation and to report bac1<. with recommendations; to
the present· session of the General Assembly, after the
Assembly shall have considered item 62 of the pro"
visional agellda (Cuban item) U." The report and l'ecomtnendations of the committee will therefore be discussed

117. My second point is that the reas~ns given for
determining the membership of the committee on the
basis of the fact that seventeen Member States of the
United Nations haverecogni~ed the People.'s Republic
of China, while the remainder have .:not recognized it,
cannot be considered convincing. Hitherto membership
of the United Nations has never been based on the prin..
ciple of recognition. The Members of the United Na..
tions determine their stand in the light of the principle
that lack of recognition or the absence of diplomat~c
relations as between particular Members of the Qrgant..
zation is not an obstacle to their co-operation in the
United Nations in the intel'ests of universal. peace and
the development of friendly relations and co-op~ration
among nation&.

118. I consider, therefore, that there are insufficient
grounds for. adopting the principle on the basis of which
the President has made his proposal. As far as I reby the General Assembly.
member, the Secretary-GeneraPs memorandum on this
111. In order to avoid a leng.thy discussion. we mig·ht
question [S/1466], issued, I believe, in .March 1950,
- s t r e s s e d the point that the decision taken on thi$ queschoose one of the two following alternatives: either I
tion by the organs of the United Nations and the
shall put my proposal to the vote~ or the Assembly will
Member States should not be based on the principle of
take a vote by secret ballot.
• recognition or non..recognition. Hence, if the President
112. I shall 110W put the matter to the Assembly. Will
bases his selection of the members of the committee on
members in favour 0·£ a vote by secret ballot kindly
the fact that seventeen Member States of the United
raise their hands.
Nations have accorded recognition to the Government
113. The USSR representative has asked for the
of the People's Republic of China, while the remainder
floor; he may speak only on the vote, as the voting has
have not, I consider that this cannot constitute a valid
started. .
argument.
114. M:r. :MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Re119. In the light of the foregoing considerations, the
publics) (tran.slatecl fronl Russian) : The delegation of
delegation of the Soviet Union proposes as a third althe Soviet Union has suggested ~ third alternative. The
ternative that we should defer voting at the present
President bas made a proposal and suggested the States
time and return to the question when we meet again
which should compose the con1mittee now under discuseither this afternoon or tomorrow morning; in this way
sion. Representatives sbould be given~ a chance to think
all representatives will have an opportunity to consider
over the President's proposal before a vote is taken. I
more carefully the membership proposed by the Presi..
consider that delegations have a dght to ask.the President and will then be able to express their views on the
dent to give them an opportunity to do so, if only for
composition of the committee by open or secret ballot.
two or three hours. That is the rigbt of every delega::- . 120. The USSR delegation therefore formally proposes
don which intends to vote on any proposal submitted
that the vote on the composition of this committee
not in atcordance with the rules of procedure. In acshould not be taken here and now, but should be
cordance with the ntles of procedure, a proposal may be
deferred.
put to the vote only if it is submitted twenty-four hours
121... The PRESIDENT (translated from Fr(mch):
.. before the opening of a meeting.
Mr.' Mali~, if you had submitted your proposal in that
115. The question of the membership of the commitform at the outset, I should have accepted it at once..
tee is an important one and I cannot agree with the
You have asked me, as a matter of couttesy no doubt, to
President that the committee will be of no importance,
review my proposal or to present & :new one. I think
8ince it will merely make recommendations. It is not as
that is not necessary. If, after two months of thought, I
simple as that. \Ve are setting up a committee to study
have not arrived at a better proposal than this one, a few
a most important question, to reviewaU the available
more hours cannot change anything.
material on the subject, and to .study the history and
122.· Nevertheless I find it quite normal that you should
<;ubstance of the matter as well as the legal, political and
ask for time to consider the matter~ so normal, indeed,
e~en moral aspects of this question. The committee will
that ~t is not even necessary to put your proposal to the
th~refore have to give most seriou$consideration to the
vote. Fot my part, I accept your proposal. That is what
task assigned to it and submit its recommendations to
I should have done from the very beginning if you had
the General Assembly in plenary meeting.
submitted it in that form.
116. It is our experience th&t only rarely dtks the As..
123. We shall i:herefore proceed to the vote either this
sembl,- $et aside or reject the recommendations of com..
aftern<?on,.towards the. ene! of th.e meeting, if you think
mittees.. It is therefore impossible b) agree that this parthat wIll gIve you enough tIme to consider the matter, or
ticu1ar ~nunittee will be of no importance. That is my
tomorrow. I.a.sk you, howeve.r, not to b.·egin a debate on
fint pomt.
the substance of the question. I shall 1:llJtgive the floor
to anyone for that purpose, because we hald come to the
of Item 610£ the agenda as adopted.
vote. T)he USSR proposal concerned the vote; it was

393

3051h Meeting-16 November 1950
therefore in accordance with the rules of procedure. At
the end of the meeting this afternoon, or tomorrow, we
shall proceed to the vote. At that time, if there are dif..
fering proposals concerning the voting procedure, I shall
put them to the vote.
'

Former Italian eolonies: (a) reports of the United
Nations COlllbUssioner in Libya and (b) reports
0.£ the adniinistering Powe.rs.in Li.-bya: reports o.f
the Ad Hoc Politncal Committee (A/1457) and
the Fifth Committee (A/1509 and Corr.l)
[Agenda'item 21]
Mr. L6pe~ (Philippines), Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc
Political Committee, preslmted thfJ "eport of the Com1nittee and the accompanying draft re,solution (A/1457).
124. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
shall first ask· the General Assembly whether it wishes
to have a debate on this item of our agenda.
A v,'ote was taken by show of hands.
125. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Thirteen votes have been cast in favour and 24 against;
thus more than one-third 'of the members present and
'Voting 'have expressed the desire that a debate should
be held. I therefore call upon the first speaker on the
list, the representative of France.
126. Mr.PLAISANT (France) (translated from,
Frp.nch) : Since the General Assembly is called upon to
take a decision on the draft resolution approved by the'
Ad Hoc Political Committee after that organ had considered the report of the United Nations Comm~ssioner
in Libya [A/1340 rs and A/1405] and the reports of the
Administering Powers in Libya [A/1387 and A/1390
and Add.1], the. French delegation deems it necessary to
make its position clear.
127. As was recalled in the Ad 'Hoc Political Committ(~e by the representative of France, the French delegation was unable last year to support the recommendation concerning Libya [resolution 289 A (IV)]. It abstained, not because it objected to the principle set forth
in that recommendation-the establishment of an independent Libya-but because it felt that the methods prescribed by the General Assembly to give effect to that
principle failed to take sufficiently into consideration
the geographical, political and economic factors of the
problem: It drew the Assembly's.atten.tion to the di,sadvantages and even dangers. which might result from
the ~;nforcement of provisions inspired by the need t1,)
maintain stability and. Sf,>turity in an area whose development, like that of every other pat"t ()f the world,
should proceed smoothly and without hitches.
"
128. The new resolution suggested by the Ad Hoc
Political Committee, however, not only. 'confirms the
recommendations contained· in resolution· 289 A '(IV),
but goes even further. It lays down arbitrary lcules for
the achievement of the successive stages in which the
constitutional development of Libya is to take place, it
specifies further detaiis concerning that development
and the transfer of authority, and it thus strengthens the
already debatable provisions adopted last year and,
moreover, infringes upon the natural rights and prerogatives of the population.
~~

. IiSee Official Records of the GeneralAssemblYI Fifth Session,

SUPPlement No. IS.

-:Printedin U.S.A.

129. The reports of Mr. Pelt, United Nations Commissioner in Libya, and his statements to the Ad Hoc
Political Committee, have merely strengthened the conviction of the French delegation as to the controversial
nature of these provisions. The Commissioner emphasized on more than one occasion the difficulties with
which he would be faced, both 1n the political and in the
administrative, economic and fivancial fields, were. he
to enforce the recommendations made in 1949. In that
connexion I must quote at least the first of Mr. Pelt's
reports:
((Libya, like any other State, cannot base itsindependence on the mere constitutlc n ofa government.
If the new State is to acquire and maintain a stable
position in the family of nations, a properly organized
and competent administration with a carefully planned
budget, supported by a viable economy, is. no less
essential.
"None who havle read the preceding chapters will
be astonished if the Commissioner expresses the belief that the establishment of' an effective administration, a sound financial system, and a viable economy
offering the prospect of a gradually improving standard of life for the Libyan people, is certain to take
more time than the period set for the achievenlent of
Libyan independence."6
130. In the light of this report and of the facts of the
situation the French delegation was constrained to
make certain reservations in the Ad Hoc Political Committee with regard to the new recommendations. However, in order to dispel any doubts, I shall say at,once
that it does not intend tQ vote against the adoption.of
the draft re:I()!ution now before us. The French Government, which is bound by the obligation it assumed when
it signed the Treaty of Peace with Italy, and which is
always. anxious to play its part j,l]. furthering international co-operation, will accept the General Assembly's
recommendation: It will take the necessary measures, as
it did in the case of the resolution adopted in 1949, to '
implement that recommendation, without in any way
prejudging the results of the work of the Libyan national assembly. The French Government hopes that
that organ will be duly representative of the peoples concerned and will reflect the specific characteristics of the
three territories which make up Libya, because,. in the
final analysis, it is the aspirations and wishes of those
peoples that must determine the Libyan constitution,
which must in no circumstances be imposed from without.'
..
131. The French d~legation notes the statement made
by the Ad Floc Political Committee to the extent that no'
provision of the draft resolution was intended to have a
restrictive meaning, excluding certain. sections of the
population from equal participation . in the life of the
new State.'
132. In conclusion,' I wish to confirm, on behalf of my
delegation, that France, both as an administering Power
and through its representaitve on. the United Nations
Council for Libya, will abide by the General Assembly's
resolution and the wishes of the various peoples of
Libya as expressed in the future national assembly.

The meeti1zu rose at 1 p.m.
(\ Ibid., pages 36 and 37, paragraphs ·259 and 260.

A-:-40464-Decetnber 1950-3,700
