326th

, United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Friday, 15 Decemberl950, at 10.45

".m.

FIFTH SESSION
Flushing Meadow, New York

Official Records

t

It

JP'

CONTENTS
Page

Former Italian colonies': (f) report of the Interhn Committee of the General
Assembly on the procedure to be adopted to delimit the boundaries of the
former Italian colonies in so far as they are not already iPced by inter..
national agreement: report of the Ad Hoc Political Committee (Aj1723) 683
Palestine: (~) question of an international regime for the Jerusalem areaand'
.protection of the Holy Places: reports of the Ad I-Ioc Political Committee
(A/1724) and the Fifth Committee (Ajl?29) .•.•••.•••••..•..••••• 684
F'ormer Italian colonies: (a) report ·of the United Nations Commissioner in
Libya; (b) reports of the administering Powers in Libya .••••••.•.•.• 684Permaneut staff regulations of the United Nations: report of the Fifth Com..
mittee (A/1731)~
"'
686
e.. .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

Budget estimates for the financial year 1951: reports of the Fifth Committee.• 686
The problem of the independence of Korea. Plans for the relief and reluibilitation of Korea: membership of the Advisory Committee
687
President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEZAM (Iran).

Former Italian colonies: (/) rep~rt of the Interim
Committee of the General ASsembly on the procedure to be adopted to delimit the boundaries
of the former Italian colonies in eo far as they
. are not already fixed' by international agreement: report of the Ad Hoc Political Committee (A/1723)

regarding. the proc:edure to be adopted t9 delimit tp,e
boundaries of the former Italian colonies.
4. In explaining its vote, the Soviet Union delegation
deems it D,ecessary to point out certain fa~ts.
5. In the first place, the General Assembly ought llt~Z
to consider therepo:rt of the Interim Committee smce
that committee is nota legal organ of the United N;a..
tions, having been established in violation ·oi tlle
[AgenCa item 21]
Charter.
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
6. St.<:ondly, it. is contrary to the. Treaty of. Peace
put to the vote· the draft resolution .contained in the
with ..Italy for the. General Assembly . to consider the
report of the Ad Hoc Political Committee [Aj1723].
question of the ooundariesQf the £onrter Italian coIn..
The draft resolution -was adopted by 4~ voles to 5.· . nies, for that treaty provides that the adjustment of the
2. The PRESIDENT (translated fromPrench): I
boundaries of Italy's former territorial possessions in
call upon the representative of the Soviet Union, who
Africa is a matter which falls within the jurisdiction of
the four Powers. That provision is laid down clearly
wishes to expl&.in his vote.
in afinex:XI, paragraph 2 of the treaty, which reads:
3. Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Sodalist Re"The final disposal of the territories corlcerned and
pttblies) (translateG from Russian): The USSR deletheapprropriute adjusttnent of their boundariessha11
gation votf!dagainst the draft resolution of the Ad Hoc
be made by the four Powers in the lightoftbe wishes
Political Committee on the· Interim Committee reportt
and welfare of the inhabitants and the interests of
P:Rceand security, taldng into ~onsideration the
t See 0 t!icial Records Qf tht GeHWQI AssemblYI Fiftlt
Stssion~ Supplement No. 14.
VIews of other interested Governments."
AjPV.326

General Auemhly-FJlth Sel.lon-Plenary Meeting.
;

7. It is clear from thi8paragraph tlw.t ~e four Powers
have two tasks to perform, namely, to determine the
final disposal of the territories, and to make the appro-priate adjustment of their boundaries. Consequently,
under the tel1lls of the Treaty of Peace with Italy~ the
question of boundaries remains fully within the C01n~­
tence of th~ four Powers and the consideration of this
matter by the General Assembly is contrary to that
treaty.
8. Furthermore, it should be P9inted out that the
consideration of the question of Italy's former territorial possessions in Africa has shown that in settHng
this problem, there has been barpining among L~
colonial Powers to the detriment of the inte)'~ests of the
peoples of those territories.
9. The USSR delegation therefore voted against the
draft resolution sub"'\1itted by the Ad Hoc Political
Committee.

Former Italian colonies: (Cl) report of the United
Nationl. C.o.mmilSsioner in Lib.~a; (b) report. ~f
th" administering Powers in Libya
[Agenda item 21)
I. ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO
LIBYA: REFORTS' OF THE Ad Hoc POL.ITICAL COM"
MXTTEE

(A/1726)

(A/1730)

AND TI:I:$ FXFTIJ: COMMITTll:E

.

13. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
shall put the draft resolution contained in the report of
the Ad Hoc Political Committee [A/1726] to the vote.
14. The representative of the Soviet Union has asked
for the floor on a point of order.
.
15. Mr.. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated. 11'01'10 Russian): The question
of the teconomic and financial provisions relating to
Libya is of the utmost importance to the future development of, Libya as an independent State and to tbe
welfare of its peopXe.
Palestine: (a) que8fion of an inte.rDad.~na).regime
for the Jerusalem area. and p1'ol00tlol\\ of the .16. This·question concerns the disposal of the material
Holy Places: rep oris of the Ad Hoc 'E'ol1t1eal
assets of Ll:;Ja which, in accordance with the decision
Committee (A/1724) and the Fifth Cf.Jmmittee adopted by the General Assembly at its fourth session
(A/1729)
Jresolution 2'89 (IV)], is to become a soverei~ and
tndependent State not late!;' than 1 January 19...:.
[Agenda item 20]
17. The draft resolution submitted by the Acl Hoc
10. The PRESIDENT .(translat,d from ,French): I
Politic:al Committee bears on some .,rery important
am going to put the draft resolution contalned in the
questions of property upon which well considerled dereport of the Ad Hoc Political C()nunittee [A/.1724] to
cisions should be taken, as they may have ~ !ierious
the vote. A roll-call vote has been requeated.
effect on Libya's future development.' Yet th(~ draft
resolution on this serious question was not uubmitted
A vote was take1~ by roll-call.
to the Ad Hoc Political Committee for conlsideration
Costa Rica3 having been drawn by lot by the Presiuntil 12,December. For this reason the USSR delegcident, was called upon to vote first.
tion and, I am sure, a number of other delegations, have
unable to study all the provisions of this draft
In favour: Cuba, Dominican Republic,· Ecuador, been
which so seriously affects the interests of
resolution
Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Greece, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
the
Libyan
pe.ople.
.
Lebanon, Luxembourg, Pakistan, Panamar Paraguay,
18. The delegation of the Soviet Union consequently
Peru, Philippines,. Saudi Arabia, Syria, Veaezuela,
Yemen, Afghanistan, Argentina, Belgium, Bolivia, Bra- believes that the consideration of this question shoulG
be deferred until the General Assembly's sixth session.·
zil, Bunna, Chile, China, Colombia.
It therefore formally submits the following draft :resoAgainst.:. Denmark, Guater.lala, He nduras, Iceland, lution:
Israel, :Net.herlands, New Zeala.nd, Nir4ragua~ Norway,
ttThe General A$${!mbly
Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, Union Id South Africa,
United .Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ite, (~Decides to postpone f J.e di13cUssion of the question
land, United States of America, UrugtWy, Yugoslavia,
of the economic and fj.n~~.\'cial provisions relat~ng to
Australia.
Libya to its sixth session/'
19. The PRESIDE~T (trl!nsZa!edjrQ1J1t French).: I
Abstaining: . Costa Rica, Czechoslovakia, India,
put
the draft resolutIon .WQ1ch tl1eUSSR delegation
Mexico, Poland, Ut~ainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union 01. Soviet Socla~i$t Republicst Byelorulsian . has joust submitted to the vote.
.
Soviet Sociaiist Republi~~Canada.
The draft resolution 'was·,e!cltiJ(J'by 44· vdlei''tu 61
with
5 abstentions. .
.- ,
.
The reS'Ult of the vote was Sf) in favour, 18 against,
and 9a:bstenfions.
20. ~he PRESIDENT (translated· from French) : I·
am gOIng to put to the vote, in turn; the pre~mble and
The draft resolution was not adopt8dl having failed the operative part of draft resolution A, followed by
to olit. the r'equiretJ two·thirds majori/y.
draft r~solution Bt. of the Ad Hoc Political Conurdttee.
It Mr. TSARAPKIN (U~icn of Soviet Socialist
The preambl(Jof dfaft fes()lution A -was adoptled by
Repuhlics) : I wish to explain my vote.
46 vc~,s to 51 'WJth 2 abstentions. .
. .'.
The opwQtive I~art of draft resolufion A was ad(;,pted
12•. The PRESIDENT (translat8d from .Frlnch):
b'Y
47 votlS to 51 'with 2-abstentions.
.
There i$ nOfleed for delegations to e.~pmin their votes
on this draft resolution, as it failed to obtain the reDraft resolution B was adopted by 49 votes to 5, with
quired two-thirds majority arid was tht!refore rejected.
2 abstentions.

326th Meeting-IS December 1950

lited

18 of

'G TO
:OM-

TTEE

): I
rt of
vote.
sked

ialist
ition
~ to
de, the
~rial

sion
sion

and
Roe

tant
deious
lraft
tted
tion
~ga.

lave
raft
, of
lt1y
,uld
ion.
:so-

IOn

to

:I
ion

6,
:I
.nd
by
ee,

by
'ed

ith

21

Mr. DROHOJOWSKI (Poland): I wish I had

be~n allowed to speak on the draft resolution submitted

by the representatiye of .the Soviet ljnion on. the postponement of the dISCUSSIOn to the sIxth session of the
General Assembly. I should like at this time to explain
why I feel that the discussion should have been postponed.
22. I took part in two meetings of Sub-Committee 1
of the Ad Hoc Political Committee. I found myself confronted there with a number of very voluminous documents regarding the matter under discllssion. It was
only on 12 December that a report was submitted to
the Ad Hoc Political Committee. I found that the Committee had come to the end of its agenda and that we
were supposed to hurry up with a decision without a
proper discussion.
23. To my mind, this raises a very important question,
namely, that of discussions of important items on the
agenda at the last minute. This item' which has now
been voted upon is a very important one. \Ve are
deciding - the majority has decided - upon questions
pertaining to the econ?mic development of a State
which does not yet eXist. In other words, we have
spent other people's money. I feel that this procedure
was not quite proper, and I do not see any reason why
we should not have postponed the discussion until the
sixth session.
24. This brings up another point, which is that we
have adopted here a stream-lined procedure, a procedure which allows the majority to forbid the minority
to speak on an)' item.
25. May I call your attention to rule 67 of the rules
of procedure, which says: "Discussion of a report of a
Mail) Committee in a plenary meeting of th~ General
Assembly shall take place if at least one-tlurd of the
Members present and voting at the plenary meeting
consider such a discussion to be necessary ..." That is,
if there is not one-third desiring a discussion, there is
no discussion. That also has happened here already.
26. There is also rule 76 of the rules of procedure,
which says: <CA representative may at any time move
the closure of the debate on the item under discussion,
whether or not any other representative has signified
his wish to speak ..." This would completely prohibit
a discussion that the minority desired.
27. However, may I also call your attention to the
report of the Special Committee on Methods and Procedure of the General Assembly. I find there an explanation which I shall quote:
"The Special Committee believes that the adoption
of its recommendations will fully safeguard the rights
possessed by Members of the United Nations whether on a given question they belong to the
majority or the minority - to draw the General
Assembly's attention to problems within its competence, to express their views and to participate fully
in the adoption of resolutions on matters of which
the General Assembly has been seized. The sole
purpose of the Special Committee's recommendations
is to adapt the organization and procedures of the
General Assembly to its increasing responsibilities,
as the Special Committee believes that such adaptation is indispensable in order to enable the Assembly

685

to discharge its functions more effectively and expeditiously." 2

28. Returning to the item under consideration, it is
the feeling of my delegation that neither the Ad Hoc
Political Committee nor the Assembly had time to
examine an item which was of a very serious nature.
Sub-Committee 1 of the Committee produced a number
of documents. True enough, a report was made, even
though it was distributed only on 12 December. But
study of the implications of this report and of precedents
should have taken more time. Furthermore, while I see
the drawback in adopting this hasty draft resolution
which the majority has adopted, I do not see any drawback in postponing the discussion to the sixth session
of the General Assembly.
29. Mr. MORA OTERO (Uruguay) (translated
from S paHish): The Uruguayan delegation voted in
favour of resolution A adopted by the General Assembly
on economic and financial provisions relating to Libya,
it being understood that article V referred particularly
to fishing boats owned by the indigenous inhabitants of
Libya and with the reservation that neither that nor
any other provision of the resolution could be invoked
directly or indirectly to modify the legal relationship
existing between Italy and other States with regard to
other shipping.

30. RAAFAT Bey (Egypt) (t.yanslated from
F,'ctlch): I shall not speat( about the resolution or
about the request of the Soviet Union. I shall explain
my vote on the report we have just approved by a
large majority.
31. My delegation was privileged to take an active
and continuous part in drawing up the economic and
financial provisions relating to Libya of resolution A,
which the General Assembly has just adopted by a
very large majority.

32. During the discussions which took place on this
subject,S during the many meetings of Sub-Committee 1
of the Ad Hoc Political Committee, my delegation consistently championed tIle rights of Libya, our neighbour,
which has always been united to Egypt by countless
geographical, historical, cultural, religious and other
ties and whose interests we have therefore regarded as
bei~g in some sort our own. We defended those interests as zealously as we should have defended our own.
Our task was greatly facilitated by the remarkable
spirit of justice and understanding which prevailed in
the sub-committee from the very outset of the discussion.

33. My delegation never felt that the draft resolution
which was the outcome of the sub-committee's arduous
labours in any way neglected or sacrificed the interests
of the Libvan people. As I told the Committe~ yesterday, had ,~e bad the sli~htest doubt in that respect, we
should not have voted 111 favour of that draft, as we
did in the sub-committee, then, yesterday, in the Ad Hoc
Political Committee, and today in the Assembly.
2 See Official Records of the General Assembly, F01trth
S£'ssiol!, SlIpplemmt No. 12, page 3.
8 See Official Records of the Getle1'al Assembly, Fifth
Sessioll, Ad Hoc Political Committee, 7th to 17th and 81st and

821ld meetings inclusive.

686

General Assembly-Fifth Sessioll-Plenary Meetings

34. It was with some surprise that we heard it stated
yesterday in the Committee that the resolution would
protect the interests of foreigners in Libya, in other
words the Italians, to the detriment of the interests of
the Libyans themselves. In the first place, it is incorrect
to assume that in principle the interests of the Italian
nationals remaining in Libya will be opposed to the
interests of the other inhabitants of Libya. We by no
means share that view.
35. Like all countries which have recently achieved
independence, Libya will need foreign capital and labour
for some time to come. The Italian nationals who
remain there, if they adapt themselves to the new
circumstances, can make a valuable contribution to the
economic and social progress of the country. Some of
the provisions of resolution A, for example article VI
and article IX, paragraph 1, deal with that aspect of
the question, in the interests of the Italians and of
Libya itself. Furthermore, articles I to V, and even
article IX, paragraphs 2 and 3, of the resolution, clearly
show the direct and real advantages which Libya will
derive from these economic and financial provisions.
36. Undoubtedly the text is not above criticism, but
it is a step in the right direction and will contribute
greatly to the establishment of the Libyan State; it is
a step which could not have been postponed save at
the expense of the interests of that State itself.
37. Moreover, it is our hope and our belief that the
United Nations Tribunal, whose establishment is provided for in article X of the resolution, will ensure, both
by its decisions on matters in dispute and by its directions and instructions, that the economic and financial
clauses of the resolution are equitably implemented.
38. It was for those reasons that we voted for the
resolution.
39. Mr. NOSEK (Czechoslovakia): The Czechoslovak delegation supported the draft resolution submitted by the delegation of the USSR calling for the
postponement of the consideration of the economic and
financial provisions relating to Libya. This question is
far too important to be decided in a hurry by this
General Assembly. The people of Libya and the independent State of Libya to be created in the near future
are vitally interested in a reasonable and just solution.
At the same time, no damage will be caused if the
question is postponed to the next session of the General
Assembly. Therefore the Czechoslovak delegation voted
against the draft resolution submitted by the Ad Hoc
Political Committee, which it had not had enough time
to study.

n. TECHNICAL AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO LIBYA:

OF THE Ad Hoc POLITICAL COMMITTEE
(A/1727)
40. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
REPORT

On the question of Libya, the General Assembly also
has before it a second report of the Ad Hoc Political
Committee [A/1727], relating to technical and financial
assistance to Libya. I put to the vote the draft resolution on the question recommended by the Ad Hoc
Political Committee for adoption by the General
.
Assembly.

.The a,rajt resolution was adopted unanimously.

Permanent staff regulations of the United Nations:
report of the Fifth Committee (A/I73l)
[Agenda item 42]
41. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
put the draft resolution contained in the report of the
Fifth Committee [A/1731] to the vote.

The draft resolution was adopted unanimously.
Budget estimates for the financial year 1951:
reporls of the Fifth Committee
[Agenda item 39]

(b)

SALARY, ALLOWANCE AND LEAVE SYSTEM OF THE
UNITED NATIONS (A/1732)

42. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
May I draw the attention of the Assembly to the
an1endment [A/1733] to the draft resolution submitted
by the Fifth Committee [A/1732] ; the amendment has
been submitted by the delegations of Belgium, Brazil,
Chile, France and Peru. I shall put it to the vote first.

The result of the vote was 35 in favour, 11 against
and 3 abstentions.
The amendment was adopted, having obtained the
reqztired two-thirds majority.
The draft resolution of the Fifth Committee, as
amended, was adopted by 48 votes fa none, with 3
abstentions.
(a) BUDGET ESTIMATES PREPARED BY,THE SECRETARYGENERAL (A/1734)
43. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
put the first draft resolution contained in the report of
the Fifth Committee [A/1734] to the vote.
The first draft resohttion was adopted by 50 votes
to none, with 5 abstentions.
,
44. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
call upon the representative of the Soviet Union, who
wishes to e.,<:plain his vote.
45. Mr. KOBUSHKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The USSR
delegation abstained from the vote which has just been
taken on the resolution approving the budget for the
financial year 1951, because that budget provides for
appropriations for measures which are being carried
out in violation of the United Nations Charter.
46. The delegation of the Soviet Union pointed out,
during the discussion of these matters in the Committee,
that the United Nations Special Committee on the
Balkans, the United Nations Commission on Ko;ea,
the Collective Measures Committee, and the Umt~d
Nations Field Service had been set up despite and 111
violation of the Charter, and it also opposed any
appropriations for their maintenance.
47. Furthermore, it opposed any appropriations for
the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine and proposed the dissolution of that body, since, as
experience has shown, it has been unable to fulfil the
tasks entrusted to it in regard to the settlem~nt of
disputes outstanding between the parties in Palestme.
48. The delegation of the Soviet Union lik~wise objected to the appropriation of funds for the mamtenance

of the United 1\
refugees and fo
preparation of a
of refugees and
these measures i
and to keep the
been forcibly rer

49. Another r
stained from VI
year 1951 is th~
1951 budget ex,
propriations ap1=
Assembly for tt

50. My delega
of $36.6 millior
amply sufficient
Nations in 1951
the appropriatio
warranted by .
Nations.

51. The PRE
There are two n
[A/1734].
52.

I now put

The second dt

53. The PRE~
now put' the thi

The third drl
to none, 'with 5 c

The problem (

for the re
membershiI

54. The PRE:
would draw yo
the resolution Cl
rehabilitation oj
sembly on 1 I
stated that the
visory committc
and here a blanl
the Agent Gene
curement ... a
names of the 11
been proposed a

55. I now pri
order to compll
India, United 1

The proposal
6 abst'entions.

Printed in U.S.A.

326th M~15
December 1950
of the United Nations High Commissioner's Office for
refugees and for the expenditure connected with' the
preparation of a draft convention relating to the status
of refugees and stateless persons, since the purpose of
these measures is to prevent the repatriation of refugees
and to keep them in the countries to which they have
been forcibly removed~
49. Another reason why the USSR delegation abstained from voting on the budget for the financial
year 1951 is that the total amount ap,propriated in the
1951 budget exceeds by more than :ji4 million the ap:propriations approved at t4e last ~~ssion of the General
Assembly for the current financial year, that is, 1950.

50. My delegation is of the opiniGn that the amount
of $36.6 million budgeted for, 1950 would have been
amply sufficient to cover the nonnal work of the United
Nations in 1951. The USSR delegati.on considers that
the appropriations for 1951 are excessive and are not
warranted by the real requirements of the United
Nations.
51. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
There are two more draft resolutions in the same report

[A/1734].
52. I now put the second draft resolution to the vote.

The second draft resolution 'was adopted unanimously.
53. ' The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
noW" put the third draft resolution to the vote.

The third draft resolution was adopted by S4 votes
tonone with 5 abstent.ions.
l

The problem of the independence of Korea. Plans
for the relief and rehabilitalton of Korea:
membership of the Advisory Committee
54. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
would draw your attention to the following point. In
the resolution concerning the question of the relief and
rehabilitation of Korea, adopted by the General Assembly on 1 December 1950 [314th meeting]; it is
stated that the Assembly decides to establish u an advisory committee consisting of representatives of" and here a blank space was left in the text - Ut\) advise
the Agent General with regard to· major financial, procurement • " . and other eC'.)nomic problems . . .". The
names of the members of the committee should have·
been proposed at the tim,e and put to the vote.
55. I now propose the fpUowing five countries, ill
order to complete the teXt of the resolution: Canad&;
India, United KingrJom, United States and Uruguay.

The proposal was adopted by 53 votes to none, with
'6 absfentions.

Printed in U.S.A.

687

56. The PRESIDENT (translated from F1'Qnch): I
believe I may take the liberty of explaining that the
delegations which abstained did so not because they
were opposed to the suggested membership of the C('immittee, but because of the stand they had taken with
regard to the draft resolution as a whole.
57. We have now completed the consideration of the
agenda for the fifth session except for a few items
which still remain on the agenda of the First Com..
mittee. Accordingly, I must wait until the First Com..
mittee finishes its work before ~onvening a plenary
meeting of the General Assembly.
..
58. Mr. MALIK (Union of Sovi'et Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): When the work of
"the'First Committee was suddenly interrupted' in order
to place before the General Assembly a draft resolution
submitted by a number of delegations, it was'said that·
the Assembly would ,dispose of the draft very quickly.,
The representative of Turkey, I believe, even stated that
it would only take about half an hour. That failed to
elicit any comment from. the Chairman,of the First
Committee, Mr. Urdaneta Arbe1aez, and it was apparently our intention to return to our work in the
First Committee without delay. We failed to do so,
either today or yesterday after the General Assembly
had adopted the draft resolution of the First Cowmittee.
59. Yet the1:e art still four most important items on
the ageno(). !)f the First Committee. There is, first,- the
question submitted by the United States and some oth~r
d~legations, which we have not finished considering"
Then. there is the question of United States aggression
against China -,- a most serio1.1s matter, the discussion
of which haS b~en quite unjustifiably postponed 111any
times. Then there is the question of the bom.bing of
Chinese territory by the United States Air. Force a most serious and important matter, the consideration
of which has also been postponed many times. Finally,
there is the question' of FOr1l1osa, submitted by the
United States delegation..
.
60. It is therefore desirable that the First Committee
should resume its work without delay.
61.. The PRESIDENT (translated ft;om French): I
belteve that all the members of the General Assembly
would like to see the First C,1mmittee finish its w01."k
at the earliest possible momevt: If difficulties should
arise or negotiations become n.cceSsary. tlie question
might be settled by the General ComrrJttee. I intend
to convene a meeting of the General COlninittee within
the next few days, with regard to the date oftlle closure
of this session of the General Assembly. I cannot, bowever, make any suggestions until I have consulted the
General Committee of the General Assembly.

The meeii'lrJg rose at 12.10 p.tn.
'Ibid., First COfflmitteel 415th meeting.

A-40464-Apri11951-3,600
