UNITEDNATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
UN LiWiRY

THIRTY-FIFTH

APR2 2 I988

YEAR

UN/ui

2220”

MEETING:

COLLECTIQN

30 APRIL 1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2220) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980 from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13855) . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

SIPV.2220’

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1%4, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2220th

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 30 April 1980, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Porlirio MUROZ LED0 (Mexico).

Present: The renresentatives of the followina States:
Bangladesh, Chha, France, German Deiocratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philip
pines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2220)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980 from the Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13855)
The meeting

was called to order at 5.15 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980from the Acting Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March MO from the Chairman of
the Committee of the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the PalestMan People addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/13855)

Arab Emirates, Viet Nam and Yugoslavia to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote and I invite
the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and
the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take seats at the Council table.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Bedjaoui
(Algeria),
Mr. Al-Sear
(Bahrain),
Mr.
Yankov
(Bulgaria), Mr. Roa-Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Douglas (Guyana), Mr. B. C. Mishra
(India), Mr. Bafi (Iraq), Mr. Blum (Israel), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan), Mr. TuCni (Lebanon), Mr. Rabetafika
(Madagascar),
Mr. Ayachi (Morocco),
Mr. Jamal
(Qatar), Mr. Allagany
(Saudi Arabia), Mr. Adan
(Somalia),
Mr. Mansouri
(Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Lipatov (Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic),
Mr. Humaidan
(United Arab Emirates), Mr. Ha Van
L.au (Viet Nam) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber and Mr. Kane (Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization)
took places at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I should now like to inform the members of the Council that I have received a letter from the representative
of Democratic Yemen in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
that representative to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Ashtal
(Democratic
Yemen) took the place reserved for him
at the side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The first speaker is the representative of Bulgaria.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

1. The PRESIDENT finferoretation from SoanishJ:
In accordance with thk decisions t&en at previo&
4. Mr. YANKOV (Bulgaria): Mr. President, I should
meetings [220&h, 2205th, 2207th, 2208th and 2219th
like at the outset to express the satisfaction of my
meetings], I invite the representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Bulgaria, Cuba, Egypt, Guyana, India, Iraq,
delegation at your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month and to wish you success in
Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Madagascar, Morocco,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, the Syrian Arab Repubthe discharge of your important duties, especially at the
lic, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, the United
end of your term of office today. I am pleased to note
:
1

.i

+

that your wide experience as a statesman and your
outstanding abilities as a diplomat have, indeed, contributed to making the work of the Council constructive and fruitful. I should like also to express the
gratitude of my delegation for the opportunity accorded
to us to participate in the discussion and to put on
record the position of the Government of the People’s
Republic of Bulgaria on the question of the exercise of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
5. My delegation has been following closely the
present deliberations of the Council focused on the
report of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People1 and on its
recommendations. The Council has had ample opportunity to consider this issue on various occasions in
the past. Taking into account the wide recognition of
the imprescriptible rights of the Arab people of
Palestine to self-determination and independence,
including the right to establish their own State, and
also the prevailing conviction that the recognition
and realization of those rights is indeed the key to the
achievement of a comprehensive, durable and fair
settlement of the whole Middle East crisis, the Council
is now called upon to adopt practical measures aimed
at resolving the issue on the basis of the recommendations set forth in the report of the Committee. In the
light of the extremely critical evolution of the
Middle East situation and the continued denial by
Israel of the rights of the Palestinians, the elaboration
and implementation of such measures assumes an
increasingly urgent nature.
6. It is the considered opinion of my delegation that
the Middle East continues to be one of the most
dangerous hotbeds of tension, fraught with dangers
for peace and security. The situation is rendered all
the more complicated and explosive by the separate
Camp David accords. The overall deterioration of
the situation which ensued in the aftermath of those
accords, as well as more recent events in the Middle
East, have furnished new evidence which has further
substantiated our conviction that the separate deal
between Israel and Egypt under the sponsorship of
the United States does not lead to peace but to still
further aggravation and inflammation of the conflict.
Attempts to settle the fate of the Palestinian people
without their participation have so far yielded no
positive results whatsoever. As the President of the
State Council of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria,
Todor Zhivkov, said during his recent visit to the
Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
“The People’s Republic of Bulgaria, together with
all progressive and democratic forces in the Arab
world, flatly rejects the separate deal between
* Israel and Egypt, including their talks on so-called
administrative autonomy for the Palestinians and
the so-called normalization of relations between
Egypt and Israel.”
This basic position was reiterated only a few days ago
by the President of the State Council, during his
oflicial visit to the Syrian Arab Republic.

7. The explanation behind those United Statessponsored moves is very simple. They represent a ’
conspiracy against the interests of the Arab countries
and an attempt to undermine their unity. Obviously,
they are designed to allow further procrastination
and to raise artificial impediments to the achievement
of a lasting and equitable peace in the Middle East,
as well as to perpetuate the illegal occupation and
colonization of the Israeli-occupied Arab territories,
in contravention of international law and all relevant
decisions and resolutions of the United Nations,
including those of the Security Council.
8. The continued insistence of the Government of
Israel on going.ahead with its own plans to establish
new Jewish settlements in the occupied West Bank
and its ongoing violations of the status of Jerusalem,
as well as the aggressive acts against Lebanon and the
United Nations forces in Lebanon, are a complete
confirmation of the truth that pursuit of the road of
separate talks, tempting as it may appear, can only
fan the smouldering conflict, hinder the just cause of
the Arab people and postpone indefinitely the prospects for a comprehensive settlement of the Middle
East problem. It is our view that the Camp David
agreements and the rapidly developing Egypt-United
States-Israel alliance are heading precisely in this
direction, despite the efforts of those countries to
convince the world of their successful outcome.
9. With regard to this, I should like to reiterate the
firm conviction of my Government that the establishment of a truly just and lasting peace in the Middle
East necessitates, above all, the complete and unconditional withdrawal of Israeli troops from all Arab
lands occupied since 1967, the realization and the
exercise by the Arab people of Palestine of their
legitimate and indisputable rights, including the
right to self-determination, to the creation of their own
sovereign State under the leadership of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the sole legitimate representative of the Arab people of Palestine, and theguaranteeing of the independent existence and national
security of all countries in the region.
10. It is the hope of my delegation that it is precisely
in this spirit that the members of the Council will
endeavour to work out their decisions, decisions that
will best serve the interests of all countries in the
region and the interests of peace, security and cooperation in the whole world.
11. The PRESIDENT (inrerprefutionfium
Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Democratic
Yemen. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
12. Mr. ASHTAL (Democratic Yemen): Sir, on this,
the last day of your presidency of the Council, I have
every reason to commend you for your vitality as
well as your distinguished leadership. You represent
a friendly country whose revolutionary tradition and
2

respect for the rights of-peoples are matched only by
its dedication to theideals of liberty, peace and justice.
Your predecessor, Ambassador Mills of Jamaica, was
equally successful, thanks to his diplomatic elegance
and intellectual depth.

its main ally, the United States Government. .Having
lost ground in the United Nations, the United States
Government sought to circumvent that international
consensus by disregarding it, while at the same time
undermining it through extra-international manoeuvres
and arrangements.
..
-17. The ill-fated Camp David affair. was to be a
framework for peace .in the Middle East, and it
ostentatiously purported to solve the Palestine problem
as well. The results, however, came only too soon:
first, a bilateral Egyptian-Israeli deal, according to
which Egypt would regain its nominal sovereignty
over a demilitarized Sinai and Israel would be
guaranteed military superiority over Egypt, thus
enabling Israel to be even more intransigent; and,
secondly, talks on Palestinian autonomy that neither
involve Palestinians nor secure so-called automony,
let alone Palestinian national independence and
statehood.

.13. A few weeks ago the Council adopted a’resolution categorically condemning the illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied territories. It was not without
significance that the United States Government
retracted its vote under heavy-Zionist pressure. Be that
as it may, those creeping settlements clearly demonstrate the aggressive nature of a Zionist State bent
on expansionism. Since its inception, Israel has shown
the world a model of a racist settler State with unlimited territorial ambitions. For the Palestinians, those
settlements represent but one” episode in a painful
tragedy; for they have been denied not only their
elementary human rights, but indeed their very
national existence.
14. Ironically, the United Nations was primarily
involved in the Palestinian tragedy when the General
Assembly decided, in 1947, to legitimize the Zionist
usurpation of Palestine. That infamous decision was
taken at a time when the Assembly, then consisting
of some SO States, was subjected to imperialist
pressure and blackmail. Ever since, the United States
Government has sustained Israel by providing it with
not only the means of survival but-the military capacity
to wage aggressive wars-the Iast of which was its
invasion of southern Lebanon. Emboldened by
United States political support, as well, Israel feels
secure enough to flout the Charter, ignore United
Nations resolutions and disregard world public
opinion.
._
15. But times have changed since the imperialist
Powers could bully the General Assembly and
impose their will. Gone are the days when the peoples
of Africa, Asia and Latin America languished under
the yoke of colonialism. Twenty-seven years later,
the Assembly, representing virtually all nations, in a
historic moment of international redemption, adopted
resolution 3236 (XXIX), recognizing the inalienable
‘rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
national independence and statehood in Palestine.
The Assembly also recognized the Palestine Liberatlon
Organization as the sole and authentic representative
of the Palestinian people, thanks to its unrelenting
struggle to resist Zionist occupation of its motherland.
Subsequently, at its thirtieth session, the Assembly
established the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Bights of the Palestinian People, which
first presented its recommendations in 1976, reaffirming the right of the Palestinians to selfdetermination, national independence and sovereignty in Palestine, including their right to create their
own independent State and the right to recover their
property and their homes.

18. It was no accident that the Camp David accords
were concluded at a time when the Shah of Iran was
tumbling from his peacock throne. The United States
had to find an alternative to serve its interests in the
region. It , needed a staging board to arrest the
revolutionary tide in the Middle East and Africa.
The Camp David accords and the Washington treaty
pr0vided.a geopolitical substitute for the loss of Iran
-nothing more. They are irrelevant to the Palestine
problem, which is the core of the conflict in the
Middle East.
19. Now the Camp David affair is winding up in
exploratory talks intended for internal consumption
and election politics here and there. But the United
States, which had hoped to re-enter the Middle East
arena in a big way, is now emphatically being asked
to stay away from our region-thanks to the unified
Arab stand forged at Baghdad and Tunis.
4
20. As for the Palestinian people, their just cause is
being espoused by the whole international community.
Even the allies of the United States are wisely keeping
their distance from the Camp David fiasco. They only
have to be more forthcoming in asserting their independence.
21. Attempts are being made to divert public opinion
from the deteriorating situation in the Middle East, but
they have been fruitless. The Palestine problem
remains at the heart of the conflict in the Middle East,
threatening international peace and security.
22. The Security Council cannot indefinitely ignore
the international consensus on Palestine. Four million
Palestinians are now waiting for the Council to recognize their inalienable right to self-determination,
national independence and statehood. Not only that:
they are expecting this august body to enforce the
international consensus so that they may be able to
take their place among the nations.

16. That international consensus in support of the
Palestinian people was, denounced by Israel and by
3

23. The PRESIDENT (interpreration fvom Sphzish):
The next speaker is the representative ofrhe Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement. .
24. Mr. LIPATOV (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (interpretation
from Russian): Mr. President, allow me first to express gratitude to you and
to all the other members of the Council for having
given our delegation the opportunity to participate
in the discussion of such an important item as the
question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of
its inalienable, rights. We should like to join in the
expression of congratulations to you made by previous
speakers in connection with your assumption of the
responsible duties of the presidency of the Council
for this month.

to find an objective.Lnd just%mlutibn to that problem.
In partic-ular, they :reaffirm:p-tovisions which are of
vital concern to the Palestinian ,people, such as their
inalienable right to self-determination, national independence and sovereignty in Palestine, including the
creation of their own independent State, and the right
of the Palestinians to return to their homes and their
lands. In its recommendations, the Committee likewise recalled the basic principle of the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force and emphasized the need for the withdrawal of Israeli troops
from all Arab territories occupied in 1967.
29. All these recommendations should be implemented. without delay because the ruling circles in
Israel not only are continuing mos1flagrantly to violate
the inalienable national rights of the Palestinians but
are hatching schemes with a view to liquidating the
Arab people. of Palestine.

25. As a member of the Committee .on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic supported the
initiative for the convening of an urgent meeting of
the Council, so that it could finally adopt practical
‘measures to give effect to the Committee’s recommendations aimed at enabling the Arab people of Palestine to exercise their inalienable rights.

30. During the debate in the Council, it has been
noted several times that the aggressive aspirations of
Israel have been considerably. intensified since
the Camp David deal and the conclusion of the separate
Egyptian-Israeli treaty under the aegis of and with the
active participation of the United States. Such actions
,can only be evaluated.as an attempt to legitimize the
presence of an aggressor on foreign territory expropriated by force of arms. That evaluation is borne out,
in particular, by the negotiations which have continued
for many months on so-called administrative autonomy
for the Palestinians residing in the West Bank and
Gaza.

26; The question of the exercise by the Palestinian
‘people of its inalienable rights is not a new item for
the Council. It took that question up ins 1977 and in
.I979 but, because of the negative position of the
United States, which gave active, support to the
expansionist policy of Israel, the Council was unfortunately not able to take a decision on the question.

31. It is quite obvious that attempts to resolve the
problem of the Palestinian people in a manner inconsistent with the interests of its representatives and
-without its participation are doomed to failure. That
appears to be recognized now throughout the world
by everyone, with. the exception of Israel and its
protector, the,Uaited States..

27: It is generally recognized that at the present time
the question of Palestine is the core of the Middle East
conflict. Unless a cardinal solution is found, ajust and
lasting settlement in the Middle East is impossible,
and without such a settlement there can be no peace
in the region. Consequently, international security
and peace will continue to be under a real threat
32. Israel’s aim is to hang on to the Palestinian
for which the Council bears direct responsibility. That
lands it has occupied under. the. cover of a so-called
has been reaffirmed repeatedly by the General As- administrative autonomy, and that aim cannot be
sembly and in other international forums., including
masked by any manoeuvring or hypocritical statethe Conference of Heads of State or Government of
ments endlessly repeated by the parties to the separate
Non-Aligned Countries, held in Havana last year. That
talks.
Conference quite definitely stated that, if the Council
was unable to take a decision on the question of the 33. It is our profound conviction that the Palestinian
problem cannot be resolved by a separate deal, such
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people because of
the absence of unanimity among the permanent mem- as that which has been attempted behind the backs of
the Arab people of Palestine. The only just solution
bers, a special emergency session of the General
Assembly would then have to be convened.
to that problem is the satisfaction of the inalienable
‘
rights of the Palestinian people, including its right to
28. To our mind, it is inadmissible for the Security
self-determination and the creation of its own independent State, within a.comprehensive political settle,Council further to disregard the recommendations of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
ment in the Middle East, with the participation on an
Rights of the Palestinian People, which were drawn up -equal footing of all the parties concerned, including
and unanimously adopted by that Committee back in
the Palestine Liberation Organization as the sole
1976 with due regard for the relevant decisions of the authentic representative of the Palestinian people.
That is precisely. the thrust of the recommendations of
Council and the General Assembly. The recommendations contain concrete proposals for ways and means the-Committee.
4

38. In regard to Jerusalem, the occupying Israeli
Government took a more drastic and defiant position.
Shortly after-.the military invasion in 1967, it declared
the annexation of Arab Jerusalem to Israel. When
I call it Arab Jerusalem, as .distinct from Jewish
Jerusalem, I am only referring to the de fucfo lines
dictated by Israel in the 1949 Armistice Agreements.
Those arbitrary lines absorbed about 10 exclusively
Arab quarters whose inhabitants were driven out,
their properties being placed under the jurisdiction of
the so-called Custodian of Absentees’ Property. The
Arab houses were given by the custodian to .Jewish
immigrants, mostly with the Arab furniture left behind,
and those quarters became part of Israeli Jerusalem.
The “creation” of facts through sheer force had paid
off in the -past and Israel was determined to follow
the same pattern in 1967and the following years. This
time, however, the world community began to see
through the Israeli deception, despite the intense
barrage of Israeli propaganda and falsehoods. At an
emergency special session in that year, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 2253 (ES-V) by 99 votes
to none, with 20 abstentions, declaring the Israeli
annexation measures invalid, and calling upon Israel
to rescind all measures already taken and to desist
forthwith from taking any action which would alter
the status of Jerusalem. The incredible response to
that resolution by the then Israeli Minister for Foreign
Affairs and the Israeli Minister for Labour was that
“the world must reconcile itself to the permanency of
the annexation”. On 21 May 1968, the Security Council adopted resolution 252 (1968) in which it recalled
resolution 2253 (ES-V) and reaffirmed that the acquisition of territory by military conquest was inadmissible. It also deplored Israel’s failure to comply with
the General Assembly resolutions and considered that
all legislative and administrative measures and actions
taken by Israel, including the expropriation of land
and properties in Jerusalem which tended to change
the legal status of Jerusalem, were invalid and could
not change that status. The Council again called upon
Israel to rescind all such measures already taken and
to desist forthwith from taking any further action
which tended to change the status of Jerusalem.

34. We express the~hope-that the Security Council,
which in accordance,>with the Charter was invested
with the appropriate competence and powers, will
finally take the stepsnecessary to settle the Palestinian
problem on a peaceful and just basis.
35. The PRESIDENT~interp~ezarionfrom Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
36. Mr. ALLAGANY (Saudi Arabia): To begin with,
I wish to express my delegation’s deep appreciation
and commendation to the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and
to its Chairman for the Committee’s thorough and
objective report, which has left no doubt regarding the
formidable plight of the Palestinian people under
IsraeI’s yoke ofoccupation-Israel which has violated
and continues to violate the basic principles of human
rights, including the right of self-determination.
37. Ever since 1949, the Israeli Government and its
Zionist agents have been harping on the tune that
Israel has no territorial ambitions and has merely
been interested in securing a peaceful coexistence with
the Arabs in which each party would respect the teni,torial integrity of the other. From time to time, however, some of the more outspoken Israeli leaders have
let it be known in public pronouncements that their
Government will never withdraw from parts of the
occupied territories. Those belligerent pronounce.ments of intent were sometimes based on the alleged
security needs of Israel, but, realizing that that would
not provide sufficient credibility, their authors sometimes invoked historical and religious grounds for
considering the occupied territories as theirs on the
basis of a covenant from God. The individual pronouncements by public Israeli figures appeared to
embarrass the Israeli Government since they betrayed
the true but hidden aggressive Israeli designs, which
Israel has preferred to accomplish through its
notorious and fiendish policy of “creating” facts.
That policy had helped the Israeli politicians in the
past and they saw no reason why, with the support of
their staunch friends in the West, it should not continue
to help them in the future. On 10 August 1967,
General Moshe Dayan made a statement reported in
The Jerusalem Post of the same date wherein he
said that people must realize that “the mountain
range west of the Jordan lies at the heart of Jewish
history*‘, and that

39. Israel continued to ignore the recurrent and
repeated resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council regarding Jerusalem, the whole of the
West Bank and Gaza. I am limiting myself to the PaIestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967
because the subject before the Council is the question
of Palestineand the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. With utter defiance and contempt for the
Organization to which it owed its very existence,
Israel proceeded to expropriate and/or confiscate
land and to build new Jewish homes and settlements
for militant, aggressive and fanatic Jews, changing
de facto the status of the occupied Palestinian Arab
territories with the clear intention of “creating” more
facts and forestalling any future attempts to implement
Council resolution 242 (1967). One cannot overlook
the fact that Israel could not have pursued such

“if you have the Book of the Bible, and the People
of the Book, then you also have the Land of the
Bible-of the Judges and of the Patriarchs in
Jerusalem, Hebron, Jericho and thereabouts. On
no account will we force ourselves to leave. ,This
may not be a political programme, but it is more
important-it is the fulfilment of a people’s ancestral
dreams.”
5
..
‘.

,.. ‘.. .-.

.,

:.

aggressive and illegal measures were it not for the
direct and indirect support of its friends in the Council, support that has rendered all those repeated
resolutions ineffective.

seeking community. Time h’as:shown that Israel is the
persecutor and oppressor and that peace is not its
real objective. The Israeli leaders seem to have built
around them a fortress capable- of repelling world
opinion and world criticism. Indeed, Israel has become
the prisoner of its aggressive, insensitive, inhuman,
rigid and inflexible racist mentality. It seems to relish
and bask in the status of isolation and combat with
the world community, The Israelis claim that these
are precautions which they have to take for their
security, knowing very well that it is not their security
that has been or is currently in jeopardy. On the
contrary, it is the security of the neighbouring Arab
countries and the very existence and future of the
Palestinian people that are in grave jeopardy.

40. Now we hope it has become more obvious, even
to the closest of Israel’s supporters, that it was not
peace that Israel was interested in but territorial
expansion, aggrandizement, annexation and the
calculated change of the physical character, demographic composition and institutional structure of the
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem. To those who know, the security needs of
Israel are not a factor but a convenient tool used to
deceive and win the support of-an influential segment
of the Western, and particularly American, public
and Israel’s supporters in the United States Congress.
The Camp David accords, given so much fanfare by
certain circles, did. not even attempt to curb Israel’s
voracious appetite for territory. The .Palestinian people, who were the direct victims of the Jews of
Palestine and the international Zionist movement in
the process of the creation of a Jewish State in Arab
lands, were totally ignored, and Israel succeeded by
political pressures and devious manceuvres in
excluding them, by excluding their legitimate representatives, from participation in the so-called peace
process. The Palestinian Arabs, like the Palestinian
Jews, were under a British Mandate awarded to
Britain to prepare the country for independence.
When Britain ended its Mandate in May 1948, the
Jews declared themselves an independent sovereign
State on Arab lands evacuated by their population,
which constituted two thirds of the population of
Palestine. Instead of statehood, the Palestinian Arabs
were doomed to exile and to living in refugee camps
for over 30 years. According to Israeli arguments,
now the Palestinian Arabs can only be granted selfrule, not self-determination, or what it calls sover&gnty of the people, not sovereignty of the land. This,
is a new theory of self-determination conceived by
Israel and its supporters which has no precedent or
basis in international law, but which, accordingto Time
magazine of 14 April, the Israeli Professor Yacob
Talmon rightly called “an archaic concept, a trick to
shut the Gentile’s mouth”.

43. Even the leading American press, which has a
tradition of supporting Israel, has begun to feel embarrassed by Israel’s loss of credibility in speaking
peace and practising aggression. On 12 February
1980, The Washington Post published an editorial
under the title “The price of West Bank settlements”,
in which it pointed out that the movement of Jews
into the West Bank was the patented formula for
further trouble. It went on to state:
some Israelis still try to treat Jewish settlement in the West Bank as an issue with two sides:
so let us argue it out, but meanwhile let us not
allow it to get in the way of more important questions. But you have to be pretty stupid to swallow
that line. There is no more important question.
Jewish settlements are regarded everywhere-and
most of all by the settlers themselves-as Israel’s
way to establish its permanent control, leading
eventually to outright annexation. The settlements
undercut Israel’s pledge to leave open to negotiation, one in which the Palestinians who live there
would take part, the ‘final status’ of the West Bank;”
“

.

.

.

The editorial continued:
further criticism of Israel on this issue is
pointless. So is wrist-slapping. More direct tactics
are called for. Why not put a measurable value on
the settlements and let Israel decide whether it
wants to forfeit that much.from its American aid?”
6‘

.

41. Of course, Israel intends to retain sovereignty
over the land, so as to enable it gradually and illegally
to usurp more Arab lands and to replace the Arab
population by transplanting Jews, thereby accomplishing the Israeli plan of annexing the West Bank,
which Israel already calls Judaea and Samaria.

.

.

44. On 13 February 1980, The New York Times
published an editorial in which it warned that while- it
returned the Sinai to Egypt, Israel was moving by
stages to annex the West Bank. It suggested that the
Israeli people had been frightened by pretexts of
“security” into supporting the extreme Zionist dream
of a minority of their fellow citizens. It stated that
Egypt had been disarmed by the Sinai transaction and
enormous amounts of American aid, and that the
American President was judged helpless to resist,
especially in an election year focused on confrontation
with the Russians. The editorial continued:

42. As I have already stated, the deceptive Israeli
quest for peace is not and never has been genuine.
Israeli and Zionist leaders have used it for so long that
they have now lost their credibility, and the world
community, including Israel’s close supporters, does
not believe them any longer. They have played too
long on the Western conscience by portraying Israel
as a persecuted and harassed peace-loving and peace-

“Under the cover of the Camp David accords and
East-West tensions, Israel continues to change the
6

legal and demographic conditions in the West Bank.
By one ruse after another, Jews are encroaching
upon the region’s ,Arabs, adding to the ‘archaeological’ and ‘army’ camps with newly requisitioned or
purchased rural lands and now with claims to
ancestral homes inside hostile Arab cities.”

a state of war existed between Jordan and Israel. There
is no mystery there, and that was.not aimed at Jews
as such. A state of war existed between Israel and
Jordan and neither country admitted the nationals of
the other.
47. But Israel has denied and continues to this day
to deny access to Islamic Holy Places to the nationals
of all Arab and Islamic countries, on the pretext
that it has no diplomatic relations with those countries. Palestinian Arabs are only allowed to travel to
visit their families who live under Israeli occupation
after they have been carefully screened and granted
permission by the Israeli military authorities. Many
of them are denied permission to visit and many
others are allowed in to face arrest and arbitrary
administrative detention. Yet Israel claims, with
incredible audacity, that by its so-called unification
of Jerusalem it has guaranteed free access to the
Holy Places to people of all faiths.

The New York Times editorial went on to describe the
devious Israeli procedures as follows:
“As in the latest move into urban Hebron, the
Israelis are careful never to create a clear focus for
objection. New policies are adopted, but not immediately acted upon; new rules are labelled tentative, then kept indefinitely; laws are observed,
but then bent out of shape. The move into Hebron
was widely justified as retaliation for the murder
there of a young Israeli; no one seemed to care that
this demeaned the historical rights of settlement so
heatedly claimed at other times. With every new
step, a few more Israelis are exposed to terror and
Arab hatred. They then need more protection from
the army, more settlers to enhance security, more
restrictions on the surrounding Arab life. The
tentacles spread.”

48. My Government does not and will not accept this
aberration and insists that Jerusalem, as well as all the
other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
be relinquished to their Arab owners, so that they may
freely choose their own form of government without
any interference from Israeli or any outside authority.
The Palestinian Arabs are no less capable of ruling
themselves than the Israelis and, in fact, they have
displayed a far greater sense of international responsibility and respect for human rights than have the
Israelis, by any standards. The Palestinian Arabs have
been struggling for the liberation of their country
against a ruthless enemy which has denied them
not only the right of self-determination but even the
right to exist.

The editorial concluded as follows:
“Israel’s defence of creeping annexation is no
longer persuasive. The cries of ‘security’ ring
hollow when Arab hostility is knowingly provoked
and when the Israeli Army is left to cope with
increasingly vulnerable outposts. The view that
Camp David did not forbid settlements does not
make them right. They offend the spirit of the
‘autonomy’ promised to the Palestinians.”
45. With regard to the status of Jerusalem, the
Israeli Government resorted to a different apologia:
they had to annex the eastern sector of Jerusalem and
keep it within a so-called undivided Jerusalem
because that was the only way they would secure
Jewish access to the Western Wall within the Old City
and that would also guarantee access to the holy
shrines for the Christian and Moslem peoples of the
world.

49. Israel has based its policy on the racist concept
of a superior and an inferior race. The killing of an
Israeli is an unforgivable crime, but terrorism by the
Israeli Government against masses of civilian AraBs
and the massacre of women and children by the use
of the most devastating ‘weapons is a defence of
democracy and liberty.
”

50. My Government firmly believes that the world
community has tolerated more than enough of
46. Israel argues that, under Arab rule, Jews were
Israel’s procrastination, intransigence, defiance of
denied access to the Old City and the Western Wall, .the United Nations, of the Geneva Convention and of
whereas since 1967 Israel has allowed such access world public opinion and, above all, its denial of the
to all Moslems. That is an entirely false, deceptive
human rights, including the right of self-determination,
and misleading distortion of the facts. Throughout
of a nation which has had a greater share of suffering
Arab and Islamic rule, Jews have never been denied than any other in recent memory.
access to the City of Jerusalem or to- the Western
Wall. For centuries travel and worship were freely
51. The Palestinian Arabs were entitled to indeopen to members of all religious faiths and denominapendence and the right to choose their own govemment at the termination of the Palestine Mandate.
tions. In fact, the- Jewish Quarter in the Old City
was built during Arab rule, and ‘the Arabs provided
Israel cannot, on pretexts of security and so-called
shelter to Jews who had escaped Western persecution.
historical and religious roots, decide to deny this
The only period during which access to the eastern inherent and natural right of self-determination and
section of Jerusalem was denied to Israeli Jews was sovereignty to the Palestinian people in the small
portion of Palestine which escaped the land grabs of
during the short period between 1949 and 1967 when
7

1948 and 1949. The Zionist leaders of: Israel- must
come. to their senses and realize that. they cannot
place themselves above the precepts of international
law, that they are not a super-race which can deny to
others what it has allowed to itself. They have
arrogantly proceeded on the premise that they are the
only democratic peace-loving country in the Middle
East, while the Palestine Arabs are possessed by the
demon of hate and violence. This cannot fool anyone
any more. They must realize that arrogance and the
resort to sheer force will sooner or later-and probably
much sooner-lead the whole region into an uncontrollable situation the consequences of which even
mighty Israel cannot escape. Let Israel remember that
those who live by the sword will perish by the sword.
There can never be peace in the area unless and until
the Palestinians enjoy full and undiminished selfdetermination coupIed with complete and unmitigated
sovereignty over the regions of the West Bank and
Gaza, including Jerusalem.
52. There is no such thing under the Charter or
under the International Covenants on Human Rights
as self-determination for the people independently
of the land on which they live. Again Israel arrogates
to itself the right to lay down new concepts of international law, as though it were the law-giver of this
universe. The Palestinian people are the party directly
concerned in the Palestine issue and their problem is
the core of the problem in the Middle East. The
sooner Israel and its supporters realize this; the better
it will be for all the parties concerned, for the world
at large and no less for the Israelis themselves. If
Israel wants real peace, it must change its mentality
and place itself on a peace course, instead of the
grave and ominous collision course on which it is
currently proceeding.

berserk. These acts of heightened Zionist terrorism
have been indiscriminately -directed against a wholly
unarmed people, victim of over 13 years of occupation
which have turned the hallowed soil of occupied
Palestine into Orwell’s Animal.Farm.
56. Spearheading these acts of terrorist assault is the
Gush -Emunim -dehumanized movement, whose
spiritual fathers are no lesser terrorists than Menachem
Begin, Borg, Shamir and their like. They evidently
cannot overcome their deep-rooted terrorist behaviour
and have a compulsive penchant to return to it when
acting against valiant but unarmed civibans in various
towns and villages throughout the occupied territories.
The following are just examples of what has been
happening, events which have received the scantiest
of coverage.
57. The twin towns of Ramallah and Bireh, to the
north of Jerusalem-Ramallah, incidentaIly, even
though we make no distinctions whatsoever, is an overwhelmingly Palestinian Christian Arab town whose
inhabitants have quite a substantial number of relatives
of American citizenship since the .tum of the last
century-were the target of a savage attack by IsraeIi
colonists at 1.30 a.m. in the dawn of 24 April, during
which attack the windows of numerous houses and
shops were smashed by iron-bar-wielding hooligans,
who also “cannibalized” 150 cars. This dawn attack
occurred when the inhabitants were, of course, asleep.
58. The reports indicate that the occupation authorities have resorted to a new pattern of which this is
just one manifestation, the purpose being to make
lie so intolerable-or so they think-as to induce the
inhabitants to leave their homeIand.

54. The PRESIDENT (inrer~retutionfrom Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of-Jordan,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

59. The attackers, armed with iron bars and machineguns, divided themselves into various assault units to
destroy as much of the inhabitants’ property as they
could, simultaneously. All information indicates that
the hooligans come from a number of Israeli colonies
in the area, planted illegally amidst the Palestinian
Arab population centres, which proves that the aftermidnight assaults were premeditated, well-prepared
and carried out with the knowledge of the occupation
authorities, who boast of having a highly sophisticated
intelligence apparatus. A three-day striie was carried
out by the inhabitants, and the damaged cars were
paraded in occupied Jerusalem and in the locations
of the Israeli settlers. The Mayor of Ramallah declared
after those dastardly acts: “Our people willrespond in
an appropriate-manner to these attacks-whose aim is to
drive us out of our country*‘.

55. Mr. NUSEIBEH (Jordan): During the past week,
a torrent of very grave reports has been received
from the occupied territories of the Holy Land,
describing the intensification of acts of despicable
oppression, terrorism, hooliganism and vandalism and
a military occupation establishment going literally

60. The twin towns of Ramallah and Bireh were
littered with broken glass and the debris which
followed the clashes between the Palestinian youths
and inhabitants and the Israeli usurpers, while the
Israeli forces patrolled the streets of the battle-scarred
towns.

53. My Government trusts that the Council will not
fallto uphold the right of the Palestinian people toselfd&termination and to the establishment of an independent Palestinian State, which can only be implemented through the withdrawal of Israel from all
Arab territories occupied since June 1967. My Govemment also trusts that the Council will unanimously
atErm its previous resolutions, particularly with
regard to the right of the Palestinians to return to their
homes and live in peace with their neighbours, and to
their inalienable right to self-determination and the
establishment of an independent sovereign State.

61. The Israeli Military, Gov,ernori General Benjamin.
Ben Elizar, gave ha.lrardrning j to Mayor Khalaf. of:
Ramallah that if another,,protest ‘demonstration took.
place he would have bit&gaoled, removed from his
elected office and. subsequently expelled from the
occupied territories.

tion. This- abominable deed was perpetrated by an
agriculturalsquad known as the Sharoon Patrol. The
secrecy surrounding this mission of destruction could
not be maintained for too long, when these helicopter
herbicide sprays resulted in the total destruction of the
crops.

62. If any stones were thrown at intruding Israeli
vehicles, it was not at the urging of the Mayor but
was an inevitable consequence of an endless occupation. Troops did open fire on student demonstrations
which erupted in several towns and .villages and the
students responded with the only weapons -they
possess: stones and empty bottles.

68. Even philanthropic societies have been prevented from obtaining funds either internally, from
their people, or from the outside, so as to paralyse their
humanitarian programmes.
69. The Zionist Rabbinical Congregation ‘in Israel.
recently and provocatively adopted a resolution
demanding jurisdiction and sovereignty over the land
of the Al-Haram Al-Sharif Holy Sanctuary in Jerusalem., This, I need hardly state, has been responded to
by our people under occupation, and will be more
universally responded to as the Zionists’ aggressive
plot against Islam’s first Qibla and third holiest shrine
unfolds. These are the lands and the people who for
13 years have been brutally held hostage by a Zionist
entity which holds far stronger forces hostage,
preventing them from exercising their will and
shouIdering their world-wide responsibilities.

63. Curfews were imposed upon the villages of .Ein
Yabrood, Silwad and Dair El-Assal and many other
villages, and army reinforcements have been brought
to the area in increasing numbers. The Israelis claimed
that stones were thrown at an Israeli military patrol
near Dair El-Assal, but the truth is that armed Israeli
bandits driving a Peugeot had tried’to storm the homes
of villagers at midnight, in an attempt to steal the villagers’ livestock and belongings. The villagers pursued
them and their car collided with a bus. -Several villagers were wounded and hospitalized as a result of
Israeli gunfire.

70. No matter what the outcome of this debate ‘on
the draft resolution [S/13911] before the Council,
I urge’ the Council to raise its voice loud and clear to
safeguard the oppressed Palestinians pending a final
solution. This is a humanitarian act devolving upon the
Council and the Secretary-General. It is a matter of
elementary human rights for which I appeal to the
Council to shoulder the responsibility. There is nothing.
in the draft resolution, as I see it, which has not
already been enshrined in numerous resolutions of
the United Nations.

64. The Israelis also attacked the Kalandia vocational
training school and Bir Zeit University because.people
there had demonstrated against the Camp David
accords and demanded independence. A suspension
of studies was decided on at Bir Zeit University to
prevent Israeli army atrocities.
65. A total strike was observed in various towns and
villages of the Holy Land, including Arab JerusaIem
and various universities and colleges, on the occasion
of the thirty-second anniversary of Israel’s usurpation
of Palestine. The Gush Emunim conducted provocative parades which led to clashes between the inhabitants and Israeli troops. In those clashes scores
of Palestinians and Israeli soldiers were injured, six
of them mortally.

71. Self-determination and the cessation of an oppressive occupation should be a sine qua non of any.
just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle’
East. The right of return is as natural as it is incontrovertible under all laws, human and divine. Failure
to support it would simply demonstrate the serious
malfunctioning of a United Nations true to its ideals,
true to its resolutions and true to the eternal laws of
justice and humanity. This is the acid test of honesty
versus hypocrisy, -freedom versus bondage, humanity
versus subservience to the brutality of power and
inhumanity.

66. The Israelis also arbitrarily decided to prevent
the holding of elections to the municipal councils,
although the time to hold them had come, for fear
that the outcome would be a reiteration of the Palestinian Arabs’ rejection of the discredited Camp
David accords.

72. It is ‘the earnest hope of my delegation that
the Council will find it bossibie to see the light of
truth and the road to a just peace, thus ending the
indescribable agony and suffering of the Palestinian
people.

67. Another aspect of Israel’s IawIessness and its
systematic attempts to strangulate the inhabitants
economically has been the destruction of large areas of
cultivated land by helicopter spraying with poisonous
herbicides in the village lands of Dura, Idna, AlDhahiriya, Yatta and a score of neighbouring villages
in- the Al-Khalil governorate. Olive, wheat and barley
crops have been destroyed; the crops of a,whole year
of toil and sweat by. the area’s- farmers were instantly
lost to a people impoverished by 13 years-of occupa-

73. Mr. OUMAROU (Niger) (interpretation from
French): It. is far from my intention to disgress, but
I should like to relate a rather juicy piecer of. news:
a former member of the Rhodesian Government of the
notorious Ian Smith, Mr. Rowan Cronje, asked the
9

South Africans a few weeks ago to make a rapid
*‘change”, “so as to stabilize the whole of southern
Africa*‘. Mr. Cronje, himself of South African origin
and a white member of the Zimbabwe Parliament,
added that the changes he called for should not take
place “to satisfy the international community, but to
resolve the internal problems of the inhabitants of
the country”. “Do it now; it is imperative”, cried this
former racist minister to the no less racist white South
Africans whom he was addressing.
74. This warning, clearly the bitter fruit of a belated
facing of the facts, could equally well apply, word for
word, to Israel, whose stubbornness with regard to
the vital problems of its region is at least the equal of
the blindness of the South African regime.
75. This is the umpteenth time that the international
community, and Israeps friends, allies and sympathizers, have called upon that country to make the
necessary effort to contribute to restoring peace in the
Middle East. It is the ,umpteenth time that, having
heard the international community, its own friends,
allies and sympathizers, Israel has persisted in its
refusal and increased its acts of arrogance to make it
clear that it is still invulnerable in its isolation. The
daily deterioration of the situation in the West Bank,
in which the Israeli settlers and soldiers are closely
involved, the unbridled colonization of Arab lands
in which Israel continues to strengthen the Jewish
settlements, the Judaization or impending Judaization
of several Arab towns in the occupied territories,
frequent and murderous raids on the territory of certain
neighbouring States, the continued and carefully
intensified profanation of Jerusalem, all this demonstrates that Israel is determined to defy international
opinion and to engulf the whole region in a vast..
conflagration if necessary.
76. Neither the Security Council nor the. world can
permit so explosive and dangerous a situation to continue. That is why Niger believes that the time has come
tocall on the Council to abandon an attitude which is
far too dilatory and has the grave disadvantage of
giving comfort to Israel, and which keeps the Arabs
and the Palestinians seething with frustration.
77. The resolutions of the General Assembly must be
vigorously followed up in the Council. They must be
translated by us into a courageous resolution in which
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people ‘are
finally recognized, proclaimed and protected. The
reportof the Committee on the Exercise ofthe Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which has been
before. the Council since 1376, contains. recommendations in that regard, and the least we can do isput them
into effect rapidly. These recommendations highlight
the rightof the Palestinian people to self-determination,
national sovereignty and a return to their homeland;
they deplore Israel’s annexation of Palestinian territoriesoccupied since 1967; and, at the same time, they
indicate ways and means to solve the Palestine
problem.

78. Niger vigorously suppQrts:Ah-ose recommendations and calls for the opening,- on the basis of the
recommendations, of urgent talks.between.Israel and
the Palestine Liberation Organization, which more
than 110 countries throughout the world have recognized as the sole and authentic representative of the
Palestinian people.
79. But Niger believes also. that at least two countries are needed for a fight, and that the will to peace
must equally emanate from all the parties in question.
That is why Niger-is making an urgent appeal for the
cessation of the state of belligerency in the area so that
in all quarters grudges may be set aside and future
relationships fashioned on the basis not of military
commitments, aggressive intransigence or warlike
aims, but of a firm and positive determination to come
to terms with the circumstances, while preserving
what is essential and showing respect for law. As the
Committee has itself affirmed, the existence of Israel
is a reality which must be taken into account. But
there is also the Palestinian reality, and at long last
that reality must be given hope and a future through
the creation of a free and sovereign Palestinian State.
It is our duty to-work towards that end.
80. Mr. ESSAAFI (Tunisia) (interpreration from
French); In opening this debate in the Council, on
31 March, the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, Ambassador Falilou Kane of Senegal,
reminded the Council of this elementary imperative:
“if we truly desire to solve the overall problem of
the Middle East we must start by recognizing the
right of the,Palestinian people to self-determination,
a right that is at the very heart of the Palestinian
question” (2204th meeting, para. 361.
He concluded:
“We have every hope that the Council will. do
this because.that is the price of peace in the Middle
East and, indeed, in the whole world.” [Ibid.,
para. 37.1

81. The draft resolution before.the Council in document S/13911 only reproduces, in their essence, the.
recommendations ofthe Committee, which have been
before the Council since 1976. If the Council did not
take a decision then, or in October 1977or in June and.
August 1979, it was because a member of the Council
on. each occasion asked for a postponement of a decision, pleading the negotiations under way on the Middle
East problem.
82: The argument seemed convincing in the sensethat
it gave rise:,to some hope. for progress on the political
outcome and. on a lessening of tension in the area.
On .both. scores, the Council is today quite well
educated, because our discussions during the past six
weeks have dealt with one or another of the aspects
10
i

,

of the situation in theMiddle East, and,have demonstrated to us a continued deteriorationof that situation
and an escalation of-@evocations that are apparently
impossible to control, including provocations by the
very ones who have been preaching patience to us for
four years.

Assembly, which is, we must recall, the deliberative
body of the Organization. Whether we like it or not,
that would result in a crisis of confidence in the
United Nations as an institution. Let us reflect on that.
90. In our view, there cannot be two opposing and
contradictory wills in this institution, that of the
General Assembly and that of the Security Council.
The countries which might bring that about must
shoulder the full responsibility, which would be
comparable to the responsibility of the Horsemen of
the Apocalypse who sowed terror, death and destruction in their path.

83. At its last session, the General Assembly took
note of the danger and, in its resolution 34/65 A,
urged the Council “to consider and take as soon as
possible a decision on the recommendations endorsed
by the General Assembly”. We believe that the Council is in a position to do that, and indeed has the duty
to do it.

91. The region of the Middle East is a powder keg.
It has been so and is even more so today, if one takes
into account what is occurring in Afghanistan and
in Iran. Who can foresee today what could happen in
that region? The boldest experts would hesitate to
advance hypotheses. Continuing to act like an ostrich
by refusing to recognize the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination will not enhance the
prestige of the Council nor contribute to restoring the
fortunes of the United Nations. On the contrary: it is
the opposite attitude, that of courage, which has been
adopted by almost all the delegations taking part in this
debate, which is logical and understandable. That is
the only path that is in accordance with the Charter
because it preserves peace and security in the world.
Finally, it is that path which will enable us to foster
the hope for justice among the oppressed peoples, and
first and foremost the Palestinian people.

84. The draft resolution before the Council was
prepared by the Committee. It is our hope that the
members of the Council will come out clearly and
overwhelmingly in favour of it.
85. The PRESIDENT (inrerpretation from Spanish):
I now call on Mr. Falilou Kane, the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People.
86. Mr. KANE (Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People) (interpretation
from French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this final opportunity
to express the views of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
which initiated this series of Council meetings.

92. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of MEXICO.

87. Since 31 March, when the Council began its
consideration of the question of the exercise by the
Palestinian people of their inalienable rights, all the
delegations that have participated in the debate, with
one sole exception, have unequivocally stated that
they favour self-determination for the Palestinian
people and that people’s right to establish a sovereign,
independent State. That means that the international
community is fully aware that no lasting solution can
be envisaged or implemented in the Middle East while
there is disregard for the aspirations of a-people that
has been and is still being trampled under foot,
martyred and condemned to exile.

93. Today we shall come to the end of another stage
in the consideration of an age-old problem, a problem
that has repeatedly and urgently held the political
attention of our Organization. In fact, the multilateral
treatment of the question of Palestine antedates the
existence of the United Nations and is clearly the
vestige of past imperial disputes.
94. In the course of more than 30 years, the question
on our agenda has become a prototype which bears
witness to the evolution of the international conscience, as reflected in the votes in the General Assembly, and which has constantly tested the prestige
and the effectiveness of the Security Council.

88. How can we respond to the hopelessness of that
people? How can we redress an injustice which has
lasted far too long, an injustice the perpetrators of
which are among us? Those are the questions which
arise and to which the Security Council.is called upon
to reply.

95. One by one, almost 100 peoples have attained
their independence during the life of the United
Nations. One by one, the political and territorial
conflicts in the Middle East have found the paths to
a solution. Viewed in that light, the still pending case
of Palestine appears both as an unjustifiable exception
and as the main centre of instability in what is today
the most coveted region in the world.
,
96. Every approach to. the question of Palestine has
been taken in this forum: from political pleas to

89. There can be only one reply: the one that preserves peace in that part of the world, the one which
we have advocated and which is embodied inthe draft
resolution before us, sponsored by Tunisia. In a disrupted world in which uncertainty and insecurity tend
to become the rule rather than the exception, it is
difficult to believe that the Council could adopt a
position which would contradict that of the General
11

juridical analyses, from historical stud.iestoanecdotes.
Virtually everything has been tried but we have not
managed to define what is fundamental:. the right of.
the Palestinian people to establish an independent
State.
97. With the passage of time, however, the intemational community has reached certain irreversible
conclusions, namely: that there will be no just and
lasting peace in the Middle East without a recognition
of the right of every nation to an independent existence;
that the self-determination of the Palestinian people
entails and presupposes the full exercise of its national
rights; that Israel must withdraw from the territories
occupied by force since 1967; and that the Palestine
Liberation Organization is the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people and of its struggles for
freedom.

quence but also as a, prec.t@io&to the exercise of
its. self-determination. This’ .has&een the internal
logic of all the independence,movements in Africa, the
Americas and Asia. Otherwise, the birth of a. State
would be subject to outside strategies and even to the
will of the occupying Power. :The possibility would
then open up of. alternative formulas, such as
autonomy-cwhich is only one type of administration-replacing the exercise of national rights, thus
frustrating the exercise of political self-determination.
I am convinced that none of us would agree to the
replacement of his country’s sovereignty by a mere
status of administrative autonomy.
102. It is also argued that it is out of order to reaffirm
the right to constitute a State unless we previously
define its territorial boundaries. That thesis is put to
rest by a reading of resolution 242 (1967) to which,
in the view of my delegation, we should add this
afternoon. Thus, we would recognize the right of all
the .peoples of the region to existence as States and
conditions would effectively be created for them to
live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries.

98. Those tenets have been defined through the
expressed will of the majority in the United Nations
and they derive from the fundamental rules on which
the Organization rests. For Mexico, as well as for many
other countries which have suffered oppression and
persecution, the affirmation of those principles is
closely identified with national dignity.

103. Finally, some maintain that the time for issuing
statements on the substance of the question has not
yet come. We respect the reasons of those who hold
this view, but we believe that, since we are dealing
with fundamental principles on which the existence of
a nation as well as the maintenance of peace depend,
the sooner the better.

99. The Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of my
country, in referring, infer aliu, to the question of
Palestine at the Sixth Summit Conference of NonAligned Countries, stated:
“The first and foremost right of man and of peoples is the right to self-determination, which is a
prerequisite of all other rights. No other claim, to
so-called historical or any other rights, enjoys the
same pre-eminence in our time as that to selfdetermination. For Mexico, that is the overriding
and key principle which must obtain before any
other consideration. We believe that the main
political problems of the world arise from the fact
that the right of many peoples to determine, for
themselves and in a sovereign way, their political
organization as independent States has not been
enforced.*’

104. Any effort in good faith which may be under way
or which may be attempted to resolve the problem
must begin with a recognition of the principles and
the rights.,embodied in the draft resolution before us.
That is the framework which should guide the actions
of the interested parties and of all States in the search
for a true solution to this conflict.
105. At the end of this meeting we shall also come to
the end of the period during which the delegation of
Mexico, after more than a third of a century, has had
the honour to preside over the work of the Council.
I wish to express my appreciation to all members
for their co-operation, to.the Secretary-General for his
diligent interest in our work and to the Secretariat
for its invaluable co-operation with us.

100. When my delegation spoke on 27 February
[2202nd meeting], it expressed various considerations
about this conflict. We have now reached a definition
.of principle which some are attempting to oppose with
“argumentsof interpretation and timing with which we
do not agree.

106. We have worked very intensely from the first to
the last day of the month. The present circumstances,
together with the sense of responsibility of the members of the Council, have kept us in practically continuous activity. The debates have concluded with
two resolutions. adopted on problems which- required
urgent decisions-acts of aggression against Zambia
and in. Lebanon. The question on our agenda today
will&o culminate in a vote which we hope will co-ntribute to the solution of an old. and serious problem.

101. The first such argument refers to-the scope of the
concept of self-determination. For some, recognition
of the right to the existe.rice of an independent and
sovereign State is tantamount to prejudging the direction in which a people will exercise its right to, selfdetermination. This argument is historically inaccurate. Any nation which has emerged to independent
life after a.process of armed struggle has claimed the
right to independence, not only as a logical conse-

107. The questions we have considered reflect, at
the same time, the pressures of everyday political
12

reality and the legacy.~~~~eathed,~~#fie past to the+
international community. That is what motivates the
Council to act and.odSa*.what lmiits the scope of its
,. .
action.

115. It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to a vote now on the draft resolution
before it. Unless I hear any object-ion, I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote.

108. The questions we have dealt with during this year
have one characteristic in common: all of them have
taken place in developing countries and all of them
reflect or involve global interests and strategies of a
unilateral character.

116. I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the vote.

109. In recent months we have suffered from a
trend towards bipolarity, which we had thought was
a thing of the past, and, in response to that, the
medium-sized and small countries- which do not wish
to lose any part of their independence or to be placed
under the security guarantee or trusteeship of any
Power, have tended to realign themselves.
110. Every day we witness new. incidents which
affect not only the precarious political stability of the
world but also the life and safety of diplomatic agents,
that is to say, representatives of national States. This
is but a symptom of the deeper evils that we must
remedy through a comprehensive understanding of the
root causes of the crises.
111. Mexico has taken,an active part in the process
of making international liie more democratic. This
trend, which summarizes the evolution of today’s
world, today meets with new resistance and obvious
dangers. It is our responsibility, as developing countries, to promote at all levels a juster ‘international
system. We sincerely believe that the activity of the
Council must be increasingly tailored to the essential.
mission which has been entrusted to it, namely, the
maintenance of international peace and security.
112. Several delegations concur as to the need for us
to adopt a more active stance which might enable us
to foresee the course of events and to enter into
dialogues that may prevent crises. For that purpose, we
may meet at any time and even resort to the exceptional procedures provided for in Article 28, paragraph 2, of the Charter. The holding of meetings at
the highest level might allow us, through participation
on an equal footing, to overcome the. obstacles along
the.path to greater political andeconomic co-operation
among States. In any event, it is our duty to explore
whatever means may be necessary and possible so that
the process of political and social change is not
interrupted and so that it can take place- peacefully.
113. I inherited the presidency of the Council from
a diplomat of irreproachable integrity who represents
a country with which we stand as brothers in our
common decision in favour of independence. I shall
hand over the presidency to the noble representative
of a nation which shares the same concerns and hopes.
I wish him every success,
114. I shall now resume my functions ‘as PRESIDENT of the Councfi.

117. Mr. YANG0 (Philippines): My delegation
approaches the issue before us today imbued with a
profound sense of responsibility and aware that the
decision of the Council will be a milestone in its
history. It is an issue that has defied solution for
decades. It has been before the United Nations from
the adoption of the partition resolution of 1947 and
-before that-it had been before the League of
Nations since i922, following the Baifour Declaration
of 1917. Our decision can make or break the peace,
already made fragile by the loss of so many lives,
the destruction of so much property, and by so many
tragedies and so much suffering of the peoples in the
Middle East.
118. For the sake of a just peace in the region, my
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution
contained in document S/13911, in keeping with my
country’s policy of support for the just and legitimate
cause of the Palestinian people. More specifically, the
Philippines supports the right of the people of Palestine
to exercise its inalienable national right to selfdetermination, including the right to establish an
independent State in Palestine. In doing so, we affirm
once more that the question of Palestine lies at the
very heart of the Middle East problem and that unless
it is first solved there can be no hope for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in that region. Unless
there is a just peace in the region, international peace
and security are imperilled. This is the syllogism of
peace that the international community must
pursue with all resolve and vigour.
119. In my delegation’s statement on the item
entitled “The situation in the occupied Arab territories” [220fst meeting], we said that the illegal
occupation of Arab territories denies a homeland to
the Palestinian people, which has every right to it.
Just as resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) recognize
the right of the Israeli people to a secure existence
as a State, so must we recognize the right of the
Palestinian people to a secure existence as a State to
ensure an even-handed and balanced approach, to the
whole question. 120. Resolution 242 (1967) provides a progressive
series of steps leading to a comprehensive and just
solution of this problem, first, by providing for the
withdrawal of all occupying forces and, secondly,
by recognizing the right of ail the peoples in that
region to live within secure and recognized boundaries
as States. That must necessarily entail the right of the
Israeli State to exist, as it must entail the right of the
Palestinian State to exist. Justice demands that the

international community recognize and give decisive
support to the full exercise of this fundamental right
by the peoples of Palestine and.Israel.
121. Palestinian refugees wishing to return to their
homes and to live in peace with their neighbours
should be enabled to do so, and those choosing not to
return should receive just compensation for their
property, as provided in General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
122. Experience has shown that there may be practical difficulties in implementing decisions achieved
at the conference table, difficulties arising from, first,
the obvious lack of mutual trust and confidence
between the parties-a serious effort must be made to
establish a favourable climate; secondly, the cloud of
suspicion that hangs over attempts to negotiate this
issue-which must be dispelled; thirdly, the.refusal of
both parties to recognize each other’s existence and
even each other’s right to exist. Let us appeal to both
parties to begin to recognize each other’s existence.
123. Because this question has confronted humanity
for so long, my delegation welcomes all initiatives,
including the draft resolution that is now before the
Council, aimed at achieving a just, peaceful and
comprehensive solution. Let us hope that in an effort
to bring this question to a successful conclusion, all
parties will henceforth resolve their differences at the
conference table.
124. We can debate this issue endlessly; we can adopt
resolutions one after another; but unless the parties
directly concerned begin to face up to and accept their
responsibility to mankind, we shall never be done with
this problem. We believe that nothing is impossible of
achievement in human affairs, as long as all the
parties are willing to come together and exercise
political will in the spirit of good will and mutual
trust. It is time indeed for the peoples of Israel and
Palestine to embark upon this historic enterprise and
for all humanity to stand fast with them.
125. Mr. MATHIAS (Portugal) (interpreration from
French): The delegation of Portugal has always emphasized in the Council the importance it attaches to
decisions adopted by consensus. Our efforts have
always been directed towards achieving consensus;
for we are aware that politics is the art of the possible
and that it is preferable and certainly more constructive to obtain by means of negotiation and in a spirit
of conciliation results that can mobilize the general
will of the members of the Council.
126. The patient search for that kind of solution,
made with a clear aw.arenessof the facts and a humble
.spirit of balance, must however take place at a time
or within a context that requires both a softening of
positions and some flexibility of views. But we fear
that in the case before us. this initial difficulty has not
been overcome, and we note with great regret that

there are still to-o many different views about the best
way for the Council to approachthe question we are
considering today, the way that, would make possible,
as we would have hoped, a,>broad consensus in support of the Palestinian cause. 8
127. In so far as my’ delegation is concerned, and
addressing ourselves to the substance of the matter, we
wish once again to reaffirm that we consider that no
all-encompassing search for peace in the Middle East
can be undertaken without first taking into consideration the legitimate national and political rights of the
Palestinian people and, therefore, its right to return,
its right to self:determination and its right to a homeland. The fate of this people lies at the very core of
the question of peace or war in the Middle East, and
only respect for these rights will, in our view, make
possible a lasting, peaceful settlement of this conflict
in the region.
128. Such a settlement would also call for the direct
participation of thet legitimate representatives of the
Palestinian people in all negotiations aimed at achieving
a just and comprehensive peace and would have to be
accompanied by the total withdrawal of Israel from the
Arab and Palestinian territories occupied in the June
1967war, including Jerusalem. The acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible, as we have already
emphasized.
129. Finally, and without any ambiguity, we wish to
reaffirm the right of the State of Israel to exist within
secure and recognized boundaries.
130. These elements, which we consider essential,
constitute the framework within which the search for
peace- should be condbcted. My Government hopes
to be able to contribute to its- success and is willing
and determined to do so. However, some conditions
must accompany these steps. We earnestly hope that
they will soon emerge, but in as much as they still
seem to be lacking today, we shall abstain in the vote
on the draft resolution before the Council.
131. Mr, KOLBY (Norway): The Security Council is
addressing the question of Palestinian rights at a particularly delicate stage in the Middle East peace
efforts. It is important that the present debate be
concluded in a way which may be helpful in achieving
our common goal, namely, a just and Iasting peace
in the Middle East. At the present stage, this may
require considerable restraint, as well as flexibility,
from all the parties concerned.
132. Norway supports resolutions 242.(1967) and 338
(1973)‘ as a basis for a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East. According to the Norwegian view, peace
in that area must be based on the following principles:
first, the acquisition of territory by force cannot be
accepted; secondly, all the States in the area must
have the right to exist in peace within secure and
recognized boundaries; thirdly, the legitimate national
rights of the Palestinian people must be implemented.

; ” ‘t.

133. Norway has from& outset given full support
to the Camp Davidogreements as an important first
step towards a comprehensive settlement of the Middle
East conflict. We strongly welcome the rapid normalization of relations between Israel and Egypt and the
fact that the Israeli withdrawal from Sinai and other
bilateral arrangements have been implemented on
schedule.

139.’ Mr. McHENRY (United States of America):
The complex and constantly interacting problems of
the Middle East have been a source of instability
and tragedy for many decades. Continuing efforts
have been made to reach a comprehensive settlement.
Time and again, dedicated efforts and imaginative
proposals have been frustrated by seemingly uncontrollable events.

134. On the other hand, progress seems so far to
have been rather modest in the trilateral talks on
autonomy for the West Bank and Gaza. These talks
are, as we know, supposed to be completed before
26 May this year. In accordance with the Camp David
agreements, autonomy for the West Bank and Gaza
can only be seen as a transitional arrangement, pending
a just, comprehensive and durable settlement of the
Middle East conflict. Whatever the outcome of the
current trilateral talks, the Palestinian issue will remain the key issue which has to be- solved if a comprehensive settlement of the conflict is to be achieved.

140. But there are some positive developments. As
a result of statesmanship on all sides, a peace treaty
was signed between Israel and Egypt, and this was
an historic event which would have been considered
unachievable prior to President Sadat’s trip to
Jerusalem and his warm reception there.
141. Important as the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty
is, all concerned recognize that it deals with only one
aspect of the many-faceted Arab-Israeli conflict. The
Palestinian dimension is one of the crucial issues which
must be resolved in the context of working towards
a comprehensive settlement. Accordingly, the Camp
David accords call for the solution of the Palestinian
problem in all of its aspects.

135. Since 1974, my Government has taken the view
that an overall peaceful solution to the Middle East
conflict must give the Palestinian people the opportunity to exercise its right to self-determination.
Invariably, my Government has at the same time
strongIy underlined the fact that the right of the Palestinians to self-determination must not in any way
undermine or threaten the right of Israel to live in
peace within secure and recognized boundaries.

142. As evervone knows. we are now engaged in
serious and iniensive negotiations to provide for the
security of Israel and to fulfil the commitment in the
Camp David framework to establishing full autonomy
for the people of the West Bank and Gaza during a
transitional period, pending further negotiations to
resolve the final status of these territories. If successful, these negotiations will provide the Palestinians
living in those areas with a real opportunity to manage
their own lives for the first time in modem history.

136. Whatever the outcome of the trilateral talks,
Palestinian participation in the negotiations for a comprehensive settlement remains a key element, both
as a requirement for further progress and as a concrete
expression, at the present stage of the peace efforts,
of the Palestinian right to seEdetermination! Also,
the Camp David agreements stipulate that representatives of the Palestinian people should participate in
negotiations on the resolution of the Palestinian
problem in all its aspects.

143. The Palestinian issue is of central importance.
The question is how best to make progress on this and
other important outstanding issues.
144. We recognize that the approach we have taken
has generated disagreement among some in the
Middle East. This is not unexpected, nor are we
surprised at the difficulty of the problems that are now
under negotiation. We do not seek to persuade the
pessimists or those who despair of a peace settlement.
We know that conviction will come only with results,
and that results will require time. The point is that this
is the only politically viable avenue available at this
time. No ‘one has been able to” come up with a
workable alternative. Although allof us agree on the
necessity for a solution of the Palestinian problem in
all its aspects, there is wide disagreement on the best
means of achieving this goal. It is nevertheless
essential that we do so.

137. The ’ question of PaIestinian participation in
future negotiations of course raises the question of the
role of the Palestine Liberation Organization. ,The
question can always be raised as to how representative a given Palestinian group or organization in fact
is. However, it is clear that no other organization,
group or individual can claim to be more representative than the PLO. Hence it is difficult to envisage
real progress without the PLO’s sharing responsibility
for the negotiations in one way or another.
138. The Council is now about to vote on the draft
resolution before us. My delegation regrets this, It
would have been advisable to await a larger measure
of agreement before. &heCouncil takes a decision on a
question of such major importance. We consider the
draft resolution before us unbalanced. It also seems to
prejudge the outcome of future negotiations. Norway
will therefore abstain in the vote on it.

145. There are over 3 million Palestinians in the
Middle East, including many of the best educated and
most able people of the region. Their voices must be
heard and their desire to manage their daily lives and
their political future must be recognized. Some live in
the Arab world outside the West Bank and Gaza and
15

have made distinguished contributions. Others remain,
tragically, refugees in camps, dependent in some
degree on services provided by the international
community through the United Nations. Over a million
in the West Bank of the Jordan River and the Gaza
Strip live under Israeli military rule. Wherever they
are, with few exceptions, they think of themselves as
Palestinians. This reality must be taken into account if
an end to the conflict is to be found.
146. At the same time, the people of Israel have
sought for more than 30 years to live at peace with
their neighbours, within secure and recognized
borders. Until President Sadat’s visit to Jerusalem,
Camp David and the signing of the Israeli-Egyptian
peace treaty, Israel was denied any practical expression of that desire. With the autonomy talks, Israel
has a chance to move one step closer to the comprehensive peace it has long sought, and this reality too
must be taken into account.
147. On an issue of such importance for the world,
and for the Palestinian and Israeli peoples, we should
not be distracted by approaches that offer no prospect
for making practical progress. We should not
adopt an approach that does not endorse resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the agreed basis for
all peace efforts in the Middle East, an approach
which, indeed, seeks to change resolution 242 (1967).
We should not allow the United Nations to be used in
this way. The clash of opposites and the sharpening
of contradictions have no place here., in this body
dedicated to the maintenance of peace and the resolution of disputes through peaceful means.
148. The United States is engaged in negotiations
within the framework agreed on in September 1978
at Camp David with the participation of the President
of the United States. By accepting the Camp David
framework, Israel and Egypt have committed themselves to working towards a comprehensive peace in
the Middle East, a peace which, the two parties firm
in the accords,‘must resolve the Palestinian question
in all its aspects and recognize the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people. This must be done in such a
manner as to permit the Palestinian people in the
West Bank and Gaza to participate in the determination of theif own future while preserving the security
of all the parties. We ‘are now entering a crucial stage
of the negotiations which, if successful, will constitute
an important step towards the realization of those
objectives.
149. I know that in many quarters there is scepticism
as to whether the negotiations in this framework can
succeed. The road ahead will be difficult. But
‘together with Israel and Egypt we ask only to be
judged by the results we obtain. At the same time, if
we ask that others judge us by the results of our efforts,
we will apply the same standard to this draft resolution. Judged by that standard, it cannot bring the
achievement of peace one day closer to practical

reality. A solution,cannot Qp .fptpd by fiat. it must
be the result of negotiat$q_: &l’s to this end-the
attainment of a juSt and l~stn@&peacein the Middle
East-that the United $t&‘h.as committed itself.
We reaffirm that commitmerif: today.
150. There, simply stated, is the approach which the
United States takes towards the draft resolution before
the Council. It follows, therefore, that the United
States will oppose the draft resolution.
151. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spa%
is@: I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/l391 1.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour: Bangl?desh, Ch.ini, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Philippines,
Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia
Againsr:

United States of America

Abstaining:
France, Norway, Portugal, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Iteland
The result of the vote was IO votes in favour,
I against and 4 absrentions.
The draft resahtion was not adopred, the negative
vote beingthat of a permanent member of the Council.

152. The- PRESIDENT (interpret&on
from Spanish): I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to explain their vote after the vote.

153. Mr. MANSFIELD (U&ted Kingdom): For
reasons which my &$egation h-asexplained, clearly and
repeatedly to the parties principally concerned, the
United Kingdom abstained on the draft resolution on
which. the Council has just voted. The decision to
abstain was taken solely b.ecau$s_
of the timing of the
draft resolution. We have not considered its substance.
But this should not be taken 8s a sign that we are not
interested in the active search for a peaceful and just
settlement in the Middle East, or that we do not accept
that the right of the Palestinians to determine their own
future as a people lies at the heart of the problem,
or that we do hot believe that Israel has a right to
exist within secure boundaries.. On the contrary, the
.question was disc.ussed at the. recent meeting of the
Heads of State.’ and Government of the European
Community i.n Luxembourg, urhen they directed their
Foreign Ministers to submit a report on the Middle
East problem for the next session of the European
Council, which will be held in Venice at the end
of June.
154. Mr. LEPRETTE (France). (interpreration frum
We have now reached- the end of a.further
debate on the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. O;nseveral occasions in the past my delegation

French):

16

has had an opportut@ i’d kxpreis the views of the
French Government:pn tl@ .problem, which.is one of
the most complex ever *f&d by the Council. Last
August- {2163rd meeting1 ‘we recalled in this very
chamber the need for a Ge~tlementof the Palestinian
problem if peace and security were to be established
in the Middle East,, In particular, we stressed the
conditions that had to be met if such a settlement
were to be possible. Only recently, on 8 March 1980,
during.his visit to Amman, the President of the French
Republic himself stated:

question ;of ‘the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. In that regard, I should like to recall in particular that during its meeting on 23 April, the European
Council made the following statement:

“The right of each State in the region to live in
peace within secure, recognized and guaranteed
borders must be confirmed, This right to security
is a universal right, as we have pointed out in the
United Nations, and France understands in that
connection the legitimate concerns of the State of
Israel. But Israel must recognize that its occupation of Arab territories since 1967 prevents it from
establishing with its neighbours the peaceful relations to which it aspires . . . At the same time, we
must recognize the true nature of the Palestine
problem. It is not a refugee problem but, rather, the
problem of a people aspiring to exist and organize
itself as a people. By exercising its right to selfdetermination-also a universal right-within
the
framework of a peace settlement, it must be able to
take a decision on its own destiny. and to possess a
homeland. For France, those.are the two conditions
for peace in the Middle East. Their implementation
requires the co-operation and support of all the
parties concerned.”

158. The countries of the Euronean Community
thus had in mind the search for a ‘common position
leading to a new initiative when the necessary conditions have been met. I would express the wish that
very soon we shall have grounds for hope in this
regard.

155. Now, who can say precisely that that cooperation and support exist at the present time? I am
sure that no one would venture to make such a claim
in present circumstances. That is why, from the very
beginning of this debate, a postponement seemed to us
by far the best course. During consultations over
the past few weeks, we have been unstinting in our
efforts to have this view conceded and to spare the
Council a deadlock. And that had seemed to us to be
the view of several other delegations too.
156. When it became clear, nevertheless, that that
appeal would not be heeded and that our Council
would have to take a stand on a text that could not
be adopted, the French delegation made one last
effort. It seemed to us that if certain amendments
were made, the draft before the, Council could win
broader support. But our efforts didnot meet with the
response we had hoped for. Thus, although this text
does contain a number of provisions that also reflect
our point of view, we have had to abstain in the vote
taken this evening.

“Only a just and lasting comprehensive settlement could bring about true peace in the Middle
East. Aware that Europe can, when the time comes,
play a part, the Council instructed the Foreign
Ministers to submit to it at its next session a report
on this problem.‘*

159. Mr. FLORIN

(German Democratic Republic)
The delegation of the
German Democratic Republic, like the overwhelming
majority of the members of the Council, voted in favour
of the draft resolution in document S/13911 because it
contains the necessary fundamental requirements for
a comprehensive and just solution to the Middle East
conflict. The draft resolution confirms the inalienable
national right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination, including the right to establish an independent State in Palestine. It de-mands that Israel
withdraw from all the Arab territories occupied since
June 1967, including Jerusalem. It also calls for guarantees for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of all States in the area,
including the sovereign independent State of Palestine,
and their right to live in peace within secure and
recognized boundaries.

(interpretation

from ‘Russian):

160. This draft resolution thus constitutes appreciable progress when compared with previous resolutions of the Council. In the view of the delegation
of the German Democratic Republic, however, a comprehensive and lasting settlement of the Middle East
conflict cannot be achieved without vigorous resistance to the imperialistic rnameuvres typified by
Camp David. We stress this even more energetically
in connection with the dangerous policy that has once
again been demonstrated here today by the use of the
veto. We see here a link with other actions by the
imperialistic circles in the United States designed to
intensify international tension in various parts of the
world, be it the Near and Middle East, the Indian
Ocean or the Caribbean.
161. The delegation of the German Democratic
Republic would like once again to confirm-its support
for and solidarity with those peoples offering resistance to that kind of imperialistic policy, whether in
the Near and Middle East, in South-West Asia or in
the Caribbean.

157. My delegation remains convinced, however,
that matters must not be left as they stand and that
everything possible must now, be done to establish
conditions that would enable the Council to take up
again-and this time under favourable conditions-the

162. We wish once again to express the hope that
reason and an understanding of the facts will prevail.
17

163. Mr. KHARLAMOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interprelation from Russian): The Soviet
delegation, along with the majority of the other members of the Council, supported the draft resolution on
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people that was
before the Council. In spite of the fact that, for wellknown reasons, that draft resolution has not been
adopted, the Soviet delegation believes the Council’s
discussion,of the question of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people has been useful and important.
The discussion in the Council has demonstrated the
growing support for the just cause of the Arab people
of Palestine by the overwhelming majority of the members of the Council and of the Member States of the
United Nations as a whole. It has confirmed that the
Palestinians must be allowed to exercise their inalienable national rights to self-determination and national
independence without delay. It is. now clear to
everyone that the Palestinian problem is at the very
core of a setflement in the Middle East and that a
genuine settlement is impossible without ajust solution
to that problem, on the basis of respect for the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people. Those
rights must include the right to establish a truly independent State in Palestine, the withdrawal of Israeli
troops from all territories occupied in 1967, including
Jerusalem, and the confirmation of the right of all
Statesin the-area, including the sovereign, independent
State of Palestine, to live in peace within secure and
recognized frontiers.

course of a separate settle.me,nt+which is an impediment to a just solution to the Palestinianproblem and
creates a division among theeArab countries as they
struggle against imperialist penetration of their region.
Regarding the talks which are now under way between
the United States, Israel and Egypt within the framework of the Camp David agreements on so-called
administrative autonomy for the Palestinians, it was
quite rightly pointed out by the Foreign Minister of
the Soviet Union, A. A. Gromyko, at a recent press
conference in Paris: “What we are dealing with here,
in actual fact, is the consolidation, of a regime of
occupation.”
168. I listened most attentively just now to the
representative of the United States and I must confess
my disappointment. None of the arguments that he
adduced, if subjected to scrupulous analysis, justifies
the position taken by the United States in the Security
Council. In spite of painstaking attempts by the United
States to represent itself as the defender of Arab
interests, the anti-Arab essence of American foreign
policy in the Middle East is becoming more.and more
obvious. with every passing day. The fact that the
United States today prevented the adoption of a draft
resolution in support of the lawful rights of the Arab
people of Palestine surprised no one. It came as no
surprise to the Heads of State or Government of the
Non-Aligned Countries, who at the Sixth Summit
Conference, held last. September in Havana, adopted
the following statement:

164. The United States, which has just prevented
the Council from adopting a resolution confirming
those fundamental principles of ajust settlement in the
Middle East, cannot fail to understand this.

“The Conference condemned the threat by the
United States to use the veto in the Security Council
against any resolution concerning the implementation,of the Palespinian people’s inalienable national
rights.“2

165. There can be no doubt that everyone fully
realizes that without satisfying the legitimate demands
of the Arab people of Palestine for the restoration
of the homeland which has been taken from it, there
can be no peace or tranquillity in the Middle East.

169. The discussion of the Ptiestinian problem in the
Council~and the.vote on the draft resolutton submitted
by the deiegation.of Tunisiahave served as one more
powerfuland clear reminder of the fact that we cannot
go on postponing &solution to the Palestinian problem,
since upon its speedy and just solution depend not
only the fate of 4 million Palestinians but also the
fate of peace and security in the Middle East, and
indeed not only in that region. It could nut have been
more cogently demonstrated that the Palestinian
problem cannot. be resolved behind the backs of the
Palestinian people without the full participation of its
sole legitimate and authentic representative, the
Palestine Liberation Grganizatian.

166, The natural question then arises, is the United
States really interested in a just and lasting Middle
East settlement? Is not the United States seeking to
maintain.in the Middle East a situation of instability
and tension, so as to expand its military and political
beach-heads in the region, which, besides Israel and
Egypt, might include other Arab States?
167. United States policy in the Middle East is not
determined only by considerations of the electoral
campaign in this country, as the press sometimes tries
to imply. Four years ago, when the- United States
twi.ce voted in the Council against resolutions confirming the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
there was also talk at the time of so-called electoral
difficulties in the United States. Now, four years
have gone by since the presidential elections of 1976
and the United States not only failed to take advantage
of the existing opportunities to establish a lasting-and
just peace in the Middles East but indeed adopted the

170. At the same time, the discussion inthe Council
has shown that en early and just solution to the problems of the Middle East is certainly not being, facilitated by the position of those States which, in words,
recognize &he inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people and even declare they are in favour of the
participation of the PLO, on an equal footing, in talks
on these problems, but when it comes to taking a
concrete decision, openly boycott any discussion of
18

the question and resort to entirely unjustified delays
and procrastinating tactics.
171. The present situation in the Middle East is so
tense and so explosive that it calls urgently for an
immediate resolution of the Palestiilian problem. It
calls for further efforts to support the just cause of the
Palestinian people until such time as the Arab people
of Palestine has established its own independent State.
172. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation would like
to stress that the struggle- for the establishment of a
just and lasting peace ifi the Middle East and for the
implementation of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people will not be ended by this discussion
but will continue and will draw ever more supporters.
The important thing, in thisdifficuit and noble struggle,
is not to weaken the efforts of the Arab peoples and
their friends to reach that goal. We are sure that that
stiilggle will inevitably be crowned by success, like
all the genuine national liberation movements in the
present century.
173. The PRESIDENT (interpreration
from Spunish): The representative of the Palestine Liberation

Organization has asked to speak and I now call upon
him.

174. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
This is a glorious result: the Council, by a vote of
IO to 1, has voted in favour of the right of the Palestinian people to exercise its inalienable rights in its
own country. The United States has chosen to single
itself out and it stands in a minority of one.
175. We are grateful. My people will appreciate,
through history, the position of those 10 States that
voted in favour of and in support of our rights. As to
the States that abstained, we can understand but we
cannot find any legitimacy in their reasoning or rationale for delaying a vote on the destiny of a people.
Because the best time to vote and to act on the
destiny of a people is now-and not in a month or two
months.
176. The current debate on the attainment and
exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people has demonstrated the overwhelming support
of our rights by the international community. The
United States has chosen to be singled out in the
Council as an obstacle to peace and as an enemy of
the principles of the-Charter, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and the resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly-but primarily as an obstacle to
peace and to the attainment of-international security.
177. At the beginning of the current debate, the
Palestine Liberation Organization made it clear that
the aim of the so-called framework for peace is to
nullify the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
The veto just cast by the United States confirms our
reading of that framework and its ramifications. It is

strange that as long ago as 1947 the Government of
the United States voted in favour of a Palestinian Arab
State in Palestine. Today it uses the tyrannical power
of the veto to deny the Palestinian people its inalienable right to self-determination and national independence .
178. The struggle for freedom and the movement for
national liberation are not regressive. They are progressive by nature, inspiration and outlook. The
Administration of the United States cannot stop the
march of time. It cannot order history to “advance
counter-clockwise”. The writing is on the wall and
Washington cannot remain-indeed it cannot afford
to remain-illiterate. The lesson of Zimbabwe should
be recalled. The Government of the United States is
voluntarily blinding itself to the realities of the situation
in the Middle East. Need I cite the developments in
Iran and the resolution of the Iranian people? But the
United States still prefers to ignore the fact that there
are peoples in this world, and that electronic devices
are no substitute for the will-power of human beings.
The United States continues to ignore the human
element, it continues to ignore human rights and the
aspirations of peoples.
179. Seeing all its ill-fated attempts and acts of aggression, the Government of the United States cannot
and must not-indeed it had better not-attempt to
perpetuate the bloodshed, misery and turmoil in the
Middle East.
180. The veto cast by the United States is no subrise.
The current President of the United States is banking
on a chip-“no national independence and no selfdetermination for the Palestinian people**. He was
reported to have said on 24 March: “We oppose the
creation of a Palestinian State”. The destiny of a
people is not a game of blackjack or of dice. The
destiny of a people is decided by that people and the
support it gets from the rest of the world, And we
did get overwhelming support today.
181. Our Deonle is also determined to continue and
to escalate-its-struggle, including its struggle in this
chamber, in all the organs and agencies of the United
Nations and in all other international forums, be it the
non-aligned movement, the Organiztition of the
Islamic Conference, the Organization of African
Unity-to which the PLO has been invited in the
capacity of observer--or the League of Arab States.
Our struggle also takes shape in other legitimate
means against the forces of occupation and foreign
domination. We shall maintain and escalate our
struggle until we have attained and exercised our
inalienable national rights in our own country, in. particular those. rights affirmed in General Assembly
resolution 3236 (XXIX). That is our will and that is
the will of the international community.
182. In its policy against the rights of the Palestinian
people the United States Government has remained

consistent. But those who design that policy have
in the past advocated a contradictory policy. When
they. are “intellectuals”, university professors or
frustrated kindergarten teachers, they teach and say
one thing, but when they advance to become presidential advisers on national security, they change. Is
there a spell in the White House or the Rose Garden?
I shall just cite one example-the case of Mr. Zbigniew
Brzezinski. When Mr. Brzezinski was a professor, in
the summer of 1975, he wrote an article that appeared
in the summer issue of the magazine Foreign Policy,
from which I shall quote the following:

184. But the current debate in the Council has really
served its purpose. It has provided a historic opportunity for a renewal and a reaffirmation. of supportforthe cause and the struggle of the Palestinian people.
Veto or no veto, the inalienable rights- of the Palestinian people are a fact and the full attainment and
exercise of those rights in our own country are also
an inevitable historic fact.
185. The Council went through a similar exercise that
was aborted by the United States way back in January
1976. Mr. Khaddoumi was heading the delegation of
the PLO then, and I should like to quote the following
short paragraph from his statement:

“Accordingly, the United States should announce
its conviction that the only settlement which can be
sustained is one which, respects the security and
right to self-determination of both the Israelis and
the Palestinians in their different parts of the old
mandate territory. . . . This might not have immediate effect on Israeli policy, and Israel would
no doubt do all it could through the United States
Congress to change that policy, but a public United
States posture in favour of such a settlement would
exert powerful influence and would probably gain
both domestic and international support.

“Where do we go from here? As you are fully
aware, the PLO is a liberation movement engaged
in combating-militarily,
politically, economically
and culturally-the
Zionist occupation of our
homeland. We take pride in the fact that our just
aspirations and our armed struggle brought so much
international support and recognition for the
national rights of the people of Palestine and for
the PLO.” [1879rh meeting, para. 203.1
186. In its resolution 34165A, the General Assembly
had naturally anticipated this aborting of the Council’s
action by the Government of the United States and its
obstruction of the peace efforts, and had authorized
and requested the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People

“There are obviously difficulties with such a
policy. It will certainly be argued that it goes too far
and that it puts pressure on Israel when it is Israel’s
life, not that of the United States, which is at stake.
It can also be argued that it does not go far enough:
it would not pf itself put immediate pressure on
Israel to change course, and might be constantly
under fire. from Congress. . . . The United States,
as the only Power with the capacity to give longterm solidarity to coexistence within the old Palestine between a Jewish and an Arab State, must
not take the initiative for an international settlement.
6‘. . . The Israelis fear that acceptance of a Palestinian State is tantamount to acquiescing in the
potential destruction of Israel. But if Israel continues
to ignore this problem or to insist that only it can
choose the Palestinians with whom to negotiate, it
will condemn itself to living perpetually at war and
bring about the very danger that the refusal to
speak to the PLO is designed to avoid.”

“in the event of the Security Council failing to
consider or to take a decision on those recommendations by 31 March 1980, to consider that situation
and to make the suggestions it deems appropriate’*.
So we have not reached a dead end. The Committee
will, I am sure, take up this matter again to decide
on the course to be followed.
187. Before I conclude, I should like to make a few
remarks in reply to the statement of the representative
of the United States. He said: “We recognize that the
approach we have taken has generated disagreement
among some in the Middle East” [para. 244 qbove].
In the Balfour Declaration there is a reference to the
Jewish population and the non-Jewish population of
Palestine, and the Jewish population was 8 per cent;
the majority was referred to by the expression “nonminority”. Today the United States chose to use a
different expression.-“some”.
But the “some’” are
the principal party to the conflict; they are the Palestinian people, and should not be referred to as
“some”. They are the principal party to the issue.
That is only an attempt at insulting the intelligence
of the, people.

Those are the words of Mr. Brzezinski. Yet when
Mr. Brzezinski is in power, he seems to forget or not
to know whether Gaza is Palestinian, Arab or what,
and he says, “Bye, bye, PLO”.
183. I shall cite another example. We were told in
the Council on 1 March that the United States recognized that there would be no comprehensive peace
in the Middle East until the problem of Palestine
in all its aspects had been solved. Today the United
States has vetoed a constructive approach to bringing
about a peaceful and global or comprehensive solution that would be conducive to peace. I do not want
to question the credibility of the United States here,
but these are just some comments that come to mind.

188. The United States representative also said: “No
one has been able to come up with a workable
alternative” [ibid.~. Is he not aware of the General
Assembly resolutions in which the Secretary-General
20

Y

*

-c

4

i

k

has been asked to undertake endeavours for a comprehensive peace in a conference in which the Soviet
Union and the United States would act as co-chairmen,
and that all parties to the conflict, including the PLO,
would participate in the conference on the basis of the
rights of the Palestinian people? Somebody in the
United States administration should read those Assembly resolutions. They cannot hold these resolutions
as things for their archives. These are resolutions of
the international will.
189. We were then told that “the Palestinian people
in the West Bank and Gaza [will be permitted] to
participate in the determination of their own future
while preserving the security of all the parties*’
[para.
148 above]. That is something new-that a
people should be permitted to participate with others
in its selfdetermination. “Selfdetermination”
is just
that. We are not going to a party or to a football
game. There is a national right called the right to selfdetermination.
190. He then told us to judge them on the results
they obtain from Camp David. Of course, one of the
results is that Sadat permitted his country to be used
as a base for the C-130s that invaded Iran the other
day. Is that what the Camp David or the framework
accords are meant to do?

191. Finally, I repeat our thanks to those who supported the draft resolution and those who abstained
in the vote on it, because judging by the statements
made by them in explanation of vote, we still feel that
there is no difference on the substance. It is either a
question of timing or some other marginal consideration, not the substance.
192. For you, Mr. President, this has been a very
long month. We are proud of your perseverance; we
are proud of your endeavours and of your prudence.
Our trust in you has proved legitimate. Even though
the Council has been prevented from discharging its
duty, I would say that it has done its best, but for the
tyrannical vote of the United States.
193. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish): There are no further speakers on my list. The
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting

rose at 8.10 p.m.

NOTES
’ Oflciai Records of the General
Session, Supplement No. 35.
2 A/34/542, annex, sect. I, para. 133.

Assembly,

Thirty-fourth

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

D-E!3 NATIONS UNIES

Ixs publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans IesIibrairies et les agencesd@sitaires du
monde cntier. Informez-vous auprts de votre libraire ou adressez-vous & : Nations Unies, Section
des venta. New York ou &r&e.
KAK HOJlYIHTh

HIAAHHSf

OPrAHH3AqHH

H3nauwi
3KKax
natueu

Opraxn3aqm
06'be~KKeaKbxx
A areKTcTBax
so ecex
paftoxax
Kxnntno~
kfara3tixe
Km nsitmrre

HaqnR.

CeKuHIl

no nponaxe

OWLEJJHHEHKhIX

RaqKR
~osctio
uynwrb
uspa.
HaBonKre
cnpaeKn
no anpecy:
Qprann3aqwt
HaXaHHfi. HbiO-L?OpK
AIlsi %eHeBa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

HAQHH

a KHHXUibIX
stara06 K3AaKnnX
a
06aeAKHeHKbrx

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciona de las Naciones Unidas estin en venta en l~brerfas y easasdistniuidoras en
todas parks del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

titho in United Nations. New York

lxl400

83-61462-M@ust

198&2.425
