S/2000/319

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 April 2000
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
1.
The members of the Security Council recall the note by the President of 29
January 1999 (S/1999/92) which contained a number of practical proposals to
improve the work of the sanctions committee in accordance with the resolutions
concerned.
2.
The members of the Security Council note the work of the General Assembly
and also note that there exists considerable recent scholarship on the subject of
United Nations sanctions that merits consideration by the members of the Council.
In particular, they note recent efforts by Canada, Germany, Switzerland, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and others to sponsor specific
reports and studies on aspects of United Nations sanctions.
3.
Taking account of the note by the President of 29 January 1999 and other
relevant proposals and recommendations, including those referred to in paragraph 2
above, the members of the Security Council have decided to establish on a
temporary basis an informal working group of the Council to develop general
recommendations on how to improve the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions.
The working group should benefit from all available sanctions expertise, including
by being briefed, on a case-by-case basis, by appropriate experts. The working
group should report its findings to the Council by 30 November 2000.
4.
The informal working group should examine, inter alia, the following issues in
all aspects with a view to improving the effectiveness of sanctions:
a.

working methods
coordination;

b.

capacity of the United Nations Secretariat;

c.

coordination within the United Nations system and cooperation with
regional and other international organizations;

d.

design of sanctions resolutions including the conditions for the
maintaining/lifting of sanctions;

e.

pre- and post-assessment reports and the ongoing evaluation of sanctions
regimes;

f.

monitoring and enforcement of sanctions;

g.

unintended impacts of sanctions;

00-39502 (E) 170400
`````````

of

sanctions

committees

and

inter-committee

S/2000/319

h.

humanitarian exemptions;

i.

targeted sanctions;

j.

assisting member States in implementing sanctions;

k.

implementation of the recommendations of the above-mentioned note by
the President.

5.
The members of the Security Council request the Secretariat to provide the
informal working group with interpretation in the six working languages of the
United Nations.

2
