UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FJRST

YEAR

1899’h

MEETING:

25 MARCH

1976

NEW YORK
,I

CONTENTS
Page

. .. . ... .. .. ... .. .. .. ... .. ... .. .. .. .. .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan for consideration of the
serious situation arising from recent developments in the occupied Arab
territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent Representatives of the
Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan to the United Nations acdressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12017) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (SjAgendall899)

S/PV. 1899

r P, LI

N(

.’ r
_j I : :,_1, ’ Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters com.I
J:- .. bined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates,a reference to a United
j. :In

Nations document.
\

q-

.’

i

: &i;i*

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally publishctd
---..---- in
-.’ ‘quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The
-___ date
_-__
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears
or in which infor“.c
mation about it is given.
il..*‘t
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in ,accordance with a
.’
; * system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has. been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1999, became fully operative
on that date.
,
I ).

1899th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 25 March 1976, at 4 p.m.
President: Mr. Thomas S. BOYA (Benin).

took olaces at the Security
Council
table and
Mr. Khiser (Bangladesh), Mr.Abdel
Meguid (Egypt),
Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Zahawie (Iraq), Mr. Sharaf
(Jordan), Mr. El Hassen (Mauritania),
Mr. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia), Mr. Allaf (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Driss (Tunisia) and Mr. PetriC {Yugoslavia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
-.
chamber.
,,’
?. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French):

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern IrelandSUnited Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.l
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l8?9)

The first speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia.
I invite him to take a place at the’Council table and
to make his statement. ”

1. Adoption of the agenda

ri:i~
,..
2. Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan
for consideration of the serious situation arising
from recent developments in the,:occupied
Arab
_
territories:
Letter .dated 19 March 1976 froni’“the’Permanent
Representatives of the Libyan: Arab Republic
.and Pakistan to the United .Naiibns addressed
to the President of .the Security Council (5112017)
The meeting

was called,tb
Adoption

3. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I feel constrained
to speak again in order to correct certain misconceptions that seem to have formed in the minds of a few,
representatives here. Furtheremore, so that I shall not
have to ask to speak once again, I shall seize this
opportunity to make clear the part of my statement
yesterday [1897th meeting] to which reference was
made by none other than my colleague from the United
Kingdom, Mr. Richard.

order at 5.05 p.m.

of the agenda

4. I have been told that I was a little hard on the
Jews. My reply is: I am never hard on the Jews. On
the Zionists, yes, but not on the Jews. We have an
Arabic proverb which says, “Stay away from evil
and sing”. Why should I wish to pick a quarrel with
the Zionists? The fact is that the Zionists have not
left us alone since 1922.

The agenda was adopted:.’
Request by the ,Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan for
consideration of the serious situation arising from
recent developments in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representatives of the Libyan Arab Republic and
Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12017)

5. Indeed, had it not been for the 1947 plan for the
partition of Palestine I would have quit the United
Nations. I was asked by none other than His Majesty
the late King Faisal-may his soul rest in peace--to
organize, as a pan-Arab, the Saudi Arabian Mission to
the United Nations. I really wished to do other things,
because I was afraid that the United Nations was
repeating the mistakes of the League of Nations. 1 had
watched what had happened in San Francisco when
the Charter was discussed and signed. At that time
King Faisal was the Foreign Minister of his country.
We were invited to the United Kingdom, before the
war was over, by the Government of the late Mr. Churchill-may God forgive him and have mercy on his
soul. But we found that our British friends could
no longer bear the blood, sweat and tears-Mr. Churchill’s famous phrase-and we were greeted on
British soil by a representative of Mr. Attlee, the
head of the Labour Government. This all happened in

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions adopted earlier
[18!&~1894th,
1896th and 1897th meetings], I shall
invite the representative of Israel as well as the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization to
take their places at the Security Council table and
the representatives of Bangladesh, Egypt, India, Iraq,
Jordan, Mauritania, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia and Yugoslavia to take the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber
on the understanding that, as is customary, they will
be invited to take a place at the Council table when it
is their turn to speak.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Herzog (Israel)
and Mr. Terzi (Palestine
Liberation
Organization)

1

11. I shall now go a little further on in years. When’
our British friends saw fit to have Mr. Churchill
again as Prime Minister, the Empire was crumbling:
India and Pakistan were obtaining their freedom, and
later we had to fight for those African “lions” sitting
around this table, morally supporting them. All those
beautiful “birds” in the British Empire were flying
out of the “cage”. And Mr. Churchill said: “I was
not appointed His Majesty’s Prime Minister to preside
over the liquidation of the British Empire.” It is
against this background that I will touch on the problem
that has bedeviled us since 1947.

August 1945. While we were in mid-ocean-we were
on the Queen Mary; it was still a troop ship but this
was towards the end of the war and it was rather
empty-we read a dispatch about the atom bombs
that had been dropped on Hiroschima and Nagasaki
by the President of the United States, the late
Mr. Truman-may God forgive him too and rest his
soul in peace.
6. What relevance has all this to the item under discussion? The relevance will become very clear as
I continue this statement.

12. When in 1947 the experts of the State Department of the United States asked to see Mr. Truman,
because the United States had friends in the Middle
East, friends in.the journalistic and diplomatic sense;
in other words, the United States had certain interests
among Arabs and non-Arabs in the Middle East and
in the Moslem ,world, Mr. Wadsworth spoke on their
behalf-and I .knew Mr. Wadsworth; he was a fine
man, not because he posed the question he did but
because in his own right he was a man of good origin,
as you are, Mr. Scranton-and Mr. Truman said:
“Tell me: how many Americans of Arab or Lebanese
origin do I have in my constituency?” In other words,
he threw in his lot with the Zionists, because the
Zionists were strong; they permeated this country,
the host country-a great country. They prospered,
and more power to the Jews if they prosper here. But
they used their power in order to lord it over the
Arabs and expel the Palestinians from their homeland.
And I do not have to tell you again and again and
again that their forebears had never seen Palestine.

7. The British got into the Second World War to
liberate the world not only from nazism and fascism,
but also, allegedly, from any foreign yoke. But had it
not been for Hitler-and I hold no brief for Hitler-the
European empires abroad would still be extant.
8. History is not a collection of chronological facts;
that is historiography. History is what was written by
people like Ibn Khaldun, the Arab historian and
sociologist who lived many centuries ago. He was
born in Tunis and went to Morocco, and part of his
life was spent in Egypt. Real history is what is written
by people like Spengler and Arnold Toynbee. What
are the factors that shape history? What is the sociological background, the political forces in conflict?
That is history. That is the kind of history we should
learn, and not chronological facts, dates, and so forth.
9. I may have said this before, but it bears repetition:
the Allies in the Second World War were deceiving
one another. To see that that is so one need only
read a book that appeared a few months ago: Meeting
at Potsclam, by Charles Mee, Jr. When Mr. Churchill and Mr. Truman were discussing the peace terms
with the late Mr. Stalin-and, although he was a
Communist, may God rest his soul in peace alsoMr. Churchill turned to Mr. Truman and said, “What
about those 700,000 Nazi troops that have laid down
their weapons in the British zone? Why do we not
march on Moscow and finish off the Russians? The
Germans started it and we will finish it.” As if the
Russians were soft-boiled eggs. And Mr. Truman threw
his chest out and said: “I have something better:
I have the atom bomb”nt a time when Mr. Stimpson,
the Secretary of Defense, was pleading with Mr. Truman not to use the atom bomb because one day it
might usher in doomsday on this earth.

13. Some people take issue with me, claiming that
there were distortions and perhaps a falsification of
history on my part. This was said by none other than
my friend Mr. Richard. “Falsification” is a big word
that one should not use. If Mr. Richard had said that
I might have been mistaken or that I had misinterpreted
history, that would have been something else; but to
accuse me of falsification? What am I, a forger?
I do not expect Mr. Richard to say that I falsify
certain aspects of history. I just learnt this from the
press release:
“Ivor Richard, United Kingdom, said the representative of Saudi Arabia yesterday had falsified
certain aspects of history.”
“Falsified”, that is a big word. There is intent behind
the word “falsified”. He could have said that I was
mistaken or had misinterpreted. I make mistakes;
I stand to be corrected; I always say that. But “falsified”? So in my statement of clarification I wish
Mr. Thomas would listen very intently to me and
convey what 1 say to our friend Mr. Richard.

10. I knew certain things from Sir Alexander Cadogan, who used to sit in the Security Council, but they
were not as explicit as the facts that were given by
Charles Mee, Jr., the American researcher. The
Russians-r
the Soviets-can bear me out: the
Japanese were getting in touch through their Ambassador in Tokyo to see how they could make peace.
But still Mr. Truman wanted to drop the atom bomb.
And what a tragedy it was, and still is-because everybody is trying to acquire atom bombs.

14. I do not see why, with all the “good” that they
have done for the Zionists, the British are always
afraid that the Zionists cannot defend themselves, and
2

they begin to defend them here. He took issue ‘with
what I had said at yesterday afternoon’s meeting.
I nientioned three things: Dachau, The Diary of Anne
Frank and the empires that crumbled: the empires of
yore, meaning the Roman, Arab, Byzantine empires,
and what not, and also the recent empires. It seems
it frayed the nerves of our friend Mr. Richard, who,
I think, is always cool and collected,
a tower of
strength, when he sits in that chair; but he was ruffled,
and so I went to the record to find out what irked him.
And here is what I said:

15. I have here the British source. This was written
by Mr. Richard Harwood, a writer and specialist in
political and diplomatic aspects of the Second World
War. At present he is with the University of London.
I think it is a respectable university.
Mr. Harwood
turned to the vexed subject of war crimes under the
influence of Professor Paul Rassinier, a French writer
to whose monumental work this little volume is greatly
indebted. The author is now working on a sequel in
this se&es on the main Nuremberg trial, 1945-1946.
16. I shall mention what I referred to, now that my
good friend from the United Kingdom
knows the
source, a British source. This is a recent publication.
And I want my colleague from Sweden to hear this.
The publication says:

“Let those who support Israel beware that they
cannot maintain their strength and power if they are
based on injustice. Where are the empires of yore?
Crumbled-and
the modem empires too. I do not
want to exacerbate matters by naming them.”
[Ibid., para. 198.1
Is that a falsification

on a statement

“The truth about the Anne Frank diary was first
revealed in 1959 by the Swedish journal Fria Ord.
It established that the Jewish novelist Meyer Levine
had written the dialogue of the ‘diary’ and was
demanding payment for his work in a court action
against Otto Frank.”
Otto Frank was Anne’s
father. “A condensation
of the Swedish articles
appeared in the American
Economic
Council
Letter, April 15th, 1959, as follows:

of fact?

“But, good Lord, colonialists?
The other colonialists were a blessing in comparison
with the
Khazars. Neither the British nor the French, for that
matter, ever expropriated
the properties of the
people of the land. Of course they had to rationalize
their colonialism,
and at one time they called it
‘the white man’s burden’.” ilbid., para. 200.1

‘The Western World has for some years been
made aware of a Jewish girl through the medium
of what purports to be her personally written
story, The Diary of Anne Frank. Any informed
literary inspection of this book would have shown
it to have been impossible as the work of a teenager.

Read Rudyard
Kipling
and the literature
during
Kipling’s
day. The British had a mission. But now
they have a Labour Government,
I think and they are
happier without the colonies. You went to “civilize”
the world. Of course you have to rationalize
your
presence in countrie’s which are not your own. “The
white man’s burden”, you call it. I added:

‘A noteworthy decision of the New York Supreme Court confirms this point of view, in that
the well-known American Jewish writer, Meyer
Levine, has been awarded $50,000 to be paid him
by the father of Anne Frank as an honorarium
for Levine’s work on the Anne Frank diary.

“But how could the Zionists rationalize
their
colonialism?
‘God gave us Palestine. We are the
chosen people of God and you, all the peoples of
the world, have to go down. You are upstarts because
we are the chosen people ofGod.’ What fiction, what
hoaxes.” [Ibid.]

‘Mr. Frank, in Switzerland,
has promised to
pay.. . Meyer Levine not less than $50,000 because
he had used the dialogue of author Levine just
as it was and “implanted”
it in the diary as being
his daughter’s intellectual work.’

That did not touch the British in any particular way.
Maybe this is what irked him-1
want to find out.
I went on to say:
“They [meaning the Zionists] have even played
on the emotions of the Europeans and swindled
them” -1 did not say the Jews swindled them; the
Zionists“... Before those Jews had a country,
so to speak, before Israel was established,
they
made West Germany pay billions of dollars. And,
like others, I was touched when I read a book
which Mrs. Roosevelt pointed out to me, saying:
‘You read that book. It is very touching.’
It was
The Diary of Anne Frank, a girl of a Jewish family
which lived in the Netherlands.
She, her parents and
her brother and sister were interned by the Germans.
It was not until recently that it dawned on me that
90 per cent of the alleged dialogues were written by
a certain Mr. Levine;“. [Ibid., para. 201.1

’

“Further inquiries brought a reply on May 7th,
1962 from a firm of New York lawyers, which
stated:
‘I was the attorney for Meyer Levine in his
action against Otto Frank and others. It is true
that a jury awarded Mr. Levine $50,000 in
damages, as indicated in your letter. That award
was later set aside by the trial justice, Hon.
Samuel C. Coleman, on the ground that the
damages had not been proved in the manner
required by law. The action was subsequently
settled while an appeal from Judge Coleman’s
decision was pending.

3

‘I am afraid that the case itself is not offtcially
reported, so far as the trial itself, or even Judge
Coleman’s decision, is concerned. Certain procedural matters were reported’-mark
this
down, my good friend Mr. Thomas, to pass on
to Ambassador
Richard-‘in
141 New York
Supplement, Second Series 170, and in 5 Second
Series 181. The correct file number in the New
York County Clerk’s office is 2241-1956 and the
file is probably a large and full one.’ ‘*

in his book that the use of prisoners in war industry
was a major feature of concentration
camp policy
until the end of the war. He fails to reconcile this
with an alleged policy of massacring Jews.”
18. I would not say there were not executions of
Jews. Who am I to say that? I would feel sorry for
any human being, Jew or Gentile, who was executed,
whether by gas, by sabre or by bombing. “The causes
of death are -multifarious,
but death is one.” It is a
crime to take the life of another person. But the gist
of what I said in reply to Mr. Herzog-who
has
again absented himself because, I think, he is very
sensitive on this subject or he does not like to hear my
voice, which irritates his eardrums-was
that I was
refuting allegations and mud-slinging
at Arabs. I was
telling him of the many distortions of history, quite
apart from the myths and fictions of yore. And in
that context I said that the Jews capitalized on the
figure they always mentioned
of 6 million
Jews.
Once, when Mr. Tekoah was sitting next to me, I said,
“Why don’t you make it six and a quarter million,
or 5,200,000? Why always 6 million, as if you have true
statistics?” This is not true, and it will come out, just
as it came out that the Germans did not eat Belgian
babies when they invaded Belgium in the First World
War. The greatness of the British lies in the fact that
their Foreign Secretary made an apology to the
Germans after the First World War in Parliament. But
who except Baroody dares point out these things?
They call him an anti-Semite. This is a contradiction:
a Semite becomes an anti-Semite-Baroody
against
himself. How do you like that? Shame on the word
“falsify”.
.-

If I had been under a false impression, Mr. Richard,
before saying I had falsified, could have asked me,
“Where did you get your facts?” Perhaps he knows
something about this author and could have told me
“Well,
he is a spurious author”.
But “falsify”?
Baroody falsifies? Tut tut.
17. Yesterday I made a reference to Dachau. I have
other sources, but I do not want to encumber the
Council; some of them are from American historians.
I refer now to an eye-witness account about Auschwitz:,
“Christopherson’s
account is certainly one of the
most important
documents
for a reappraisal
of
Auschwitz.
He spent the whole of 1944 there,
during which time he visited all of the separate
camps comprising
the large Auschwitz complex,
including Auschwitz-Birkenau
where it is alleged
that wholesale massacres of Jews took place.
Christopherson,
however, is in no doubt that this is
totally untrue. He writes: ‘I was in Auschwitz from
January until December 1944. After the war I heard
about the mass murders which were supposedly
perpetrated by the S .S. against the Jewish prisoners,
and I was perfectly astonished. Despite all the
evidence of witnesses, all the newspaper reports
and radio broadcasts I still do not believe today in
these horrible deeds. I have said this many times
and in many places, but to no purpose. One is never
believed.’ ”
And then he goes on to other sources, quoting
books about the gassings:

19. I do not ask for an apology, but I can refute
what is said. We are diplomats; we make mistakes.
But I do not think he was justified in saying that I
falsified certain aspects of history. If I did so unwittingly, it was by proxy, quoting British sources.
20. I will end my statement by asking our colleague
from the United Kingdom to be assured that I am still
friends with the British. This will not cloud the personal
relations or diplomatic relations I have had with them.
But we here should not be automata, formalistic,
playing the old game with toffs of diplomats
and
measure our words ‘and juggle semantics. Let us be
frank. Let us have a new approach to international
affairs. It is high time, when the big Powers say one
sweet thing out of one comer of their mouths and
then fill their arsenals for overkill. Who do they think
they are? Are we fooled? No, Sir.

from

“However,
no living, authentic eye-witness of
these ‘gassings’ has ever been produced and validated. Benedikt Kautsky, who spent seven years
in concentration
camps, including three in Auschwitz, alleged in his book Teufel und Verdammte
(Devil and Damned), Zurich, 1946, that ‘not less
than 3,500,OOO Jews’ had been killed there. This
was certainly a remarkable statement, because by
his own admission he had never seen a gas chamber.
He confessed: ‘I was in the big German concentration camps. However, I must establish the truth
that in no camp at any time did I come across
such an installation as a gas chanber.’ . . . The only
execution he actually witnessed was when two
Polish inmates were executed for killing two Jewish
inmates. Kautsky, who was sent from Buchenwald
in October 1942 to work at Auschwitz-Buna,
stressed

21. Although I am 70 years old, I hope that the
youngsters will take a new approach and not use the
antiquated
approaches to international
affairs by
throwing mud, beating around the bush and going in
circles. Let them pirouette at the circus; if they want
to go in circles rather than come here and deal with
matters of life and death, matters that touch upon the
self-determination
of a people expelled from its own
4‘

occupied Arab territories. This fact has already been
emphasized
repeatedly in resolutions
of both the
General Assembly and the Security Council on the
general question of the Middle East.

land. They cannot have one yardstick
for the
Europeans
and another for the Asians and the
Africans. We are all human beings, brothers under the
skin. But if they want to be supercilious, we can beat
them at that game. Who are they who wish to use the
approach of wielding power over weaker people? The
elements of destruction lie within them, and they will
fall and crumble as others have. Let them beware.

27. Clearly, any situation of occupation, if it does not
draw to a close at an appropriate
time, ends by
exasperating the populations and provoking reactions
of rebellion which the forces of occupation usually
cannot control. These are tangible facts and realities
which Israel must recognize in order to be able to
adapt its reactions to them. This occupation,
so
repugnant to the Arabs and so strongly condemned by
the international
community,
must cease without a
futile delay which would inevitably be detrimental
to
Israel. That is why the Council must not tire of striving
to have Israel withdraw as soon as possible from all
the Arab territories occupied since the 1967 war if that
country has a genuine wish to ensure its own security
and live on terms of peace and good understanding
with its neighbours. It is the duty of the Council to
appeal to the great Powers, particularly
those which
are able to exercise any influence on Israel, so that
Israel may recognize this truth and bow to the lessons
of the history of wars that last too long and therefore
are ruinous. If Israel were to withdraw from the
occupied Arab territories,
the problem before the
Council, which flows from this anachronistic
and
abnormal situation, would consequently disappear.

22. I apologize for the length of this statement,
knowing that members are all avid to finish this
business and, perhaps, next week embark on another
touchy question on with I will have my say-Angola,
and other matters. We shall see what the Europeans
are doing surreptitiously
or covertly. I hope there will
be no mud-slinging and that we will all talk with good
intentions in the hope of bringing peace, peace even
between the Palestinians and the Jews in the Holy
Land of Palestine, and peace all over the world. For
there is no escape from it: if we do not establish
peace, we may be leading the world to perdition,
into anguish and tribulation and, perhaps, the extinction of the human species.
23. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Since no other member of the Council wishes to speak
at this stage of the general debate, now that the Council is about to conclude its work on the question of
Jerusalem, I should like to make a few brief comments
as the representative of BENIN.

28. It only remains for us to express the hope that
soon serious and real negotiations may start between
Israel and the Arabs, particularly the Palestinians, so
that they may find a solution that will permit the withdrawal of Israel from the occupied Arab territories and
the lessening of tension in the Middle East.

24. My delegation is very happy to have among us
the new Permanent
Representative
of the United
States, to whom we extend our best wishes for success
in his post. I can assure him here and now of our
complete co-operation.
25. My delegation is also pleased to see that we have
participating
in the debate the delegation
of the
Palestine Liberation Organization as well as the delegation of Israel. The contributions
which both delegations have made to the work will, I am sure, help to
bring about the further evolution of the situation in the
Middle East. Benin is willing to see in their participation in the debates a good omen that the time is not
distant when Palestinians and Israelis will at last agree
to meet together at a negotiating table so as to seek
jointly the ways and means to half future bloodshed in
that disturbed area.

29. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan):
Mr. President, on
behalf of your delegation, those of Guyana, Panama,
the United Republic of Tanzania and my own, I have
the honour to put before the Council the draft resolution contained in document S/12022. The draft is selfexplanatory. Members are aware of the effort that has
gone into its preparation.
Nevertheless,
I shall ask
your indulgence while I explain briefly the considerations which the sponsors of this text have in mind in
presenting it to the Council.
30. The present debate has ranged far and wide over
the issues and emotions which divide the Arabs from
the Israelis in the Middle East, and it has reflected the
passions and the bitterness of this conflict, which has
gone on too long. As happens often, not everything
that was said was necessary or relevant. I want to say
again, as I said in my statement at the beginning of
the debate [189&h meeting], that the objective of the
present meeting was specific and was specified in the
letter which my delegation and that of Libya submitted
to the President [S/12027].

26. The delegation of Benin has attentively followed
the statements of the delegations chiefly concerned
with the problem of the tension prevailing in Jerusalem
and in the occupied Arab territories,
and we have
come to the conclusion that we have been warranted
in the position we have been taking for a number of
years. The question of the desecration of the Holy
Places in Jerusalem and elsewhere and the marked
tendency of Israel to change the demographic, political
and social character of the territories at present under
its domination are manifestations of a single problem,
namely, the need for withdrawal by Israel from all the

3 1. What has been happening in Jerusalem and in the
West Bank generally is a warning signal that time is
5

running out. It has been stated that the military
occupation of Israel has been exemplary and benign.
The fact of the matter is that in its nature no military
occupation can be benign. As soon as resistance to
occupation
becomes effective the benign features
disappear
and the mailed
fist reappears.
This
morning’s issue of The New York Times states, for
instance:

our colleague from the United States. On the matter of
Jerusalem he recalled what his predecessors had said:

“ . . . the Israelis today hesitate less in using force
to maintain public order. In putting down the most
recent riots, Israeli soldiers, many of them teenagers, have used tactics they would themselves
denounce in any other situation.”

“such unilateral measures, including expropriation
of land or other administrative
action taken by the
Government
of Israel, cannot be considered other
than interim and provisional”-and
I would venture
to suggest that it cannot be considered anything
but illegal-“
and cannot affect the present intemational status or prejudge the final and permanent
status of Jerusalem.”
[Z896th meeting, paras. 66
and 67.1

“The United States does not accept or recognize
unilateral actions by any States in the area as altering
the status of Jerusalem.”
He went on to say:

32. The situation has been described to us by impartial observers reporting from Jerusalem and the
occupied territories of the West Bank. There are curfews in town after town, paratroopers in Jerusalem on
the rooftops of private houses. All this has been going
on for more than seven weeks and has only intensified
with every passing day. The judgement delivered by the
Supreme Court of Israel has made no great difference
to the situation. It was possible to describe acts by
individual
guerrillas as acts of terrorism, as acts of
banditry. It is not possible to do so in the case of the
mass uprising that we are witnessing in the West Bank.
The representative
of Israel minimized
the whole
affair as demonstrations
by teenagers who had been
carried away by propaganda directed at them from the
outside. I would submit that such self-deception
is
futile and destructive.

On the wider issues that have been of concern to us,
the representative of the United States stated:
I‘ . . . substantial resettlement
of the Israeli civilian
population
in occupied territories,
including East
Jerusalem, is illegal under the [Geneva] Convention... the presence of these settlements is seen by
my Government as an obstacle to the success of the
negotiations
for a just and final peace between
Israel and its neighbours.”
[Ibid., para. 68.1
35. In the circumstances,
the Security Council’s
responsibility to act under the Charter and to intervene
in the situation is unmistakable
and undisputed.

33. The debate which has taken place he; indicated
at least one thing: that Council members are well
aware of the gravity of the situation, and not only the
members of the Council but the world at large. Once
again, Mr. Terence Smith, reporting from Jerusalem,
writes in today’s New York Times: “The disturbances
are a genuinely indigenous phenomenon that reflects
the accumulated grievances of a population that has
been under occupation for eight years.” The world at
large is also clear about the necessary elements of
peace. There must be withdrawal of Israeli forces
from all the territories they occupied in the war of 1967.
There must be recognition of the rights of Palestinians:
their right to entity, their right to self-determination,
their right to return if they so choose to their homes
and properties from which they fled or had to flee;
and finally of the right of all States in the region to
live in peace, in mutual respect with each other. We
shall have to return to this larger issue on a later
occasion when the Council takes it up, and we shall
seek once again to reach the agreement which eluded
us on the previous occasion.

36. I should like to say on behalf of the sponsors of
this draft resolution that we have not approached it
in a spirit of a semantical exercise. Although we do
feel that fundamental principles must be stated with
clarity, its language and phraseology is less important
than its basic objective,
its basic aim and thrust,
which is, as expressed in the preamble, to express
concern at what has happened, at whas is happening
and at what might yet happen, and to affirm fundamental principles such as the inadmissibility
of the
acquisition of territory by force and war; and in the
operative part, to call on Israel to do what seems to
us essential in the present situation and inescapable
in the longer perspective of the enduring peace which
Israel itself and all the other parties to the dispute
desire and seek. I must say, in parenthesis, the fact
that all the parties to the dispute are for the first time
seated around this table is in itself a step towards
reality.
37. If Ambassador Scranton will forgive me, I should
like to return once again to his statement. There are
three questions, he said, which would determine the
position of his Government towards whatever action
might be proposed to the Council. The first is, “do
the facts and judgements on which the draft resolution
is based correspond to the actual situation?”
[ibid.,
para. 691. In other words, is it broadly correct, is it

34. On the specifics of the present agenda item, it
was encouraging to see that there were no substantial
or major differences and, if I may say so, there were
no minor differences on what is required to be done to
redress the situation. I shall take the liberty of quoting
from only one of the statements made here, that of
6

accurate that the measures taken by the Israeli
authorities aimed at changing the physical, cultural, ;
demographic and religious character of the occupied
territories, the establishment
of Israeli settlements in
occupied territories,
the violations of human rights
-call them by whatever name you wish-should
be a
matter of deep concern to this Council?

‘and we remain responsive to any constructive ideas,
any changes, that any member feels might be necessary or might even be advisable to improve this draft
and, if not to improve it, to make it more generally
acceptable.

39. Ambassador
Scranton’s second question was,
“will the Council’s action in practice advance the
proper administration
of the areas involved?”
[ibid.].
All that the Council can do is to remind the parties
of their responsibilities,
of their obligations,
of their
duties, of their commitments
under the international
instruments which exist, and this is what we seek to
do. We have done it before and we have been met
with silence and disregard. The least we can do-in
operative paragraph l-is
to deplore the fact that
Israel has failed “... to put a stop to actions and
policies tending to change the status of the City of
Jerusalem and to rescind measures already taken to
that effect”.

45. An allegation was preferred in connexion withcertain alleged events in Jerusalem connected with the
Al-Aqsa Mosque. As I pointed out, the allegation was
nothing more than a lie and uttered in a mischievous
and sinister attempt to incite religious feelings for
political purposes. I trust that I convinced at least
some of the representatives
that indeed we were
dealing with a frivolous argument which was completely unsustained by the evidence and was in fact
a facetious use of the representatives’
time. What is
so serious, of course, in this whole debate is the
dangerous and sinister purpose behind it all, namely,
an attempt to inflame religious opinion throughout the
world on the basis of a foul untruth.

40. Finally, the representative of the United States
asked-and
he said, and I agree, that this was the
most important question of all-“will
the Council’s
action help or hinder the peaceful settlement process,
the framework for which was established by resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973)?” [ibid.]. It is the considered view of the five sponsors, a view we hope
will be shared by all the members of the Council,
that the adoption of the draft resolution which we put
to you will indeed help this process. If there is any
delegation which feels that, on the contrary, the adoption of this draft resolution will hinder the peaceful
settlement process, we should be very happy to hear in
what way it would do so.

46. An attempt was made to condemn Israel, whose
Government is in fact protecting the Moslems’ rights
and whose Supreme Court has twice upheld the
Government’s
decision. I believe that I convinced
some of my colleagues here on this point. In fact,
you may have noticed that allegations in this respect
have quietly disappeared from the speeches made
‘before this body. Instead, we suddenly find ourselves
seized of all sorts of matters irrelevant to the accusation preferred which do not relate in any way whatsoever to the original charges in respect of which this
body was hastily summoned. This is in the Orwellian
tradition of the Organization: to debate something that
never was in the language which Orwell coined,
“Newspeak”,
in which peace is war, love is hate and
truth is falsehood. Yes, it may be 1976 outside this
building, but the year inside this building is 1984.

42. I think that we have given affiimative
answers
and that this draft resolution gives affirmative answers
to all three of Mr. Scranton’s questions. It embodies
38. It was put to us that Israel has shown the most
the widest measure of agreement obtainable on the .
punctilious
regard for the religious sensibilities
of
specifics
of the case we are discussing. It would be
Moslems and Christians who venerate the Holy Places
more than a pity, it would be more than disappointing;
situated in Jerusalem. I shall not burden the Council
it would be contrary to the political logic of the situawith a great deal of detail, but I have before me an
tion if that agreement fell short of what is necessary
article from The Guardian of London, 27 April 1972,
for the unanimous adoption of the draft resolution.
by David Hirst, entitled “Bulldozing
through Arab
With these words I commend this draft resolution to
history”, a long article in which he states:
the members of the Council in the hope that it will be
-.
adopted without dissent.
“Four days after Dayan made his proclamation” -a proclamation to the effect that Israel would
43. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
show respect for the Holy Places-“Israeli
bullThe next speaker is the representative
of Israel, on
dozers demolished.. . 700 years of Moslem history
whom I now call.
in the shape of the wa4f or religious endowment
adjoining the Wall,” -the Wailing Wall-“founded
44. Mr. HERZOG
(Israel): In my initial remarks to
by the son of Saladin himself, 135 houses of the
the Council [2894rh meeting], I dwelt on the abandonMograbi quarter, where 650 beneficiaries
of the
ment of the principles
of natural law in United
endowment lived, and two mosques were swept
Nations practices. I pointed out that the concepts of
away.”
impartiality
in such a hearing as this one had been
-.
__._ _..~ replaced by the idea that United Nations organs are
There is considerably more in the article.
both prosecutor and judge. -

41. I said that we are not wedded to any particular
language and phraseology. We have been responsive
7

-47. And now what do we do? This allegation having
been proved false, all forms of side-issues
were
introduced, which only goes to prove what I explained
to the Council regarding the real purpose of the
frivolous document originally
submitted in order to
summon this body.

the tvoe of discussion which we are obliged to listen
to, the United Nations has been manoeuvred into the
forefront of those elements that would sabotage every
effort in the Middle
East towards peace. By the
permission
given to small groups of irresponsible
extremists to dictate to the United Nations, the tragedy
of the Middle East conflict is being prolonged.

48. What might have been expected of this body if it
had been acting in accordance with the principles of
. natural law-which
should of course guide it? In those
circumstances,
those who had preferred this false
charge would have been condemned
not only for
bringing it before this body and wasting everybody’s
time but also for a flagrant act of racial and religious
incitement calculated to lead to a disturbance of the
peace and to inflame passions in a situation fraught with
danger. An impartial
body seated as a judiciary,
independent
of the executive, unimpeded
by considerations
of expediency would first of all have
condemned this disgraceful attempt to falsify the facts,
create mischief, encourage religious incitement and do
harm in a charged atmosphere today in a manner which
is best calculated to bring deterioration
and tragedy.
This body would then have proceeded, if it had indeed
been an impartial judiciary and unimpeded by considerations of expediency, to invite the States parties
to the conflict to meet face to face in accordance
with Security Council resolution 338 (1973) and come
to grips with the issues at stake instead of wasting
the time of the Council.

51. I wish to emnhasize in the strongest possible
manner that there is no point whatsoever&
discussing
out of context the territories administered
by Israel.
Anyone who does so is consciously distorting the
picture. Twice before, in 1949 and 1957, we withdrew
from territories in the hope that this would encourage
our Arab neighbours to move towards peace. We were
given undertakings of an international
nature at that
time. Yet, when the Arabs decided to atttack us in
1967, all the undertakings were forgotten. The sanctity
of the 1967 borders, which is constantly invoked, was
ignored.
52. Our experience led us to the conclusion that withdrawal, accommodation
and concession could come
only in return for a state of peace. We did not want
war in 1967. We did not seek hostilities.
We were
living behind the 1967 borders. We were attacked and’
promised
annihilation.
We will not agree to the
creation again of the situation which brought on the
previous wars, or indeed to any compromise
unless
it is in return for a move towards peace. That we are
prepared for this type of advance has been adequately
demonstrated in the Israel-Egyptian
agreement in the
Sinai [S/11818/Add.l
of 2 September 19751.

49. Instead, what are you doing? As I pointed out,
since three days before I was even given a chance to
present our case, you have, in accordance with the
incongruous practice which has begun to be accepted
as a norm here, even by those who know better, been
sitting in judgement
and in fact writing the judgement-for
that is what the draft resolution is-even
before you heard the sides to the case. I protest against
this disgraceful behaviour which violates norms of
natural law and which is destroying the United Nations.
In raising my voice against it, may I express the hope
that the enlightened world community
will awaken to
the dangers inherent in this abhorrent development. To
return to the Queen of Hearts, “sentence first, judgement afterwards’*. Here you are doing it again.

53. Furthermore,
for 19 years, as I pointed out, we
sat along the 1967 borders, which have suddenly
become sacrosanct in the eyes of all and the solution
for all evils in the Middle East. Did the Arab States
make peace, or even talk peace? No. They made war
in 1967. That war, which they made for the avowed
purpose-it
is all on the record-of
throwing us into
the sea and destroying
us all, men, women and
children, to quote them at the time, is what brought
about the present situation whereby we administer
these territories. Despite the problems we are proud
of our administration
of these territories. We are proud
of the fact that, despite all the provocation, not once
has the death sentence been carried out. We are proud
of the fact that we have given a large Palestinian
Arab population
more freedom in relation to the
Government
under which they live than any other
Arab in the Middle East enjoys. Nowhere in the entire
Arab world today, now that the Lebanon has been-1
regret-eclipsed
to a great degree, is an Arab free to
speak, write and vote against the Government of the
country in which he lives. Only in Israel is this possible
for an Arab. We are proud because in the West Bank
and in Gaza, where we are engaged in a daily dialogue
with a large Palestinian
Arab population,
we have
consciously created a bridge to the Arab world which
has in these weeks stood the test of the disturbances
brought about by irresponsible
incitement
in which

50. The manner in which the United Nations has
been dealing with the Middle East problem is a tragedy
of major international
proportions.
Its implications
are terrifying and sinister. It should have been acting
as a forum the purpose of which is to encourage
negotiations, to strive for consensus and compromise,
for that is the only manner in which the problem of
the Middle East will be resolved. Instead, the United
Nations, by allowing itself to be dominated by a group
of intransigent extremists whose declared purpose is
to fight against any move towards peace, is encouraging
dissent instead of accord, intransigence instead of compromise, fanaticism instead of accommodation
and
conflict instead of peace. By taking a subject which
can only be solved by compromise and bringing to it
8

I
.-

cessions and put its good faith in those who make
these statements?

this Council meeting has regrettably played a part.
Look at the events in the Middle East today, contemplate all that is happening domestically and internationally, and give events their correct proportions.
’

58. Two Arab representatives
spoke in the Council
chamber yesterday in terms of the destruction of a
Member State. The representative of Libya, a member
of the Security Council, an organ which is entrusted
with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance
of international
peace and security, called in this
chamber yesterday for the destruction of a Member
State. The Charter in Article 23 states:

54. In the disturbances which occurred in parts of the
West Bank and which were aroused by religious
incitement
sparked off by the story of Al-Aqsa
-which has no basis in fact and in which the Government of Israel was protecting
Moslem
interests;
indeed, nobody was more vociferous and active in
pacifying the crowds than the Cadis and religious
leaders at Al-Aqsa Mosque; thanks to them the
developments
did not get out of hand-a number of
salient facts are worthy of note. During these events,
the bridges across the Jordan remained open to the
movement of thousands of Arabs and others, in both
directions, and to two-way trade. Seventy thousand
Arab workers crossed daily into Israel, as they do
every day to come to work. In no case was the use of
firearms authorized. For the unfortunate shooting of
a child by an off-duty soldier who fired the shot into
the crowd, the soldier has been arrested and arraigned.
As I mentioned two days ago, the total number of
arrests in the West Bank during this period did not
exceed 48.

“The General Assembly shall elect ten other
Members of the United Nations to be non-permanent
members of the Security Council, due regard being
specially paid, in the first instance to the contribution of Members of the United Nations to the
maintenance of international
peace and security and
to the other purposes of the Organization.”
What moral standing can the Council have when on
it sits a member who can come before it and call for
the destruction of a Member State? The representative
of Libya stated yesterday, “This racist entity in the
Middle East must be destroyed and it will be destroyed
one day.” [l897th meeting, para. 184.1 Yet, let it be
recorded that the Security Council remained silent.
Can this really be the Security Council of the United
Nations?

55. Let us look at the picture in perspective. Despite
the disturbances, no Arab voice was raised in the West
Bank calling for a cancellation of the elections. If the
Palestinian Arabs want elections, they will be held.
If they do not want them, it is up to them. Candidates
will file on the 29th of this month, namely, next
Monday, and elections are scheduled for 12 April.

59. Take the list of the Arab States whose representatives have spoken here. Look at their record, not
towards Israel, but one towards the other. Consider
for a moment their record of loyalty to their friends,
to their fellow Arabs, to the countries that helped them
in their hours of stress and need, both militarily
and
economically.
Consider their inter-Arab relations. If
I am not mistaken, there is not one treaty that has
been signed between Arab countries that has not been
broken on one or more occasions. Consider all this,
and then in your heart of hearts ask yourselves whether
you would recommend to Israel, recommend, indeed,
to any country, to make concessions under such conditions. I know that you will not express yourselves,
but at least let your true feelings, if not your statements
and votes, be tempered by a degree of intellectual
honesty when evaluating this situation.

56. So let us return the picture, which has been
distorted by Arab rhetoric, to its true proportions.
Remember that while we have been listening to this
purposeless debate a casualty list of over 200 killed
was recorded last night in the Lebanon, for a total of
approximately
480 since our debate began. And still
there is silence from the Security Council while
tragedy stalks the Lebanon. The Council continues to
fiddle while the Lebanon bums.
57. Not for a moment am I suggesting, or have
I ever suggested in the meetings at the United Nations,
that there are no problems. Not for a moment are we
trying to avoid the issues facing us. They are there for
us all to see, and our Government’s
policy as to their
solution has been made clear time and time again. But,
Mr. President and distinguished members of the Council, can you envisage the solution between parties to a
problem without negotiations?
Can you envisage any
human problems being decided without the involved
parties negotiating?
Can you envisage any fruitful
development that could possibly emerge from the type
of debate which we have heard in this chamber, or in
any other chamber in this building? Do you honestly
believe that any self-respecting individual,
let alone
any self-respecting. country, would agree to be browbeaten like this and then be expected to make con-

60. Is it not time for the record which is nlaved to
us, day in and day out, an evil record of uncompromising hate and intransigent hostility, a record so
cracked and worn out by long and constant usage,
to be replaced by one emitting sounds of hope and
even a small measure of good will?
61. Is it not intellectually
degrading to have to sit and
listen to this ceaseless outpouring
of negation and
barren and purposeless vituperation,
uttered day in
and day out, year in and year out, at times without
reference to even the common courtesies applicable in
international
society? What is the purpose of this
uncouth, insulting exhibition
to which we are sub9

jetted?
To create goodwill and a more congenial
atmosphere between us and our neighbours?

hinder those negotiations.”

[664th meeting,

paras 95

and 96.1

62. What is the purpose of all this? Is it not time that
somebody posed that question? I can already hear the
stream of rhetoric answering me. Let me make one
point quite clear. It does not disturb me, for nothing
could explain or justify our attitudes better than the
remarks of my Arab colleagues. Indeed, every speech
here made by an Arab representative vindicates our
stand. But I just fail to comprehend
this bizarre
phenomenon.

65. I declare here and now that I am prepared to
sit down with each and every one of the ambassadors
from the Arab countries to this Organization,
in an
atmosphere of mutual respect. Let them overcome
their difficulties in talking to me. Let the Council,
instead of encouraging hatred. intransigence and incitement by.its very deliberations,
make a simple move
forward by recommending
that here, at least, we-the
Arab representatives and I-should
sit down and talk.
I am prepared to do so at any moment.

63. I ask you, Mr. President, does it make sense
if one really wants peace to sit and listen to what we
have had to listen to day in and day out in this
building? Is this the method best calculated to influence
us towards accommodation
and compromise?
What
purpose is there in all this hateful exhibition to which
we have been witness? Has not the time been reached
when the members of the Council should demand,
once and for all, an end to this continuous barren
diatribe and outpouring of vitriol, which is getting us
nowhere and is only strengthening
intransigence
everywhere, and should insist that the parties to the
conflict sit down and discuss and negotiate in a
civilized manner? Without this we shall never achieve
anything. Why should not the representatives
from
the Arab countries, instead of vying with each other
in levels of hostility, each one straining to outdo the
tones of hatred and bitterness of his neighbour, in a
futile exercise of one-upmanship,
sit down with me to
talk over matters, as civilized human beings-however hostile one to the other-should
do?

66. I reject the thesis that Israeli occupation of the
territories is obstructing the process of peace as a
thesis based on an erroneous premise. That is not the
main issue. If it was, why was peace not achieved
before the territories fell into our hands in 1967?
67. Again I repeat the question I have asked time and
again without receiving an answer. For 19 years,
from 1949 to 1967, the West Bank and Gaza were
ruled by two Arab countries: What happened to ‘the
inalienable
rights of the Palestinian
Arabs in those
years? Why did those Arab countries not do what
they are asking Israel to do today? Why did they not
accord the degree of local administration
to the
Arabs in the West Bank and Gaza which those Arabs
enjoy today under Israel? For 19 years you ruled the
West Bank and Gaza. What did you do for them?
The answer is: nothing. So much for your concern.
68. The issue is not a question of territory, it is not
a question of the Palestinian Arabs-although
those are
both important. It is a question of a change of heart
in respect of Israel on the part of the Arab countries.
Until that change of heart is achieved, no meaningful
advance can really be made.

64. Will resolutions help? Have they ever helped?
Has any international
accord been achieved by means
of a one-sided resolution, in the drafting of which one
of the sides did not even participate, let alone being
consulted? Nobody has better summed up this issue
than a former representative
of the Soviet Union,
Deputy Foreign Minister Andrei Vyshinsky, who on
29 March 1954 addressed the Council as follows:

69. I repeat: at the heart of the conflict lies the Arab
refusal to recognize the right of the Jewish nation to
self-determination
and national sovereignty. I cannot
express this problem in a more succinct and incisive
manner than did a former President of the General
Assembly, Mr. Charles Malik of Lebanon, who said in
an interview last year, as reported in the Saturday

“You can submit whatever resolutions you like.
But life does not call for resolutions;
it calls for
decisions which can promote the settlement
of
important
international
questions which are still
outstanding.

Review:

“The main essential for peace-indeed
the quintessential-is
the need for the Arab world to accept
Israel’s existence. [Malik] felt that this is the ultimate
issue. Unless and until the Arab peoples have a
genuine change of heart the Middle East will vibrate
from one crisis to the next. [Malik]
repeated
‘change of heart’ in order to emphasize his belief
that what is required is not just a temporary accommodation or an expedient political manceuvre, but
genuine acceptance of Israel as a State.”

“What is the proper method for this? The method
is that of direct negotiation between the interested
parties. On one side we have the representative of
Israel and on the other the representative of Egypt;
they are sitting opposite one another. Let them sit
down together at one table and try to settle the
questions which the Security Council cannot settle
now. I am deeply convinced that they can find a
better solution. That is why certain representatives
and States show a stubborn disinclination
to permit
direct negotiations
between the interested parties
and are trying to interfere in and, unfortunately,
to

70. In our region the Arab nation has realized its
sovereignty in 20 States comprising 100 million people
10
-, L

general situation prevailing in the occupied territories
as a result of Israel’s occupation, which has lasted
for almost a decade, with no peaceful end in sight.
It restates principles and provisions of international
law which govern the conduct of occupation by any
occupying Power towards the civilian inhabitants of
the occupied territories and the areas in which they
live. It understates-rather
than overstating
or
stating sufftciently-the
grave concern of the largest
sector of the international
community
at the Israeli
violations of the rights of the people in the territories
under occupation
since June 1967 and enumerates
objectively
those violations.
But it is a timely and
necessary text, regardless of its basic understatement
of the case, because the people of the occupied territories need it, because the occupying Power needs it,
and because the preservation
of the authority and
conscience of the United Nations requires it.

in four and a half million square miles, with vast
resources. The issue therefore is not whether the
world will come to terms with Arab nationalism.
The
-auestion is at what pomt Arab nattonahsm, wtth tts
prodigious glut of advantage, wealth and opportunity,
will come to terms with the modest but equal rights
of another Middle Eastern nation to pursue its life
in security and peace.
71. Thus, in conclusion, let me re-emphasize once
and for all: If the Arab States want peace they can
have it. We are ready here and now, and have
always been ready, to negotiate peace. But the operative word is “negotiate”.
In the course of the protracted struggle in the Middle East, nothing has been
achieved without negotiation.
On the other hand, no
negotiation has ever taken place without something
positive being achieved. Why not, therefore, encourage
the process of negotiation which has achieved results?
We are not ready to be dictated to and we will not
accept a dictate. We want peace; we have stretched
out our hand in an offer of peace; we are prepared
to move towards peace within the framework laid
down by Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). We are prepared, I repeat, to enter into
negotiations
with the Arab States at any moment
without any preconditions
whatsoever. And in such
negotiations
all States will be free to make whatever proposals they wish to make.

75. The inhabitants of the occupied territories need
to be told that their plight has not vanished from the
consciousness of the world and that their rights still
exist and cannot be abridged at the level of the ideals
of the United Nations. They need to be reassured
categorically
and clearly that the Israeli occupation
is temporary and transient, that their independenoe
from that occupation is recognized as legitimate and
inevitable.
76. Israel needs to be told that it is not above the
laws of humanity, that it is not exempt from international accountability,
that it is not to be preserved
from the requirements
of international
responsibility
simply because it can invoke some mystical and
mythical
immunity
and can pressure others, particularly in the. West, into silence by threatening to
remind them of a latent guilt which is not relevant to
the issue before us here.

72. We will negotiate only on the basis of a recognition of Israel’s sovereign rights. We will not negotiate
our own suicide. For that is what withdrawal without
concrete moves towards peace means. If the Arab
countries are serious about this, let them stop this
horrible stream of hate and invective that we hear day
in and day out in this building and let them begin to
behave like mature nations. I reiterate once again
Israel’s willingness to begin at any moment negotiations with the Arab States designed to lead to peace,
fully aware of the fact that by their very nature negotiations must be based on mutual respect and compromise. Let the Security Council stop encouraging
the type of useless debate which we have heard, move
away from the meaningless resolutions which only
serve the cause of intransigents
everywhere, and
address itself to the purpose for which it exists, to
the purpose of achieving peace.

77. The United.Nations
needs to act to maintain its
moral authority,
since so far it has been unable to
exercise effective political power to end the occupation and to preserve in the meantime the human rights
of those under occupation.
As I said on an earlier
occasion, the uprising which has taken place in the
West Bank and in the rest of the occupied territories
sends an urgent and agonized message to the world.
It is a message to the nations of the world that the
oppression of alien occupation has no place in the
present world order. It is a message to the world that
the struggle of the people of the world against foreign
domination is indivisible. It is a reminder to the powerful and complacent supporters of the aggressor that
their policy is deficient, their calculations wrong, and
their sense of history absent. The urgency of the
message cannot be diluted by Israeli assertions that
the situation is normal in the occupied territories,
that no aggression has been committed
against the
Arabs-that
the situation is normal and that Israel is
in a comprising mood.

73. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Jordan,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
74. ’ Mr. SHARAF
(Jordan): The draft resolution
before the Council [S/12022] is a fair and restrained
text. It obviously attempts to represent the common
position of the members of the Council in the various
shades of their views and approaches, without sacrificing the basic theme. It is moderate and positive.
Its basic theme is that of drawing attention to the

78. Least of all can Israel’s position be based on
anything less than the Orwellian world, about which
11

we were told and lectured by the Israeli representative. In the Orwellian world truth is untruth, justice
is injustice, facts are non-facts. If we apply this yardstick we will find that the Israeli representative and
his statement and the Israeli positions fit very well
into this Orwellian world. For if, according to the
Israeli representative,
the situation in the occupied
territories is normal, then we are living in an Orwellian
world. How can the situation be normal when a country
occupies a territory three times its size, when that
territory is inhabited by over a million people and when
the occupation lasts for nearly a decade? How can
the situation be regarded as normal and natural
when the occupying Power engages in expanding the
area which it has officially annexed to become more
than 30 per cent of the area of the West Bank which
is under occupation?

those who had been forced, by Israel and its violence
in 1948, from their homeland to return to their homeland. The fact that that was not achieved then, the fact
that the United Nations could not implement
that
inalienable
right, caused the continued
hostility
between the Arab States and Israel for the 19 years to
which the representative
of Israel referred. At .that
time the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people
consisted of their right to go back to their homes.
Between 1967 and today the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people has become twofold: it still continues to be their right to go back to their homes; in
addition,
there is the right to exercise their selfdetermination-the
ending of the occupation.
82. How is this relevant to inter-Arab relations and
how can this be interpreted as a distortion by the
Arab side? And, finally, how can we speak of Israel’s
position regarding a peaceful settlement as one that is
fair, just and that offers a compromise, but of the Arab
position as intransigent
and closed? Which party is
intransigent and closed? Is it the party which says:
“All I am asking for is two things: that the occupying
Power which at the moment occupies my national
soil end that occupation, and that this party, which has
displaced a nation consisting of hundreds of thousands
of people and placed the rest of it under occupation
end this abnormal situation”?
That would automatically produce a situation of peace in which there
would be coexistence and a just and lasting guarantee
for future security. Is that the intransigent and totally
closed party? Or is it the party which says: “What
I aim at in effect is to expand at the expense of the
national soil of the other party. I am by right in the
land that I occupy and which is inhabited by people
who have lived there for hundreds and thousands of
years”? Is it the party which says; “Israel cannot
have security if it seeks to expand at the expense of
our national soil”, or the party which seeks security
always and exclusively in territorial terms, the party
which pursues the policy of advancing its own security
by the self-defeating approach of seeking more territory at the expense of the other party?

79. It is an Orwellian world where, when people
seek to visit their relatives in the occupied territories,
the warden of the prison can claim that he is humane
and fair because the relatives are not denied the right
to go and visit their relatives in prison. Nor would
Israel’s assertions about the economic prosperity of
the occupied territories pass as anything but Orwellian,
.for what takes place in the occupied territories economically cannot be isolated from the fact that there
are nearly 65 Israeli settlements in the occupied territories and that these have been built during the last
nine years. How can it be regarded as economic
prosperity and fairness when the exports of Israel
exceed by five times Israel’s imports from the occupied
territories? When we are told about Israel’s objection to the incitement of racial and religious hatreds,
is not this again Orwellian? Is not this again an attempt
completely to transform the situation? How can people
who are under occupation, when they rise up against
that occupation, be regarded as racists or as responding
to racial incitement?
Which is the party that can be
characterized as racist: the party which claims a land
that is not its own and then descends upon it by force
and violence, displaces its people, keeps the rest of
them under its military occupation and denies them
their rights, and denies the world the right to investigate
or look into that situation; or the party which rises
up against that occupation
seeking its rights and
asking the world to pay attention to that situation,
respond to it effectively,
end the occupation
and
preserve human rights during that period? Which
party is the racist party?

83. How can that party bring about peace? How can
Israel expect the Arabs to reciprocate and say: “We
are ready to make peace with you, and to include the
cession of our own rights, land and territory and the
giving up of our own national soil”? Is it that party,
or the party which says: “We are ready to make
peace; we are ready to negotiate for a peace; we are
ready to accept its guarantees-if
you end your illegal
occupation brought about by violence on our national
soil and respect the rights of our brethren whom you
have displaced from their ancestral homeland and
kept in exile”?

80. Nor can we accept the Orwellian transformation
of the facts that is made when Israel claims that the
Paiestinian people were victims not of Israel but of the
Arabs and that the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people should have been exercised within the Arab
world rather than against the people which displaced
them and at the moment keep them under occupation.

84. As for the call-personal
or official, I do not
know-by
the Israeli representative
to the Arab
ambassadors to sit and discuss the issue, it is purely
an attempt at creating an Orwellian world again. We
are not dealing with procedure; we are dealing with

81. Before Israel occupied the West Bank and the
Gaza, the Palestinian
problem and the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people consisted of the right of
12

89. In this draft resolution Israel is called upon to
refrain from continuing with such policies and practices
and to rescind measures undertaken to that effect.
There is nothing in the text before the Council which
is not factual or reasonable. There is reason to believe
that such a moderate but unequivocal text would be
unanimously supported by all members of the Council.
This is dictated by the logic of the Charter, by the
imperatives of wise judgement and by the requirements
of consistency in policy of all members of the Council
on the issues contained in the document. There is no
reason to believe that any member of the Council
would fail to stand by such a clear position of principle. Any failure to do so would be most unexpected
and would be a failure to express respect for the
Charter and its moral imperatives and would amount to
an invitation to the people under occupation to despair
of the peaceful channels of political settlement and to
intensify their violent resistance.

substance. We are not dealing with instruments;
we
are dealing with ends, aims and goals. People do not
sit and talk just for talking’s sake. They sit and talk
so as to arrive at certain results, decided by the
concepts of natural justice-which
he himself citedand considerations of international
law.
----_--_--_85. In 1949 the Arab parties sat and negotiated with
the Israelis. Some of the Arab parties went to Geneva
not long ago and sat down to negotiate. But that did
not solve the problem. What would solve the problem
is a decision by the Israeli Government
to make a
drastic change of heart and of approach by accepting
the rights of the other side. If Israel decided in the
context of peace to withdraw from the occupied territories and to accept the inalienable
rights of the
Palestinian
people, including
their right to selfdetermination,
the problem would not remain one
of sitting, talking or negotiating. Several Arab parties
have said repeatedly that the method by which peace
can be brought about is a minor and secondary matter
so long as we can agree on the substance and ultimate
aims. We cannot sit and talk with a clearly prejudged
position that, as a result of that talking, we should
give up part or all of our territory. This is the position
of the Arab parties.

90. We in Jordan have a deep emotional involvement
with the hopes and agonies of the people of the
occupied territories. For decades we have had ties of
fact and of feeling with the people in the areas under
occupation. Our soldiers have spilled their blood to
maintain intact what they could of Palestine and to
continue to defend it as much as they could against
the brutal expansionist force from the west. There is
hardly a family.in Jordan east of the river that has not
lost a son in the battle for Palestine and for its people.

86. At the same time as the Isareli representatives
offer peace and negotiation
they insist on saying
that they will not return to the 1967 borders. How can
one reconcile the two positions? I want to have a
compromise,
provided you make the compromise.
I want to negotiate with you, provided I negotiate
you out of your rights. I will negotiate with you if
you will negotiate with me-all
that you have is
negotiable; all that I have is not negotiable. That is the
situation. That is what brought about the conflict and
sustained it for two decades after 1948 and that is what
is creating the present stalemate;
and it is the
stalemate that the Security Council and the United
Nations are called upon to solve decisively. They
can solve it by taking strong and unanimous action to
influence the intransigent and closed party to accept
the requirements of the Charter and of natural justice.

91. The people of Jordan joined their destiny with
that of the Arabs of the West Bank. The echoes of
pain in Jerusalem and Ramallah, in Nablus and AlKhalil, in Jericho and Tulkarm,
touch the heart of
every Jordanian. We have striven since June 1967 to
bring about an Israeli withdrawal from the occupied
territories
so that the people would exercise their
right of self-determination.
We join the rest of the Arab
world in this effort. We hope that the whole world
will join in the effort so that a peaceful Middle East
can ultimately emerge from the present turmoil. It is
necessary that the Council take action today that would
push the cause of peace in the Middle East one step
forward. All nations in the Council must join in this
action. It is necessary for the cause of peace in the
Middle East. It is necessary for the cause of world
peace. It is indispensable
for the credibility
of the
United Nations as an institution. It is equally necessary
for the credibility
of every individual member of the
Council which has pronounced itself in favour of peace
in the Middle East and the cause of human rights.

87. Therefore, the case, as the draft resolution before
the Council statesdr
even understates-is
a simple
and uncomplicated
one. There is an explosive and
serious situation
resulting from continued
Israeli
occupation.
This serious situation
is made more
explosive by the fact that the occupying Power is
engaged in measures and actions aimed at changing the
physical, cultural, demographic
and religious character of the occupied territories.

92. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The list of those wishing to speak on the draft resolution is exhausted. Before we proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution, I shall call upon those representatives
who wish to explain their votes before the vote.

88. The heart and soul of the occupied areas,
Jerusalem,
is suffering an immediate
and direct
threat. It is being changed beyond recognition
by
physical and other means, and its status as occupied
territory is being ignored and attacked daily by these
measures and by its annexation to Israel and its absorption-physically,
demographically,
administratively
and legislatively.

93. Mr. SCRANTON
(United States of America):
I want once more to recognize and appreciate the
comments that three or four of the representatives
13

,

made this morning in giving me a warm welcome to
the Council, and I am indeed grateful for their very
kind remarks. This reminds me, incidentally,
that their
comments
were in some contrast to the welcome
I had outside the Council today. I dare say I have now
written a new record for representatives to the Council, one I think nobody else can match, by having a
demonstration
requesting my ouster almost before
.I have sat down.

document S/12022. Our vote must be seen in the light
of the views I expressed yesterday in this debate
[1897th meeting].
I trust that I made our position
clear on the issue at stake, and therefore I do not
deem it necessary to go into the substance of the
matter again.
99. The draft resolution is quite clearly the result
of a commendable effort by our non-aligned colleagues
in the Council. Their efforts deserve to be acknowledged for the successful achievement
of excising
excessive language from the original text and making
the final draft less unbalanced. I wish, in this connexion, to pay a tribute to all the sponsors for the
spirit of understanding and accommodation
they have
shown in this case, as in previous cases, in taking
into account the positions and opinions of many delegations, including my own.

94. I should also like to say to the representative of
Pakistan how much I appreciate the comments he
made to me in a very quiet and deliberate way a few
moments ago, quoting some of the comments I made
on behalf of my Government on Tuesday. I shall try
to respond and explain our vote in the same quiet and
deliberate way, briefly.
95. The representative
of Pakistan has quoted the
three tests I laid out in that intervention
on Tuesday,
and I shall not repeat them. But they are the tests
that have been carefully measured by my Govemment, and when I say “carefully”
I mean just that.
We have carefully measured the draft resolution now
before members against these criteria and have concluded that it fails to meet them, especially because
it reflects or implies judgement which on balance does
not correspond to the actual situation in the area.
Parts of the draft resolution, for example, are based
on the judgement that Israel is persisting in a policy
aimed at changing the religious character of the city
of Jerusalem. We believe, my Government and I, that
this conclusion is incorrect. Quite to the contrary:
we think that Israel’s administration
of the Holy
Places in Jerusalem has literally and actively minimized
tensions.

100. However, in regard to the practices of the
Israeli authorities in the occupied Arab territories,
I wish to state along the lines of what I said yesterday
that the local populations naturally resent and oppose
that occupation. It is an occupation that can be regretted, as we certainly regret it, but it is, in our view,
really overstretching
the imagination
to equate these
practices with “Hitlerite
atrocities” as some speakers
have done in this chamber. We believe that, in spite of
circumstances,
in spite of some actions, regrettable
as they may be, the Israeli presence, while making
its imprint on the occupied territories, has managed
not to deviate-at
least in intention, if not always in
practice-from
the standards and values of its own
society. The Israeli authorities in the occupied territories-unfortunately
for the local Arab population and
for them also-cannot
escape some actions necessitated by their responsibilities
following a prolonged
occupation. As was rightly pointed out this morning
by the representative
of Tanzania-and
I am paraphrasing his words-foreign
occupation automatically
generates opposition,
and the longer the occupation
the greater becomes the opposition,
the greater the
resistance of the local population.

96. Finally, and I think this extremely important,
the Council will remember that one of the tests was
whether the Council’s action would help or hinder the
peaceful settlement process. On Tuesday I said that
my Government has committed itself to do all it can to
bring about a settlement. We take a back seat to no
nation in this regard. We are. as I said then, engaged
at this moment in an effort to regain momentum
in
the negotiating process that has brought some unusual
progress, and I think it is fair to say that there has
been more progress in this effort than in anything that
has been undertaken since the 1967 war, although
we are as aware as everyone else that there must be
more.

101. That is why-and
this is my final comment,
which is in line with what I said yesterday-we
hope
more than ever that, in the interests of the local
population
and in the interests of Israel itself, the
causes that tend to perpetuate that military occupation
will be removed as soon as possible, and this could
be done, as far as we can see, only by the early implementation
of all the provisions contained in resolution 242 (1967) and the recognition of the rights of the
Palestinian people.

97. It is our belief and our strong feeling that this
draft would not help in that peaceful settlement
process. And therefore, because in our judgement
the draft fails to meet the tests which I brought to the
Council’s attention on Tuesday, the United States will
vote “no”.

102. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (interpretation
from
French): My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Council, which reflects the concerns I expressed in my statement of 23 March [2895th
meeting]. In the provisional
situation which, in our
view, as well as in the view of the international
community, is that existing in the occupied territories

98. Mr. VINCI
(Italy): I should like to say a few
words in explanation of the affirmative vote my delegation will cast on the draft resolution contained in
14

107. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic):
First
I should like to say a few words concerning the allegations of the representative of Israel. I want to say that
the Zionist entity in the Arab land is a strange entity.
By its very nature it is racist, expansionist and terrorist.
I said that as long as Israel, the Zionist entity created
by a colonial occupation, is racist and expansionist,
it will not live in our midst. I did not say that the Jews
would not live in our midst. We accept all the Jews
who want to live in our Arab lands, but never a racist,
expansionist
entity, which will be destroyed, not
necessarily from the outside, but perhaps from the
inside by its very nature.

and in Jerusalem, the occupying Power has the duty to
respect the status quo in accordance with international law and particularly
in accordance with the
Geneva Conventions,
which is constantly recalled in
resolutions of the Organization.
103. All unilateral measures which might be taken
are without validity and cannot change the future.
The future may emerge only from negotiations among
all parties to seek a settlement in which withdrawal
from occupied Arab territories is one of the fundamental elements. In particular, the creation of settlements in occupied territories represents a violation
of the provision of the fourth Geneva Convention.
It is also a mistake in that it raises new obstacles
on the road to a settlement. This is a point I wish to
stress. It is something that has been demonstrated,
and we must call upon the Israeli authorities to give
up their plans to establish a deep-water port in the south
of the Gaza territory, as was mentioned by the representative of Egypt [ibid.].

108. Secondly, I should like to say that Libya voted
for the draft resolution submitted by our brothers from
Benin, Guyana, Pakistan, Panama and Tanzania, in
spite of the fact that it did not respond to all the
requirements of the Libyan delegation. We did so in
a spirit of accommodation
and because our brothers
who submitted the draft spent a great deal of time and
effort in trying to accommodate other members. They
also hoped to accommodate the United States, so that
the Council could conclude its deliberations
with a
resolution
concerning the serious situation in the
occupied Arab territories.

104. In conclusion, we should like to pay a tribute to
the delegations of the non-aligned countries and to the
delegation of Pakistan, which once again have made a
considerable contribution
to our work. We acknowledge their efforts, particularly the efforts to take into
account the views that we put to them.

109. However, the United States voted “no”. Maybe
the photograph of, Ambassador Scranton raising his
hand in voting against the draft resolution will be a good
thing in an election year.

105. In our view, the text which is before us represents a praiseworthy effort to deal with an extremely
sensitive matter by discarding any pointless summary
blame. The provisions in the resolution are a reiteration, in firm but not polemical terms, of the principles
with which the occupying Power must bring its actions
in Jerusalem and in the occupied territories into line.
My delegation hopes that the Israeli delegation, which
we are pleased to have heard and seen here, will see
in it an urgent appeal to wisdom and to reason, which
we feel can serve as a felicitous conclusion to this
meeting of the Council.

110. When I welcomed Ambassador Scranton the
other day-and
I shall speak about the vote of the
United States, because it was an important vote, it
was a veto-1 said:
Ambassador Scranton, arrives preceded by his
excellent reputation as a man of great integrity,
high morality and statesmanship.
I hope that as a
devoted son of his great nation he will contribute
to the furthering of peaceful understanding and cooperation between his country and our developing
nations and help to shape American policy in the
real and genuine interest of his country, as well as
in the interest of peace and justice in the world. We
hope that that super-Power, the United States of
America, in its bicentennial
year, will be guided
by a new light. We promise Mr. Scranton our full
co-operation to achieve these goals and we wish him
good luck.” [2893rd meeting, paru. 27.1
“

. . .

106. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfvom
French):
As no other representatives wish to speak, I take it that
the Council is prepared to proceed to a vote on the draft
resolution contained in document S/12022. I shall put
it to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour: Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy,
Japan, Libyan Arab Republic,
Pakistan,
Panama,
Romania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania.
Against:

United

111. When we said that, we did not really expect
that the United States would depart from its policy of
commitment
to the Zionist entity and to Zionist aggression in one day. We know that the change of a representative or a change of style does not mean that a
policy has changed. Indeed, it is very important to
establish better relations between human beings representing the different policies of their respective countries. It is very important to establish a humane and
understanding approach between us. But what is more

States of America.

The result of the vote was 14 in favour

and 1 against.

The draft resolution
was not adopted, the negative
vote being that of a permanent member of the Council.

15

important is to change our policies to better and more
just ones, because in the end we are all representatives
of our Governments and their policies, good or bad.

‘A lot of guys said they were afraid not to sign it,
even though they didn’t want to. Some of them
told me it was the last time they would sign such a
petition. But if another one comes, I’ll bet they’ll
be just as scared of the lobby and sign up again.
But don’t quote me by name.’ ”

112. We cannot say that we are happy that*Ambassador Scranton initiated his activities in the Council
with a negative action and a negative position. The
negative United States vote in fact confirmed and
aggravated once again the isolation of the United
States and its hostile position regarding our Arab
people and the just cause of our Palestinian brothers.
We know that the American establishment
is under
tremendous pressure from the Zionists and their supporters,
their blackmail
and their propaganda,
especially in this election year. But in our view that
does not justify and must not justify the unjust and
destructive policy of the United States.

115. The vote of the United States has confirmed
this fact. It is indeed very unfortunate and regrettable
that those who support this policy are the elite of
American
universities
and among the intellectuals
-and here I include Mr. Kissinger himself. We are
fully convinced that the people of the United States
will know the truth one day and will understand the
real nature of the Zionists and their manoeuvres. If the
intellectual
elite to which I am referring were to talk
about the problems of the third world and the Zionist
objectively and sincerely, and if it were to enable the
American people to understand and see both sides of
the various questions and issues involved, we believe
that the American giant would rid itself of these bad
spirits. And we hope that will happen very soon.

113. But I think that that negative United States vote
is in the final analysis salutary and beneficial because
it will dismiss any illusions about a possible change or
even slight amelioration
of American policy following
the change of style or the change of person. In fact,
the negative vote of the United States confirms-and
I have stated this in the General Assembly and in the
Council-the
deep relationship between the establishment in America and Zionism, and particularly
the
sensitivity of the American authorities with respect to
anything that might affect the Zionist entity from
near or far, and that the defence of the Zionist entity
is put before the defence of the interests of the
American people itself. That is not new. We recall
that recently, when Mr. Kissinger spoke of withdrawing assistance from the United Nations at the
time we first spoke of expelling the Zionist entity
from the Organization,
the American
press and
congressmen competed to support the Zionist entity,
and on many occasions did so not through conviction
but through fear of Zionist influence on American
political life.

116. The United States has bolstered the Israeli
economy, supplying it with conventional
and sophisticated weapons. The Arabs have suffered and coritinue to suffer from this unholy alliance between the
Zionist regime and the formidable American might.
The unjust and unlimited United States commitment
to the Zionist cause constitutes the main obstacle to
the formulation
of a just and lasting peace in our
region. Relations between the United States establishment and the Zionists have even become embarrassing
to many Americans. The United States authorities are
particularly
sensitive to any development
that could
potentially challenge the Zionist entity. Some of those
I do not exaggerate-view
this
authorities-and
defence of Zionist interests as more important,
as
I said, than the defence of their American interests.
117. Because of this unlimited
support of Zionism,
the United States has created hostile and bitter relations with ail the Arab nations and with most of the
Arab leaders. Because of this commitment,
the United
States has threatened and insulted the United Nations.
Responsible United States authorities have employed
strong language and taken tough measures, as they
say, against the countries of the third world. In reality,
the United States, together with the Zionist regime,
desires a return of the third world to a subservient
position of obedience and allegiance.

114. I should like to recall for the record what was
printed in The New York Times of 8 August 1975.
These are extracts from what was said by some
Congressmen:
*
“Another Democratic Senator said he would talk
about the Israel lobby, but only in the background
‘because they can deliver votes and they control a
lot of campaign contributions.
That’s why I can’t go
on the record, or I’d be dead.
“ ‘It is the strongest lobby’ he went on, adding:
‘It doesn’t dilute its strength by lobbying on other
issues. A lot of the members resent it, but they
don’t feel they can do anything about it. That lobby
wants to do Congress’s thinking on Israel. They
don’t want any independent judgements.

118. On this occasion I should like to mention an
issue which I mentioned earlier in the General Assembly. Our problem is with the United States Government
and the United States establishment rather than with
the American people and nation. We hope that one day
soon the American people will stop to consider the
sufferings inflicted
upon the Arab nation by the
United States governing establishment.
We are fully
convinced that the people of the United States will
know the truth one day and will understand the very

“ ‘Last spring the Israel lobby rounded up those
76 Senators to sign the petition backing Israel,’
another member of the Congress recalled, adding:
16

-- . .

nature of Zionism
of the catastrophic
Middle East.

125. However, our colleagues from the non-aligned countries, after very hard work did succeed in the task
of producing a draft resolution which, in our opinion,
is less than moderate, but in the Security Council
one cannot achieve all aims. Yet, despite all of that,
once again the Council has been prevented by the
tyranny of the veto from adopting that draft resolution. But this is not. really surprising; the negative
vote was the vote of the United States Government.

and discover the true dimensions
United States involvement
in the

119. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): The draft
resolution submitted to the Council was of a moderate,
I would say, an extremely moderate nature. Its major
advantage was that it expressed, as it seemed, the
general opinion to the effect that, even if we could not
come to an agreement on a maximum,
there was at
least a certain minimum
which could not be contravened by Israel, a State which for almost nine years
now has been occupying Arab lands.

126. In December 1975, that same Government had
vetoed a draft resolution [.S/ZZ898] condemning
the
Zionist entity for its unwarranted and premeditated
attack on Lebanon.
In that attack, 100 innocent
civilians died and hundreds of others suffered injuries
as the result of bombing
by United
States-made
planes piloted by Zionists who dropped United Statessupplied bombs on innocent and peaceful civilians.
The Council then, by an overwhelming majority, gave
a positive vote. Yet the tyranny of the United States
veto obstructed that vote.

120. The fact that even such a minimum does not
exist, in the opinion of one delegation, is an alarming
signal. This signal is especially alarming in the light
of the statement of the representative of Israel which
we just heard. The gist of this statement was that
Israel intends to prolong its occupation of Arab lands
and that it intends to continue its criminal practices
there. The representative
of Israel stated here that
Israel does not intend to be guided by anything but
what he called natural law. But there is another name
for this natural law, that is, the law of the jungle.

127. Again in January the Government of the United
States prevented the Council from adopting a draft
resolution [S/12940] affirming our inalienable national
rights comprising our right to return to our homeland,
self-determination
and independence in our Palestinian
homeland. But, as was said then, and I shall say it
again now, veto or no veto, it goes without saying that
our national rights in Palestine are inherent. They
derive their validity neither from recognition by other
Powers nor from resolutions.

121. Against this background, a legitimate question
arises. How can Israel preach and follow the law of
the jungle? Another question arises: What is the
even-handed policy in the Middle East, of which we
have heard so much recently? Does it not consist in
saying one thing and in’ fact doing exactly the
opposite?

128. Today the United States Government has again
utilized the tyranny of the veto, but we are not disillusioned, for the United States Government,
which
was instrumental
in the creation and maintenance of
Zionist colonialism and aggression and which is equally
responsible for the continuing wars, bloodshed, misery
and turmoil,
is still determined
to perpetuate this
perilous situation in the Middle East and in the world.
In his statement on 23 March, the representative
of
the United States Government said:

122. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization,
on whom I now call. ..-.
123. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
At the outset,‘1 wish to express our gratitude for the
14 positive votes that were cast for the draft resolution, a result which in itself is a great victory for a
great event. The isolation of the Government
of the
United States was very clearly manifested.

“Events have taken place over the last several
years which have deeply hurt us all: terrorist raids
and equally senseless retaliations
and reprisals.
These and other events have meant human killing,
and a good deal of it, and last but by no means least,
very intense and very wide-spread human suffering.
It seems to me that it is our responsibility
in this
international
body not to add fuel to those fires as
they individually
or collectively
arise, but to do
everything we can to lessen tensions, to deal with
facts, and to help in every way possible to bring
peace there and everywhere else in the world.”
[1896th meeting, para. 54.1

124. When the Council invited the Palestine Liberation Organization on 22 March, we made it very clear
in our statement that we placed high hopes in the
Council. We said then:
“This Council is responsible. It must exercise its
powers, powers conferred upon it by the Charter,
powers cited in Article 36 or any other Article. It
is up to the Council to exercise its authority to fulfil
its responsibility.”
[1893rd meeting, para. 68.1
We also said then that the cause of all that was going
on was occupation,
that it was in that context that
“the Council should view the present situation”,
and
that a “remedy should be sought through the elimination of the cause, namely, termination of occupation,
the sooner the better” [ibid., para. 661.

He added:
“So long as the situation persists”-and
I repeat
the word “persists”-“
we can expect continuing
17

tension and occasional violence, however much we
might and must regret it.” [Ibid., pm-a. 60.1
He also referred to the religious

situation

occupation is clear proof of its colonialist, expansionist
and racist nature. For, while the indigenous Arab
Palestinians were uprooted and driven away from the
territory in which they and their ancestors had lived
for so many centuries, the Zionists are resorting to
everything they can possibly resort to in order to
gather in hundreds of thousands of Jews from every
comer of the world and to settle them in the land
usurped and expropriated
from its legitimate
Arab
owners.

and said:

“The deep religious attachment of Moslems, Jews
and Christians to the Holy Places of Jerusalem has
added a uniquely volatile element to the tensions
that inhere in an occupation
situation.”
[Ibid.?
para. 65.1
129. The representative
of the United States listed
three tests by which his Government would evaluate
any resolution presented to it. Naturally, each Govemment uses its own yardstick and criteria. However,
we have been told that the negative vote of the United
States Government
is based on the inclusion of the
expression “Israel persists”-and
the word “persists”
comes from his statement-“in
its policy aimed at
changing the physical, cultural,
demographic
and
religious character of the City of Jerusalem”. This is a
nice pretext, but a poor one.

134. The Zionists have attempted
in the past to
justify their 1967 aggression against Syria, Egypt and
what remained of Palestine by claiming the necessity
of ensuring the security of their kibbutzim and settlements along the armistice line of 1949. After 1967,
however, they established more new settlements in
various parts of the freshly usurped territories, particularly along the new, 1967 cease-fire lines.. Claiming
now that their new settlements
in the Golan, the
West Bank, Gaza and Sinai would be threatened if
they withdrew their forces from the territories they
occupied in 1967, they are blocking every effort
towards a peaceful solution and persisting in their
refusal to comply with United Nations resolutions,
using the same old pretext of security considerations.

130. Ambassador Scranton spoke of the different
forms of reception he had met inside the Council
and outside. We are aware of the slanderous campaign
of distortion launched against the statement made by
the United States representative
in the Council on
23 March, a campaign of distortion, yet a campaign
that had left its impact. And one wonders, why this
negative vote of the Government of the United States?
Or I wonder-and
here I return to a statement, already
mentioned during this debate, about Mr. Churchill’s
having, when in opposition, accused the then incumbent Prime Minister of turning the Mother of Parliaments into a public convenience-does
the Govemment of the United States wish to turn the Council
into a public convenience during the election year?

135. If this state of affairs is permitted to go on, it is
not excluded that Israel will resort once again to
aggression against the Arab countries, occupying new
territories under the pretext of the need to protect
the present Israeli settlements on the existing ceasefire lines, establishing more settlements in the most
recently occupied areas, resorting to further occupation in order to protect the latest series of settlements,
and so on, without any end to this vicious circle.
136. Israel’s occupation of the Arab territories is,
then, unjustified and illegal. That was the most important fact confirmed in the present debate. Zionist
desecration and aggression against the Moslem holy
places and shrines have been only one of the aspects
of the consequences of Israel’s illegal occupation of the
Arab territories. The Arab inhabitants of Palestine and
other occupied Arab territories
cannot accept the
perpetuation of the alien occupation of their territories.
They are entitled,
under the Charter and all the
principles of international
and humanitarian
law, to
resist the foreign military occupation with all the means
at their disposal.- They are supported in their just
struggle against the Zionist colonialist occupation by
the overwhelming majority of the nations of the world.

13 1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic, and I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
132. Mr. ALLAF
(Syrian Arab.. Republic):
The
unanimous conclusion which emerges from this latest
debate on the situation in the occupied Arab territories
is that Israel’s illegal occupation of those territories
must immediately
come to an end. Military occupation
by force is a continued act of aggression against the
political and human rights of the Arab inhabitants and
a constant violation of the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles of international
law.

137. The United Nations in general and the Security
Council in particular must fulfil their responsibilities
under the Charter and impose a speedy end to Israel’s
illegal occupation of the Arab territories.

133. Israel’s
type of occupation
is particularly
inhuman and c,ruel because it is designed to achieve
permanent usurpation of the occupied Arab territories
through the progressive alteration of their physical,
demographic,
cultural and religious character. The
feverish manner in which Israel is implanting more and
more new settlements
in the territories
under its

138, The draft resolution just vetoed was the very
minimum the Council could have done at this stage to
try to stop the suffering endured by the Arab population as a result of Israeli occupation and Israel’s
18

.

illegal and repressive measures against that population. We believed that the crimes committed
by
Israel against the Arab people in the occupied territories should have been condemned in a much stronger
manner, because any lack of firmness or determination might be misinterpreted
by the Israeli aggressor as
a sign of weakness by the international
community or
condonation of Israel’s aggressive andillegal practices.
However, we understand the reasons which led the
sponsors of this draft resolution
to accommodate
various, sometimes exaggerated, changes and amendments in order to secure the widest possible support
for the draft resolution and thus enhance its moral
:
significance and implications.

respond to the actual situation in the occupied territories. If you turn again to the draft resolution, you
will see that it really corresponds to the facts. It says
that Israel is altering the demographic,
cultural,
political and religious character of the occupied territories. But this was stated by the United States representative himself. It says also that Israel is establishing
settlements in the occupied territories. This again was
mentioned by the United States representative
and
was considered by him illegal. The draft merely
requests Israel to cease these illegal acts and these
illegal measures tending to alter the nature and status
of Jerusalem and the occupied territories.
144. The same thing may be said also about the
second condition-whether
the Council action in
practice advanced the proper administration
of the
areas involved.
If the draft resolution
had been
adopted, of course that would have advanced the
proper administration
of the areas involved, because
then the occupier would have been unanimously
requested by the Council to cease any illegal acts
and not to take any action which would hinder their
proper administration.
But the blocking of that draft
by the misuse and abuse of the veto will not help to
ensure or secure the proper administration.

139. But once again a lone hand v&s raised in the
Council chamber. It is very regrettable indeed to see
the same super-Power which claims that it is seeking
a just and peaceful solution to the Middle East conflict going once again so far as to sabotage and block
the otherwise unanimous intemationalcffort
to reduce
tension in the region, to put an end to the suffering
of its inhabitants
and thus to pave the way to the
establishment
of a really just and lasting peace.
140. What is in this draft resolution that the United
States could possibly use this time as a pretext for its
veto, or that it could have used even for an abstention?
Did not the United States representative
himself say
that the occupation of territories in 1967 has always
been considered as “an abnormal state of affairs”
[2896th meeting, paru. 61]? Did not the United States
representative affirm in his statement that

145. The last, and most important,
condition was:
would the Council action help or hinder the peaceful
settlement process? That is the most important of all.
If the Council had unanimously
deplored the action
of Israel and requested Israel not to establish settlements and not to alter the physical, cultural, demographic and political character of the occupied territories, of course Israel would have been obliged to
comply with that resolution-at
least this time,
because it would have been a unanimous resolution
of all the members of the Council. And if Israel
complied with that resolution, then no more settlements would be established and the old settlements
would be dismantled,
and the laws enacted and the
measures taken by Israel in contravention of the status
of Jerusalem and the other occupied territories would
be abolished. And since all these measures to alter the
characteristics of the occupied territories were considered, even by the representative
of the United
States, as blocking the way towards settlement, the
logical conclusion would be that, if the draft resolution
had been adopted, it would have paved the way
towards a just and lasting settlement in the Middle
East.

“the presence of [the Israeli] settlements is seen
by my Government as an obstacle to the success of
the negotiations for a just and final peace between
Israel and its neighbours”
[ibid., paru. 68]?
_-_____
____
141. A while ago, the representative of the United
States used as a pretext and justification
for his veto
the allegation that, if adopted, the draft resolution
would have hindered the efforts towards peace. But
earlier in this series of meetings he said that what was
hindering these efforts towards peace was the establishment of the Israeli settlements in the occupied territories. Now he considers the request by the Council
to Israel to cease establishing new settlements as a
hindrance to peace. How can one hinder peace by
requesting the cessation of the establishment of settlements which the united States representative himself
said constituted an obstacle on the road to peace?

146. But the bitter fact is there; it was stated before.
How many times now have we seen the United States
isolated and isolating itself beside the isolated aggressor, which is Israel? We wonder how in future the
United States will dare pretend that it is mediating in
the Middle East and is unbiased, when on several
successive occasions it has blocked
each draft
resolution, whether it contained the basic and essential
elements for the establishment
of a just peace in the
region, or whether it simply requested that the ag-

142. The United States representative
set forth the
conditions in which the United States could accept
the draft resolution. It now is very clear that those
conditions were put forward in such a way as to justify
the United States veto, no matter what-1 repeat, no
matter what-words
or phrases would have been used
in the draft resolution.
143. He said the first condition is that what is in the
draft resolution should be based on and should cor19

gressor cease its aggression and refrain from establishing new faits accomplis in the occupied territories.

149. The other lie which was repeated several times
by the Zionist representative is that they want negotiations as a means of ensuring peace. He said: “I
am ready to meet with all the Arab ambassadors and
sit with them to negotiate about peace.”

147. As for the Zionist representative,
I think what
we heard from him before the vote on the draft resolution was just a new series of the customary, usual lies
and falsifications
that are repeated every time the
representative of Israel takes the floor. I will not, of
course, discuss those lies; it is very late. But I will
confine my remarks to one or two of them in order to
prove that if the representative
of Israel, who has
repeated certain allegations several times during this
speech, was lying when he repeated those allegations,
then of necessity, as usual, he was lying throughout his
speech, as well as in previous speeches.

150. Who is blocking negotiations
towards a real
peace? He said that he is ready to negotiate with the
parties. Who is the main interested party in the Middle
East conflict? Everybody knows now. The Security
Council agreed on this during its previous debates.
The United Nations has adopted resolutions
confirming this reality. The overwhelming
majority
of
nations have reaffirmed,
time and again, that the
Middle East conflict is the result of the Palestinian
question and that the people of Palestine is the main
interested party in the Middle East conflict. So let
us not hear those lies.

148. He kept repeating that Israel was attacked by
the Arabs in 1967, but he has chosen the wrong
argument. Everyone knows now that the Israeli war
of aggression of 5 June 1967 is a fact ‘admitted even
by the Israelis themselves. It is also a fact that the
late, great leader of France, General de Gaulle,
imposed an embargo on Israel just because Israel had
started the aggression of 1967; and General de Gaulle
and the great Government of France, I think, were in
a very good position to know who the aggressor was
and who started the aggression. But I will quote from
the statements of the Israeli authorities themselves:

151. I challenge the representative
of the Zionist
regime to declare here in this Council that he is ready
to meet the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization,
the representative
of the Palestinian
people, and discuss peace with him. That would-be the
only proof of Israel’s sincerity in what it claims.
152. But as representatives
knows, Israel does not
want peace. Israel wants to usurp all the territories
under its occupation. It has been known to.all representatives here and to all the nations of the world all
along that Israel has blocked each and every effort
right from the beginning-the
resolutions of the United
Nations, the efforts of the wise African leaders, the
mediation efforts of Mr. Jarring, and even the unilateral
efforts of the United States. The Geneva Conference
was blocked by what? By the insistence of Israel not
to discuss directly and to the point the real problem,
which is the establishment of a just and lasting peace,
with the participation
of all the interested parties,
based on its complete withdrawal from all the Arab
territories
and its recognition’
of the inalienable
national rights of the Palestinian people.

“Sixteen
years’ planning had gone into those
the 80 minutes of
initial 80 minutes,” -meaning
the attack on 5 June 1967 against the Arab countries-“ We lived with’ the plan; we slept on the
plan; we ate the plan. Constantly we perfected it.”
Tha;’ is the statement of Brigadier General Mordecai
Hod, Commander of the Israeli air force in July 1967.
The plan of the aggression in 1967 was practised and
repeated and rehearsed for 16 years. Furthermore,
General Rabin, who is. now the head of the Israeli
Government represented here, said:
“I do not believe that Nasser wanted war. The
two divisions he sent into Sinai on 14 May would not
have been enough to unleash an offensive against
Israel. He knew it, and we knew it.”

153. Even during the Security Council debate last
January, when the Council had before it a draft resolution embodying
those two basic preconditions
for
peace-total
withdrawal by Israel from all the occupied
Arab territories
and recognition
of the inalienable
national rights of the Palestinian
people-and
in
addition the right of every State in the region to live
in peace, even with those comprehensive
elements
Israel boycotted the Council meetings, and the superPower which is protecting Israel vetoed that draft
resolution.

Furthermore,
the report of the Secretary-General
pointed out those who had provoked and prepared
the war of aggression of 1967:
“In recent weeks...’ reports emanating from Israel
have attributed to some high officials in that State
statements so threatening as to particularly inflammatory in the sense that they could only heighten
emotions and thereby increase tensions on the other
side of the lines.” [S/7896 of19 May 1967, para. 8.1

154. The Arabs want peace. They are sincere,
because they are the victims of aggression. I3ut they
want peace with justice; they want peace, but not
kneeling at the feet of the occupiers. That will~oever
happen. The revolt and uprising of the Arab inhabitants
in the occupied territories and the struggle of the Arab
countries and the Palestinian people to liberate their

So Israel started the war of aggression of 1967; Israel
was planning that war for so many years. And the
Zionist representative
dares come here and say the
Arabs had attacked them in 1967, and Israel was only
responding.
20

territory will never cease, whether or not Israel
remains alone in its isolation or has found-the United
States to console it in its isolation.

the situation for themselves? I dare him to say
yes if he is so sure that the people in Gaza...
are happy with Israeli occupation. What about the
reports and decisions of the Commission on Human
Rights, the Red Cross, Amnesty International,
church
leaders,
distinguished
correspondents,
even the Israeli Human Rights Commission
and
many others? If the Israeli representative is so sure,
let him invite the Special Committee.”
[1895th
meeting, para. 34.1

155. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I invite the representative of Egypt to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
156. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID
(Egypt): Mr. President,
I thank you for giving me the floor again. Be assured
I will try to be brief.

161. I should like to take this opportunity to express
Egypt’s deep regret and disappointment
that the Council failed to adopt the draft resolution sponsored by
non-aligned countries because of the veto cast by the
United States.

157. This evening the Israeli representative engaged
the time of the Council-which,
allegedly, he was very
anxious to save-in acrobatic semantics in an attempt
to justify the unjustifiable
actions of the Israeli
authorities in the occupied territories. He has qualified
most of the statements made in the Council as “lies”
and “falsifications”.
It seems that the Israeli representative is a good student of Goebbels’ propaganda,
based on invented lies repeated over and over in the
hope that perhaps some simple-minded
persons will
believe him.

162. I should like to seize this opportunity
to assure
our brothers and sisters in Jerusalem and the rest of
the occupied territories that Egypt stands with them in
their struggle against Israeli occupation and repression.
The battle is one and indivisible.
History has always
taught that, whatever the obstacles and difficulties, the
people with their resistance attain victory in the end.
Occupation cannot last against the will of the people,
and the Israeli occupation is no exception.

158. But his attempts have failed. The Council knows
the facts of the situation and cannot be an easy victim
of Israeli propaganda methods. Whatever he tries, he
cannot hide the fact that there is a popular uprising
in the occupied territories against Israeli occupation.
Those are the same people he claims are happy under
Israeli occupation and enjoying the blessings of the
so-called Israeli democracy. All of us sitting around
this table know what kind of democracy an occupying
foreign Power would bring to an oppressed people.

163. In spite of the Council’s failure’ to adopt this
draft resolution, it is evident that the overwhelming
majority of its members condemn the Israeli policy
and measures in the occupied territories.
164. One last word of advice and, at the same time,
warning to Israel. As I said in my statement on
22 March:

159. I assure the members of the Council that I have
no intention whatsoever of refuting all the allegations
in that statement; indeed, I do not need to because
the facts are clear to all; they speak for themselves.
However, it may be opportune at this moment to refer
to the question of the Egyptian administration
of
Gaza. As is well known to all of us, in 1955 Gaza
was administered by Egypt in accordance with a constitution. That constitution
was decided on for the
territory. It specified that Gaza forms an integral part
of Palestine and established a legislative body composed of elected members. It established also an
executive council of 11 members, as well as an independent judiciary.
160.

“There can be no escaping the fact that if Israel
persists in its present policy of brutal repression
and coercion, then it will be solely responsible for
the deterioration
of the situation in the Middle East
and the disruption
of the processes of peace.”
[1893rd meeting, para. 95.1
I said also:
“Egypt will remain steadfast in its opposition to
Israeli threats and policies against our people in the
occupied territories, especially in the West Bank”
[ibid., para. 961.

Let me repeat what I said here on 23 March:

165. It is thus evident that the Israeli policy is doomed
to failure. Whatever it tries to accomplish through
repressive
measures,
shootings,
massive arrests,
expropriation
of land, new settlements-all
that will
fail one day against the will and resistance of the
people of the occupied territories.

“Furthermore,
if the Israeli representative is so
sure about his claim that the people of Gaza and other
parts of the occupied territories are content with
Israeli rule, why did his Government bar the Special
Committee on the investigation
of Israeli practices
from visiting the occupied territories and verifying

The meeting

rose at 8.25 p.m.

21
.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may bc obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les libmiries et Iesagences d&positaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous aupr& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventcs, New York ou Gen&e.
KAK

HOJIYVHTb

H3AAHlifI

OPl-AH&I

3AUElZi

OG’bE~NHEHHFdX

HAII(HH

HJAaAHR Opraan3asww 06-bbeAHXeHXblX
HaquR HonoZO XyUHTb
a mIWaKHbIX
maraJWHaX H are.HTCTaax ao acex paBoHax Mapa. HaBOAHTe
CnpaBKa 06 H3AaRWRX
B
BaneM ~IIWXCKIICJH
Mara3kiHe HRH naum~e no anpecy : Oprannaaqwa 065emineHHbIx
HaswR, C~KUHR no npo~a%e HsAaHaR, Hblo-PIopx
AIIH XCeHesa.
COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en Iibrerias y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes del mundo. Cons&e a su Iibrero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00400

83i50801-August

1984-2.260
