S/2003/679

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 June 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 30 June 2003 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 25 June 2003,
which I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-41331 (E)

010703

*0341331*

S/2003/679

Annex
Letter dated 25 June 2003 from the Secretary-General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) addressed to
the Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
monthly report on Stabilization Force operations for May 2003 (see enclosure). I
would appreciate your making the report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) George Robertson

2

S/2003/679

Enclosure
Monthly report to the United Nations on Stabilization
Force operations
1.
Over the reporting period (1 to 31 May 2003) there were just over 12,500
troops deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia.
2.
The overall situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remained stable during the
period under review.
Security
3.
The Stabilization Force (SFOR) continues to contribute to the maintenance of
a safe and secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina; collect weapons and
ammunition in the framework of Operation Harvest; and monitor possible terroristrelated threats throughout the country.
4.
The total number of items collected during the month under Operation Harvest
included: 1,244 small arms (rifles, pistols and revolvers); 282,824 rounds of
ammunition less than 20 millimetres; 274 rounds of ammunition between 23 and 76
millimetres; 19 rounds of ammunition greater than 76 millimetres; 4,855 hand
grenades; 568 mines; 288.2 kilograms of explosives; and 4,668 other items (mortars,
mortar rounds, rifle grenades, attack rockets and hand-made ordnance). SFOR
conducted another campaign this month to encourage weapons to be handed in
voluntarily.
5.
On 8 May, SFOR searched a house near Bijeljina and detained Dragan “Vaske”
Vasiljevic, suspected of being the driver and bodyguard of Ljubomir Borovcanin.1
Vasiljevic was questioned by SFOR and subsequently handed over to the Republika
Srpska authorities. A computer and documents were confiscated during this
operation.
6.
During another search, carried out on 8 May, of a house in Rogatica, SFOR
discovered radio equipment being used to monitor SFOR frequencies. More radio
equipment was found in a second building, together with illegal weapons and
ammunition. SFOR confiscated all the radio equipment as well as the weapons and
ammunition and is carrying out an investigation to find those responsible for the
monitoring.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
7.
On 30 April, the State Border Service and the Director of Civil Aviation signed
an agreement restoring the use of Tuzla airfield for SFOR and civil aviation use. The
newly redesignated Tuzla International Airport received its first commercial flight
on 10 May, after having been closed since September 2001.
8.
On 8 May, the Standing Committee on Military Matters (SCMM) adopted
amendments to the Book of Rules on SCMM Operations and the Book of Rules on
Internal Organization and Systematization of the SCMM Secretariat.
9.
The SCMM Secretary-General informed the press that SCMM intended to ask
the Council of Ministers to invest in the SCMM secretariat full Defence Ministry
responsibilities and to include a seat for the SCMM Secretary-General with voting
privileges in the Council of Ministers. SFOR is responsible for the State-level

3

S/2003/679

military doctrine initiative to help Bosnia and Herzegovina qualify for NATO
Partnership for Peace status. The overarching doctrine document was completed at a
workshop on 15 May and is awaiting endorsement by SCMM. 2
10. During the period under review, SFOR monitored 256 training and movement
activities: 88 of the Republika Srpska Army (VRS) and 168 of the Army of the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (VF). SFOR monitored 365 mine-clearance
activities: 117 of VRS and 248 of VF. SFOR also carried out 47 inspections and
verification of weapons storage sites: 19 of VRS and 28 of VF.
Cooperation with international organizations
11. Within capabilities and in accordance with its mandate, SFOR continues to
provide assistance to the international organizations working in-theatre.
12. On 20 May, Carla del Ponte visited Sarajevo to oversee the preparations by the
State Court to try lower-level cases of indicted war criminals, with a view to
transferring such cases from the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to
the Bosnian authorities during the summer of 2004. She held talks with the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Presidency, the Council of Ministers, the State Prosecutor, the
High Representative and the Stabilization Force Commander.
Outlook
13. The security situation is expected to continue to be stable. Progress is being
made in normalization in several areas: for example, in the opening of Tuzla airport,
in military reform and in the response of the local population and police to
Operation Harvest.
Notes

4

1

Mr. Borovcanin is currently under indictment by the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.

2

The Common Military Doctrine Working Group (made up of representatives of SCMM, the
Ministry of Defence and leaders of VRS and VF) approved the new document on the
overarching doctrine, which brings together the three documents relating to doctrine previously
approved. The new document provides common terms for the protection of sovereignty and
territorial integrity; peace support operations; and military assistance to civil authorities.
Although this is the first document of its kind, it does not address some of the controversial
issues which the military authorities will have to deal with in the coming months.
