S/2020/614

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 June 2020
Original: English

Children and armed conflict in the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions on children and armed conflict, is the sixth report
of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict in the Sudan. It focuses on
trends in and patterns of violations committed against children in Darfur, the Two
Areas and Abyei between 1 January 2017 and 31 December 2019. It provides
information on the perpetrators of the violations, as well as on actions taken by the
parties to the conflict to improve the protection of children affected by armed conflict,
including dialogue and actions plans. The report also contains a series of
recommendations aimed at ending and preventing grave violatio ns against children in
the Sudan.

20-08611 (E)

210720

*2008611*

S/2020/614

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions on children and armed conflict, is the sixth report
of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict in the Sudan and covers the
period from 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2019. It contains descriptions of the
trends in grave violations committed against children since the previous report
(S/2017/191) and outlines the progress and challenges since the adoption of the
conclusions by the Working Group on Children and Armed Conf lict in July 2017
(S/AC.51/2017/3). The violations presented in the report have been verified by the
country task force on monitoring and reporting, co-chaired by the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) for Darfur, and the Resident Coordinator and UNICEF
for the Two Areas (Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile) and Abyei. Where possible,
perpetrators are identified.
2.
The present report shows continuing trends in grave violations affecting
children in Darfur, with the most prevalent being killing and maiming and sexual
violence. Most of the violations were committed by unidentified armed elements and
occurred in the context of intercommunal violence or conflicts between nomads and
farmers. Children in rural areas and internally displaced children continued to be
particularly vulnerable to grave violations and suffered from the prevalence of
explosive remnants of war. Almost one third of the total violations against children
were attributed to Government security forces, often in the context of military
operations, attacks against civilian populations or excessive use of force against
demonstrators. Infighting between different factions of the Sudan Liberation ArmyAbdul Wahid (SLA-AW) further caused grave violations against children. In the Two
Areas, very few violations against children were verified owing to the continued lack
of access to areas under the control of armed groups. The present report also details
progress made in engaging parties to conflict to end and prevent grave violations,
such as the completion of the action plan to end and prevent the recruitment and use
of children by the Government and progress in the development and implementation
of action plans with armed groups.

II. Political and security situation and parties to conflict
A.

Political and security developments
3.
Hostilities between the Government of the Sudan and armed groups decreased
significantly as a result of Operation Decisive Summer (January 2014 to June 2016),
which reduced the presence and activities of armed groups in Darfur. The Sudan
Liberation Army-Minni Minawi (SLA-MM) and the Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM) lost their foothold in Darfur; however, both groups maintained a presence in
South Sudan and were reportedly increasingly active in Libya. The Government
consolidated its control and authority across Darfur, except for small pockets in the
Jebel Marra area, which remained under the control of SLA -AW. After a relative lull
during most of 2017, Government security forces resumed their operations against
the group in 2018, including through aerial bombardments, which resulted in child
casualties. In the same period, SLA-AW targeted Government security forces bases
and checkpoints, mostly through sporadic hit-and-run attacks.
4.
Internal divisions over the engagement in negotiations with the Govern ment
further weakened and fragmented SLA-AW, leading to leadership struggles and
infighting between different factions. This resulted in fierce competition and clashes
among various factions and grave violations against children. The feud between

2/17

20-08611

S/2020/614

SLA-AW-Saleh Borsa and SLA-AW-Mubarak Aldouk, sparked by Mubarak Aldouk
announcing his intention to negotiate a peace agreement with the Government, was
the most protracted, as SLA-AW-Saleh Borsa staged attacks on SLA-AW-Mubarak
Aldouk positions in Daya village in the south-west of Rockero, Central Darfur. Those
sporadic attacks led to displacements of the population and grave violations against
children. In North Darfur, the Sudan Liberation Army/Peace and Development
(SLA/PD) harassed, assaulted and attacked civilians, in particular at the Sortony camp
for internally displaced persons. Areas in Jebel Marra under SLA -AW control
remained inaccessible to the United Nations owing to insecurity and government
restrictions from 2017 to late 2019.
5.
While armed hostilities between Government forces and armed groups abated
in most parts of Darfur, intercommunal conflicts over land and natural resources
continued to fuel tensions and clashes. Disputes between farmers and nomads over
nomadic migratory routes or access to grazing land and farmland often resulted in
violent confrontations. Abduction, killing and maiming of children and rape of girls
by elements described as armed nomads remained prevalent in farming areas. Conflict
over access to land and natural resources also negatively affected the capacity of
internally displaced persons to return to their areas of origin. Internal displacement
remained a major source of vulnerability, as internally displaced children often fell
victim to grave violations. Furthermore, the presence of explosive remnants of war in
Darfur continued to cause child casualties.
6.
In Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan States, unilateral ceasefires declared by the
Government and by the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-N)
remained in effect throughout the reporting period. However, the SPLM -N-Malik
Agar faction accused Government security forces of violating the ceasefire on several
occasions. In March 2017, the SPLM-N Deputy Chair Abdelaziz Al-Hilu resigned
over a disagreement on the inclusion of self-determination in the peace negotiations
with the Government. On 8 July 2017, SPLM-N announced the formal split between
the faction led by Malik Agar in areas of Blue Nile and the faction led by Abdelaziz
Al-Hilu in areas of Blue Nile and in the Nuba Mountains of Southern Kordofan. The
split led to tensions and clashes between supporters of the two factions and along
ethnic lines, and subsequent population displacements in Blue Nile. During the period
under review, monitoring in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile was constrained owing
to the continued denial of access to SPLM-N-controlled areas by the group from
within the Sudan. In Abyei, while tensions between the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya
continued, the security situation overall remained relatively calm. Occasional
incidents of criminal activity and attacks by unidentified armed elements occurred,
resulting in child casualties.
7.
UNAMID underwent a reconfiguration and drawdown, leading to challenges in
the monitoring and verification of violations against children in areas from which
UNAMID had withdrawn. In 2017, the Security Council determined that there had
been an overall improvement in the security situation in Darfur and decided to reduce
the UNAMID footprint (resolution 2363 (2017)). In 2018, a gradual withdrawal of
UNAMID from the more stable areas and concentration on conflict-affected areas was
authorized. As part of that process, the child protection section of UNAMID
underwent a large reduction of its capacities, which negative ly affected the
monitoring and reporting of violations and engagement with parties.
8.
In December 2018, popular demonstrations broke out in Khartoum and spread
to other states over the high cost of living occasioned by the withdrawal of
government subsidies on essential commodities. That unrest led to the removal, on
11 April 2019, of the President, Omer Al-Bashir, by the Sudanese Armed Forces.
Those events had repercussions in Darfur, where large crowds in major urban centres
and camps for internally displaced persons gathered to celebrate events in Khartoum.
20-08611

3/17

S/2020/614

The demonstrators targeted National Intelligence and Security Service and other
security forces facilities, perceived as symbols of the previous Government. The
government security forces, mainly the Rapid Support Forces, responded with
excessive force to the protests, thereby causing child casualties.
9.
On 17 August 2019, with the support of the African Union and the Government
of Ethiopia, the Transitional Military Council and the Forces for Freedo m and
Change, an umbrella opposition group instrumental in organizing the popular
demonstrations, signed a constitutional declaration agreeing on transitional
arrangements for the forthcoming 39 months. On 21 August, the Sovereign Council
of the Sudan was sworn in, replacing the Transitional Military Council. The Sovereign
Council comprised five military personnel and six civilians, including two women.
Abdalla Hamdok was sworn in as the Prime Minister of the transitional Government
the same day. A new 18-member Cabinet, including four women, took office on
8 September.
10. Meanwhile, starting in April 2019, the President of South Sudan hosted peace
negotiations between the transitional Government of the Sudan and various
opposition groups under the Sudanese Revolutionary Front umbrella in Juba. The
talks led to the signing, on 11 September 2019, of the Juba Declaration for
Confidence-building Procedures and the Preparation for Negotiation, which
constitutes a road map and trust-building agreement. Furthermore, the Government
agreed to permit humanitarian access to all areas of the country, including conflict affected areas of Jebel Marra, Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. This allowed the
United Nations, in late 2019, to access parts of those areas for the fir st time in many
years, creating a renewed opportunity to engage with armed groups on the situation
of children affected by the conflict

B.

Parties to the conflict
Government security forces
11. The Sudanese Armed Forces are the military forces of the Sudan, consisting of
the Land Forces, the Sudanese Navy, the Sudanese Air Force, and the Popular Defence
Forces. The Sudanese Armed Forces were delisted from the annexes to the annual
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict as of 2018
(S/2018/465), after having taken all the steps in their action plan to end and prevent
the recruitment and use of children.
12. The Sudan Police Force works under the command of the General Director of
Police. The Popular Defence Forces, a paramilitary group established in 1989 through
the Popular Defence Forces Act to support the Sudan Police Force, was dissolved by
the Transitional Military Council in May 2019. The Popular Police Force, a
paramilitary reserve force of local citizens raised by the Government to augment and
provide assistance to the Sudan Police Force, derives its mandate from the Popular
Police Act of 1989.
13. The Rapid Support Forces, a major security player in Operation Decisive
Summer and composed of members of the former Border Guards and Government allied armed Arab militias, continued to emerge as a major security entity. In January
2017, the Parliament passed the Rapid Support Forces Act, integrating them into the
Sudanese Armed Forces. Some 30,000 members of the Rapid Support Forces were
reportedly absorbed into the Sudanese Armed Forces.
14. The General Intelligence Service, created in July 2019 by the Transitional
Military Council, replaced the former National Intelligence and Security Service. The
agency was renamed in response to demands by protesters for the dissolution of the

4/17

20-08611

S/2020/614

National Intelligence and Security Service because of its involvement in the violent
response to popular demonstrations in late 2018 and 2019. For the purposes of the
present report, the service will be referred to as the National Intelligence and Security
Service/General Intelligence Service.
15. Joint Government security forces consisting of Rapid Support Forces and the
Sudanese Armed Forces conducted military operations against SLA-AW in Jebel
Marra. Joint forces consisting of the Rapid Support Forces, the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the National Intelligence and Security Service/General Intelligence
Service were also involved in the violent response to the popular demonstrations in
2019.
Armed groups
16. SLA-AW was gradually fragmented by internal divisions and leadership
struggles and the territory under its control and its operational capabilities were
significantly reduced during the reporting period. Defections of key commanders who
signed peace agreements with the Government led to shifts in allegiances and
infighting between the different factions. Splinter groups included SLA -AW Saleh
Borsa, SLA-AW Mubarak Aldouk, SLA/PD Siddiq Al Fouka, SLA-AW Zanoun, the
Sudan Liberation Movement-General Command, led by Amir Yousif Adam, and the
Sudan Liberation Movement-Field Leadership, led by Yousif Ali Shag. SLA-AW is
listed for the recruitment and use of children in annex I to the latest repo rt of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (A/74/845-S/2020/525) as a party
that has not put in place measures to improve the protection of children.
17. In July 2017, SPLM-N split into two factions, led by Malik Agar and Abdelaziz
Al-Hilu, as detailed in the preceding section. The Malik Agar faction was present in
parts of Blue Nile State, while the Abdelaziz Al-Hilu faction held territory in parts of
Blue Nile State and in the Nuba Mountains of Southern Kordofan. SPLM-N is listed
for recruitment and use of children in annex I to the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (A/74/845-S/2020/525) as a party
that has not put in place measures to improve the protection of children.
18. Although SLA-MM and JEM have lost their foothold in Darfur since 2014, both
groups maintained a presence in South Sudan and were increasingly active in Libya.
According to the Panel of Experts on the Sudan, Libya is an important source of
financing for those groups, as they are involved in mercenary and criminal activities
(see S/2019/34 and S/2020/36). SLA-MM and JEM are listed for recruitment and use
of children in annex I to the most recent report of the Secretary -General on children
and armed conflict (A/74/845-S/2020/525) as parties that have not put in place
measures to improve the protection of children.

III. Grave violations committed against children
19. Between 2017 and late 2019, access restrictions to conflict-affected areas of
Darfur presented challenges to the verification of grave violations against children.
Access to areas controlled by SPLM-N in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile was
constrained throughout the reporting period, despite ceasefires declared by the parties
to the conflict and advocacy by the country task force and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict for monitoring access to
those areas. Therefore, the information contained in the present report does not reflect
the full impact of armed conflict on children in the Sudan.

20-08611

5/17

S/2020/614

Darfur
20. During the reporting period, the country task force verified 714 grave violations
in Darfur, affecting 679 children, of which 291 were girls. The great majority of the
violations (405), including 144 violations caused by explosive remnants of war, could
not be attributed to any party. Government security forces were responsible for more
than one third of the total violations (272). The remaining 37 violations were
committed by SLA-AW and its splinter groups. In 2017, 213 violations against
children were verified. The number of violations peaked in 2018 (293). In 2019, the
United Nations verified 208 violations. South Darfur was most affected, with almost
half (332) of all violations against children, followed by North Darfur (161), Central
Darfur (139), West Darfur (75) and East Darfur (7). Overall, killing and maiming
accounted for most of the violations (451), followed by rape and sexual violence
(171), abduction (53), attacks on schools and hospitals (31) and recruitment or use
and denial of humanitarian access (4 each).
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States and the Abyei Area
21. During the reporting period, the country task force verified 20 grave violations
in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States and the Abyei Area, affecting 17 boys, 2
girls and 1 baby whose sex was unknown. The violations were attributed to unknown
armed elements (18) and the Sudanese Armed Forces and SPLM -N (1 each). The
violations occurred in 2017 (16), 2018 (1) and 2019 (3) in Southern Kordofan (16),
Abyei (3) and Blue Nile (1).

A.

Recruitment and use of children
Darfur
22. Four boys were verified as recruited and used by SLA-AW. The violations
occurred in South Darfur (2), North and Central Darfur (1 each), in 2019 (3) and 2017
(1). Furthermore, the country task force is in the process of verifying alleged cases of
recruitment and use of children by the Rapid Support Forces.
23. Four cases of recruitment and use of children by SLA-AW were verified during
the reporting period. For instance, a 14-year-old boy was recruited by SLA-AW in
2017, following separation from his family after an airstrike. He was used to guard
SLA-AW military bases and observation points. The boy later escaped from the group
and received reintegration assistance. In 2019, a 14 -year-old boy recruited in 2016
escaped the SLA-AW-Saleh Borsa group and sought refuge at the Sudanese Armed
Forces military garrison in Golo, Central Darfur, after he had shot a soldier for
punishing him. The Sudanese Armed Forces handed the child over to chi ld protection
actors. The boy was reunited with his family in Zalingei but later left his family; his
whereabouts remain unknown.
24. The country task force continued the verification of the alleged recruitment and
use of 14 boys as part of a reported mass recruitment of children by the Rapid Support
Forces. On 18 May 2019, the country task force received information that 87 children
aged between 14 and 17 from South Darfur had joined the Rapid Support Forces
training centres in Nyala town. The children reportedly received training on
dispersing demonstrators. They were reportedly sent to Khartoum and posted to
different areas to carry out the crackdown on demonstrators in June; 8 of them were
reportedly killed by unidentified perpetrators during the crackd own, while 10
reportedly returned to their families in Nyala. Furthermore, in August 2019, the
country task force received allegations of the recruitment and use of boys by the Rapid
Support Forces in Kabkabiyah, North Darfur, leading to the closure of two secondary

6/17

20-08611

S/2020/614

schools for boys. The children were allegedly sent to Saudi Arabia and Yemen. The
country task force was permitted to access Rapid Support Forces camps in Darfur and
found no evidence of recruitment of children.
Detention for alleged association with armed groups
25. In May 2017, four children, aged between 16 and 17, were arrested by the Rapid
Support Forces in Kutum, North Darfur, for their alleged association with SLA -MM
and the Sudan Liberation Army/Transitional Council and detained by th e Sudanese
Armed Forces. The children were transferred from military detention to the Family
and Child Protection Unit of the Sudan Police Force in October 2017 to receive
medical and psychosocial support and to be reunited with their families. The Special
Representative and the country task force advocated for their release, which resulted
in the attorney general dropping the charges on 15 February 2018.
26. In November 2017, 18 children were arrested and detained by the Rapid Support
Forces for their alleged association with Musa Hilal’s forces in North Darfur.
Following joint advocacy by the country task force and the technical committee for
the implementation of the action plan, chaired by the National Council for Child
Welfare, the children were transferred to the Family and Child Protection Unit of the
Sudan Police Force in El Fasher and released by decision of the Governor on
23 December. However, the children were released to individuals who were not their
relatives, resulting in delayed reunification with their families.

B.

Killing and maiming
Darfur
27. Killing and maiming accounted for approximately two thirds of all verified
violations during the reporting period in Darfur. Overall, 451 children (111 girls and
340 boys) aged between 0 and 17 were killed (170) or maimed (281). Most (258) of
those casualties could not be attributed to any party, including 144 cases of children
killed or maimed by explosive remnants of war. Almost 40 per cent of the killing and
maiming was attributed to Government security forces (176), including the Sudanese
Armed Forces (68), the Rapid Support Forces (67), the National Intelligence and
Security Service/General Intelligence Service (13), the Sudan Police Force (12), the
Popular Defence Forces (10), joint Sudanese Armed Forces/Rapid Support
Forces/Sudan Police Force operations (5) and the Joint Chad-Sudan border
monitoring force (1). The remaining casualties were attributed to SLA -AW (15) and
SLA-AW Abu Jamal and General Leadership factions (1 each). Child casualties
increased from 146 in 2017 to 186 in 2018. They decreased to 119 in 2019. Children
were killed or maimed by gunshots (205), explosive remnants of war (144), attacks
with high-calibre weapons or aerial bombardment (43) and through physical assault
or other causes (59). The great majority of violations occurred in South Darfur (219),
followed by Central Darfur (94), North Darfur (85), West Darfur (47) and East
Darfur (6).
28. Over half of the incidents involving the killing and maiming of children (258)
could not be attributed to any party. In many instances, it involved cases in which
perpetrators were described as armed nomads and the country task force was unable
to verify whether the perpetrators belonged to any particular group. For instance, o n
15 January 2017, two girls, aged 10 and 11, were killed between Feina and Kidjir in
east Jebel Marra, when armed men identified as of Arab ethnic origin attacked the
group of women the girls were travelling with and looted all of their belongings. The
case was reported to the police, but no action was taken against the suspected
perpetrators. On 11 April 2017, a 17-year-old girl sustained gunshot injuries following

20-08611

7/17

S/2020/614

an assault by unidentified armed men described as armed nomads in Golo locality,
Central Darfur. The perpetrators opened fire on the girl and her mother as they resisted
a rape attempt. Both the girl and her mother were hospitalized. The case was reported
to the police; however, the perpetrators remained at large. On 25 December 2018, a
7-year-old girl from Zamzam camp for internally displaced persons was shot and
injured in the chest while farming in Abu Zeriga area, North Darfur, by unidentified
armed men wearing military uniforms and riding camels.
29. The presence of explosive remnants of war continued to gravely affect children
in Darfur, accounting for almost 32 per cent of the total killing and maiming of
children during the reporting period. Children encountered them while playing,
fetching firewood and water, or herding livestock. Often, children played with the
objects they could not identify, hit them with stones or other objects or threw them
into fire, causing explosions resulting in loss of life or limbs. For example, on
26 January 2017, an 8-year-old boy was maimed by an explosive remnant of war in
El Geneina locality, West Darfur, while he was looking after animals. The boy picked
up the object and smashed it against stones, which made it explode, causing him to
lose his fingers. In another example, on 6 May 2018, six children (thre e girls and three
boys), aged between 3 and 14, were killed and two children (one girl and one boy)
were injured when they played with an explosive remnant of war that subsequently
exploded in Karkarah, Um Dukhun, Central Darfur.
30. Government security forces were responsible for 176 child casualties in the
reporting period. Incidents of killing and maiming occurred in the context of
indiscriminate attacks with live ammunition or rocket-propelled grenades affecting
civilian populations, including children, often while they were fleeing villages under
attack. During fighting in Jebel Marra, attacks on civilians by Government security
forces and allied militias and the aerial bombardments and use of long - and shortrange high-calibre weapons by the Sudanese Armed Forces resulted in child
casualties. For instance, on 29 March 2018, during an attack by the Rapid Support
Forces on Feina, east Jebel Marra, South Darfur, six children (four boys and two girls)
were killed, and one boy was maimed by gunshots. Two boys were killed as their
house was set on fire. On 13 May 2018, three boys were shot and killed when they
were fleeing an attack by the Sudanese Armed Forces on Turri village, south Jebel
Marra, South Darfur. Later the same day, four boys were killed by aer ial
bombardments on Turri village and on Koya village, south-west Jebel Marra. On
15 July 2018, the Sudanese Armed Forces fired a long-range high-calibre weapon on
a village in east Jebel Marra, where internally displaced persons had sought refuge,
resulting in the killing of two girls, aged 2 and 3.
31. Children were also affected by the excessive use of force employed by
Government security forces during public demonstrations. Such incidents increased
significantly from late 2018, when demonstrations over the standard of living sparked
nationwide protests that ultimately led to the removal of the President, Mr. Al -Bashir,
in April 2019. On 22 September 2018, one girl was killed and nine boys and one girl
were maimed when the Rapid Support Forces started shooting indiscriminately at a
peaceful demonstration against the visit of Mr. Al-Bashir to Kalma camp for
internally displaced persons, South Darfur. On 21 April 2019, three boys aged 14 to
15 were seriously injured when National Intelligence and Security Service/General
Intelligence Service agents opened fire on internally displaced persons who were
demonstrating in front of the National Intelligence and Security Service/General
Intelligence Service and Sudanese Armed Forces offices in Kutum, North Darfur. On
25 May 2019, the Rapid Support Forces opened fire on demonstrators in Kass, South
Darfur, resulting in the maiming of two boys, aged 12 and 16. On 15 September 2019,
one 15-year-old boy was shot and killed, and four boys aged between 16 and 17 were
maimed by National Intelligence and Security Service/General Intelligence Service
8/17

20-08611

S/2020/614

while they were participating in a demonstration in Mershing camp for internally
displaced persons, South Darfur.
32. This kind of incident was not limited to Darfur. Violent re sponses by security
forces to demonstrations, leading to the killing and maiming of children, occurred in
other parts of the Sudan as well. The crackdown by Government security forces on a
sit-in site in Khartoum on 3 June 2019 and the ensuing violence in Khartoum and in
other parts of the country reportedly resulted in the deaths of 19 children and the
injury of 49 more, according to UNICEF. 1 In a statement to the press on 11 June 2019,
the Security Council strongly condemned the violence and expressed reg ret for the
loss of lives and injuries among civilians. On 29 July 2019, Government security
forces opened fire on a demonstration by high-school students in El Obeid, North
Kordofan, killing five children and injuring many others, according to UNICEF. 2 As
those incidents occurred outside of the conflict-affected areas of the Sudan, they were
not represented in the numbers of children killed and maimed that were verified in
the framework of the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed
conflict.
33. Children were also killed and maimed in attacks on civilians committed by
SLA-AW and its splinter groups and in clashes between SLA-AW factions. For
instance, on 23 November 2019, two armed members of SLA -AW broke into a house
in Bardani village, Jebel Marra, and attacked a family. During the attack, they cut the
foot of a 3-year-old girl with a knife. The child was admitted to a local hospital. The
armed men also burned two houses in the village.
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States and the Abyei Area
34. The country task force verified 18 cases of killing (12) and maiming (6)
affecting 17 boys and one 8-month-old baby (sex unknown). Most violations were
unattributed (17), including four children affected by explosive remnants of war.
SPLM-N was responsible for the killing of one child. The violations occurred in
Southern Kordofan (15) and Abyei (3), and the great majority were verified in 2017
(16), while the remaining 2 occurred in 2018 and 2019.
35. For instance, on 13 February 2017, a 10-year-old boy was killed, along with his
father, by elements of SPLM-N during a cattle-looting incident in the Bagaia area,
Kadugli locality, Southern Kordofan. On 13 February 2017, two boys, aged 12 and
16, from the Tagali tribal group, were killed in the Abbasiyya locality, Southern
Kordofan, reportedly by members of the Kawahla tribal group.

C.

Rape and other forms of sexual violence
Darfur
36. A total of 171 children (169 girls and 2 boys) were verified as subjected to rape
or other forms of sexual violence during the reporting period. In almost 60 per cent
of the cases, perpetrators could not be identified (101). Government security forces
were responsible for 65 cases, including the Rapid Support Forces and the Sudanese
Armed Forces (29 each), the Sudan Police Force (4), the Popular Defence Forces (2)
and the National Intelligence and Security Service/General Intelligence Service (1),
followed by SLA-AW (4) and SLA/PD (1). The violations occurred in South Darfur

__________________

UNICEF. “Children killed, injured, detained and abused amid escalating violence and unrest in
Sudan: statement by UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore”, 11 June 2019.
2
UNICEF, “No child should be buried in their school uniform: statement by Abdullah Fadil,
UNICEF Representative in Sudan”, 29 July 2019.
1

20-08611

9/17

S/2020/614

(63), North Darfur (53), Central Darfur (32), West Darfur (22) and East Darfur (1), in
2017 (44), 2018 (68) and in 2019 (59).
37. Children in rural communities or in camps for internally displaced persons were
particularly vulnerable to sexual violence, as perpetrators often assaulted their victims
while they were working on farms, fetching water or firewood or when they carried
out livelihood activities outside camps. Nevertheless, sexual violence against children
is believed to be underreported in Darfur owing to widespread impunity, fear of
reprisals, stigma and discrimination and the limited availability of services for
survivors. In addition, with UNAMID withdrawal from several areas of Darfur, girls
leaving camps for internally displaced persons were left more vulnerable. While
perpetrators in some cases of sexual violence were brought to justice, accountability
remained low as the absence of a comprehensive witness protection and reparations
law, inadequate legal aid and the limited presence of rule of law institutions in remote
locations continued to discourage survivors from seeking justice, as noted in the
report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2019/280).
38. Unidentified armed men, many of whom were described as armed nomads,
committed most (101) cases of sexual violence against children during the reporting
period. For instance, on 23 December 2017, two girls, aged 14 and 15, were raped by
six unidentified armed men at Ragi farming area, close to N ertiti, South Darfur. The
survivors were attacked when they were returning from their farm and carried to
nearby bushes, where they were raped. The girls were released by the armed men after
two hours of captivity. One of the perpetrators was later arreste d by the police. On
5 February 2019, two girls, aged 16 and 17 and residents of Zamzam camp for
internally displaced persons in El Fasher, North Darfur, were raped by unidentified
perpetrators described as armed nomads. The victims had gone to collect stra w along
with other women outside of the camp when they encountered the armed men, who
beat them and threatened them at gunpoint, before raping two girls and one woman.
The case was reported to the Sudan Police Force and the survivors received medical
assistance.
39. Government security forces were responsible for 38 per cent (65) of the cases
of sexual violence, with most cases attributed to the Rapid Support Forces and
Sudanese Armed Forces (58 in total). For instance, on 3 August 2017, a 6 -year-old
girl was raped by a Sudanese Armed Forces element in Malam, South Darfur. The girl
had been sleeping at her home when the perpetrator attacked her. The family found
the victim bleeding and crying close to her house. The victim’s family reported the
incident to the police and the perpetrator was arrested. In another example, on
29 March 2018, the Rapid Support Forces and allied militias attacked Feina, South
Darfur, and raped seven girls aged 10 to 12 as they were on their way to the water
point. On 5 January 2019, a 14-year-old girl from Kassab camp for internally
displaced persons in Kutum was raped by two Sudan Police Force elements as she
was coming back from the town. The case was reported to the Sudan Police Force and
two suspects were arrested and detained at Kutum police station.
40. Five cases of sexual violence were attributed to armed groups. For instance, on
25 May 2019, SLA-AW-Saleh Borsa group attacked Tergei village, in Jebel Marra, and
raped two girls, aged 15 and 17, during the attack. On the same day, SLA-AW-Saleh
Borsa elements also attacked Dongola village in Jebel Marra and raped one 16-year-old
girl.
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States and the Abyei Area
41. Two cases of rape affecting two girls were verified and attributed to the
Sudanese Armed Forces and unknown armed elements in Blue Nile and Southern
Kordofan, both in 2019. On 28 April 2019, a 15-year-old girl was threatened at
10/17

20-08611

S/2020/614

gunpoint and then raped on her farm by two unidentified armed men dressed in
military uniform and riding camels at Elfaid Um Abd Allah town, Abu Kershola
locality, Southern Kordofan. On 12 August 2019, a 13-year-old girl was raped by a
Sudanese Armed Forces soldier, in Damazine, Blue Nile. The soldier threatened the
girl with his rifle while she was on her way home from the market, then raped her in
a nearby empty house and left her bleeding. The incident was reported to the police
and the victim received medical and psychosocial support. The perpetrator was
arrested a day after the report and discharged of his duties. He was later sentenced to
20 years in prison.

D.

Attacks on schools and hospitals
Darfur
42. During the reporting period, the country task force verified 31 attacks on schools
(20) and hospitals (11), many of which were attributed to Governm ent security forces
(15), including the Rapid Support Forces (9), the Sudanese Armed Forces (5), and
jointly to the Rapid Support Forces and an Arab militia (1); 4 of the attacks on schools
and hospitals were attributed to SLA-AW and one to SLA-AW-PD; and 11 attacks
could not be attributed to any party. Most of the incidents occurred in South Darfur
(15), followed by North Darfur and Central Darfur (6 each) and West Darfur (4). A
sharp increase was documented from 2017 (8) to 2018 (17), followed by a decrea se
in 2019 (6).
43. Attacks on 13 schools and two hospitals were attributed to Government security
forces. For instance, in May 2018, the Sudanese Armed Forces looted Qubo and
Shallal basic schools and destroyed their roofs during an attack on Qubo in Jebel
Marra. On 29 December 2019, the Rapid Support Forces, supported by Arab
tribesmen, entered El Geneina hospital, where they harassed and threatened medical
staff at gunpoint and destroyed hospital assets, including the blood bank. As a result,
hospital staff went on strike.
44. Five schools and six hospitals were attacked by unidentified armed elements.
For instance, on 30 December 2017, three unidentified men wearing civilian clothes
threw tear gas into the premises of a school in Zalingei, Central Darfu r, where
students and teachers were celebrating the end of the school year. As a result, 30 girls,
aged between 14 and 17, were hospitalized: 20 were discharged the same day and 10
were admitted for two days to one week, with 3 in critical condition. On 27 August
2018, an unidentified militia set the Qur’an School in Wuoh Ateem village, South
Darfur, on fire while retreating from the area.
45. In addition, the military use of 12 schools by the Rapid Support Forces (5), the
Sudanese Armed Forces (3), SLA-AW (2), and the Sudan Police Force and the
National Intelligence and Security Service/General Intelligence Service (1 each) was
verified in North Darfur, South Darfur and Central Darfur (4 each). Many of the
schools had been used for military purposes for yea rs, having a negative impact on
children’s access to education. After advocacy by the country taskforce, the Rapid
Support Forces vacated two schools and SLA-AW vacated one school in 2019.
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States and the Abyei Area
46. No attacks on schools or hospitals were verified during the reporting period.
However, the military use of five schools and two hospitals was verified, all attributed
to the Sudanese Armed Forces in Southern Kordofan (2 schools, 1 hospital) and in
Blue Nile (3 schools, 1 hospital). For instance, in May 2017, the Sudanese Armed
Forces in Kurmuk locality, Blue Nile, used three schools (Kurmuk Secondary School
for Boys, Kurmuk Secondary School for Girls, and Basic School in Sali village) and

20-08611

11/17

S/2020/614

one health clinic in Jurt West village. The facilities were vacated in 2018 after the
country task force’s advocacy with the Ministry of Defence

E.

Abduction
Darfur
47. During the reporting period, 53 children (11 girls and 42 boys) were abducted
by unidentified armed elements (34), Government security forces (14), including the
Rapid Support Forces (9), the Sudanese Armed Forces (2), the Border Guards (2) and
the Popular Police Force (1), and SLA-AW (5). Abductions occurred in South Darfur
(33), North Darfur (15), Central Darfur (4) and West Darfur (1). An increase was
documented from 2017 (13) to 2018 (22), followed by a slight decrease in 2019 (18).
48. Within the Government security forces, most violations were attributed to the
Rapid Support Forces, the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Border Guards. For
instance, on 5 June 2018, a 16-year-old boy from Wira village, Central Darfur, was
abducted by Sudanese Armed Forces elements and taken to an unknown destination.
The victim had been hiding in forests around Wira with a group of women who were
planning to flee when they encountered the perpetrators. On 16 March 2018, a
16-year-old boy living in Hasahisa camp for internally displaced persons in Zalingei,
Central Darfur, was abducted together with two men by a Rapid Support Forces
element while they were collecting firewood. The victims were taken to the house of
the Rapid Support Forces member and released the same day, after payment of a
ransom.
49. Cases attributed to unidentified armed men were often related to intercommunal
conflict. For instance, on 12 March 2018, three boys from Dereige camp for internally
displaced persons in Nyala, South Darfur, were abducted by unidentified armed men
who accused internally displaced persons in the camp of stealing their goa ts. The boys
were eventually released after the internally displaced persons paid for the stolen
goats.

F.

Denial of humanitarian access
Darfur
50. Areas under SLA-AW-control in Jebel Marra remained inaccessible to
humanitarian actors during most of the reporting period owing to ongoing operations
and restrictions imposed by the Government. The restrictions were relaxed in late
2019, allowing UNAMID and humanitarian actors to enter some areas for the first
time in many years.
51. Furthermore, the country task force verified four incidents of denial of
humanitarian access: two in Central Darfur and one each North Darfur and West
Darfur. Two were attributed to the Sudanese Armed Forces, one to SLA -AW and one
to unidentified armed elements. Three incidents occurred in 2019 and one in 2017 and
they included abductions of humanitarian personnel, restrictions of movement and
looting of humanitarian goods.
52. For instance, on 3 July 2019 in Golo, Jebel Marra, SLA -AW-Saleh Borsa
elements carjacked and kidnapped four staff of an international non-governmental
organization and their driver. They were released the following day, allegedly after a
ransom payment. On 24 June 2019, an inter-agency humanitarian mission on its way
to Kuraynik locality in West Darfur State was stopped by members belonging to the
military intelligence of the Sudanese Armed Forces who alleged that proper procedure

12/17

20-08611

S/2020/614

had not been followed while organizing the mission. The humanitarian actors were
instructed to leave the locality immediately.
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States and the Abyei Area
53. No specific incidents of denials were verified; however, during most of the
reporting period, all areas controlled by SPLM-N factions remained inaccessible to
the United Nations as the Government indicated that it would permit access for
humanitarian aid and personnel to those regions only through the Sudan and both
SPLM-N factions were only willing to allow access from neighbouring countries. The
conducive political climate and negotiations with the Government allowed for a first
humanitarian mission to Blue Nile State in December 2019, to an area that had not
been visited since September 2011.

IV. Progress and challenges in ending and preventing grave
violations against children
A.

Engagement with the Government
54. The Government continued implementing its action plan to end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children signed in March 2016. Remaining key steps included
the establishment of clear procedures for identification and screening of children in
their forces, the endorsement of handover protocols, the implementation of complaint
procedures and awareness-raising activities.
55. By October 2017, in addition to the high-level ministerial committee and the
technical committee chaired by the National Council for Child Welfare, the
Government had established state-level technical committees to support the
implementation of the action plan in all five states in Darfur. Regular joint monitoring
missions with the country task force were conducted, which included meetings with
civilian and military authorities and communities to advocate for and raise awareness
of child protection issues and conduct spot checks in Sudanese Armed Forces barracks
and Sudan Police Force training centres. Command orders and directives were issued
covering all the government security forces (the Sudanese Armed Forces, the Rapid
Support Forces, the Popular Defence Forces, the National Intelligence and Security
Service/General Intelligence Service and the Sudan Police Force) to end and prevent
child recruitment.
56. In November 2017, the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict visited
the Sudan to engage with the Government on the implementation of its action plan.
This was followed by a visit by the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict between 25 February and 1 March 2018, during which she took stock of the
implementation of the action plan. She strongly advocated with the Government to
capitalize upon the gains of the action plan and transform it into a national prevention
plan on grave violations against children.
57. On 26 April 2018, the high-level ministerial committee endorsed a manual on
complaint mechanisms in judicial and security institutions to enable th e public to
report child recruitment by Government security forces. On 28 April, Government
representatives signed standard operating procedures on the release and handover of
children associated with armed groups and captured during operations. Those
standard operating procedures are aimed at preventing the detention of children
formerly associated with armed groups by putting in place clear procedures and time
frames for the handover of children to civilian child protection actors.

20-08611

13/17

S/2020/614

58. On 13 May 2018, the Government endorsed the UNICEF Knowledge, Attitudes
and Practices study on the recruitment and association of children with armed forces
and groups, including in intercommunal conflict. The endorsement paved the way for
a national communications campaign to end and prevent child recruitment and use by
armed forces and groups and other violations.
59. Following those developments, the Sudanese Armed Forces were delisted from
the annexes to the annual report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict as of 2018 (S/2018/465).
60. On 25 July 2018, the high-level ministerial committee agreed to build upon the
gains of the completed action plan, including by maintaining the institutional
structures and mandates of the national and state-level technical committees. The
state-level committees continued to coordinate training for security forces, support
the roll-out of the complaint mechanisms manual, report grave violations by armed
forces and ensure the application of the standard operating procedures on the release
and handover of children associated with armed groups. Following advocacy by the
Special Representative with the Government on the development of a national
prevention plan on grave violations, following Security Council resolution 2427
(2018) and an exchange with the Government in New York in September 2018, by the
end of 2019, the Government had agreed on a road map with the country task force
to ensure continued compliance with the action plan, developed and drafted a national
strategy on the protection of children in armed conflict, developed communications
and awareness-raising materials to launch the national communications campaign,
and drafted a standardized training manual on child protection for government
security forces.
61. In 2019, following reports of the recruitment and use of children by the Rapid
Support Forces for its operations in the Sudan and overseas, a United Nations -led
screening and verification exercise of Rapid Support Forces barracks was agreed upon
by the United Nations, the National Council for Child Welfare and the Rapid Support
Forces. Some 1,346 Rapid Support Forces soldiers were screened in South Darfur and
West Darfur, and no child was identified. Further visits are planned for 2020 to oth er
Rapid Support Forces bases and training centres across the Sudan, including in Blue
Nile and Southern Kordofan. Furthermore, in 2019, the Sudanese Armed Forces and
the Rapid Support Forces issued and disseminated further command orders
prohibiting the recruitment of children into their ranks.
62. The country task force continued to support the state-level technical committees
with training for security forces on the action plan and children’s rights. In 2018, for
example, 450 commissioned and non-commissioned officers from the Sudanese
Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces received such training. In 2019, 568
soldiers from the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces (including
five women), mainly from Khartoum, West Darfur, East Darfur and South Darfur,
received similar training. In the Two Areas, 3,188 members of the security forces (the
Sudanese Armed Forces, the Rapid Support Forces, the National Intelligence and
Security Service/General Intelligence Service, the Popular Defence Forces an d the
Central Reserve Police) received the training.

B.

Dialogue with armed groups
63. While SLA-MM and JEM were operating outside of the Sudan for most of the
reporting period, the country task force continued to engage with both groups on the
implementation of their action plans, signed in 2007 and 2012, respectively.
Following a meeting in Geneva in November 2016, the country task force organized
a workshop in April 2017 with both groups, which resulted in road maps outlining

14/17

20-08611

S/2020/614

next steps and priority activities. Following the workshop, SLA-MM shared their
existing command orders prohibiting child recruitment, draft disciplinary measures
and age-assessment procedures, which were reviewed and strengthened in
consultation with the country task force. On 16 August 2017, SLA-MM reissued the
command order prohibiting the recruitment and use of children, sexual violence, the
abduction and killing and maiming of children, and attacks on schools and hospitals.
64. On 22 January 2018, the Chair of JEM renewed a command order instructing
members to refrain from the recruitment and use of children, sexual violence, and the
killing and maiming of and other violations against children. The order reiterated the
adherence of JEM to international norms and standards, a s well as to national laws
protecting children against violations.
65. While dialogue continued, the verification of the implementation of measures
proved difficult, as the groups’ operations were located in third countries. In the
beginning of 2019, dialogue was further hampered as representatives of the groups
left the Sudan. However, at the time of writing, the current peace process is providing
opportunities for revitalized engagement with SLA-MM and JEM.
66. While SLA-AW has not formally engaged on the signature of an action plan to
end and prevent the recruitment and use of children, the country task force was able
to establish contact with one of the splinter groups, the SLA -AW-Saleh Borsa faction,
in late 2019. Following the Government’s agreement to allow humanitarian access to
all areas of the country, the country task force could access conflict -affected areas in
Jebel Marra for the first time since 2011. In Daya village, Jebel Marra, which is in an
area heavily contested by different SLA-AW factions, a child protection-focused
engagement began with the SLA-AW-Saleh Borsa faction.
67. The country task force convened a workshop with SPLM -N in 2017 to review
the status of its action plan, signed in 2016, and to finalize command orders and
develop disciplinary measures, a complaint mechanism and an age-assessment
protocol. However, as mentioned in the previous report (S/2017/191), the country task
force continued to be denied access to areas under the co ntrol of SPLM-N for
monitoring and verification of grave violations and following up on progress on the
action plan.
68. After the group split in July 2017, both factions committed to the existing action
plan and appointed new focal points and action plan committees. The Special
Representative spoke repeatedly with both factions and travelled to the region for a
possible meeting with Malik Agar and Abdelaziz Al-Hilu in support of engagement
by the country task force. However, the planned meeting did not ta ke place because
of the SPLM-N leaders’ inability to travel.
69. Furthermore, the conducive political climate created by the peace process
enabled the United Nations to access areas in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
controlled by the SPLM-N Al-Hilu faction in late 2019, after months of negotiations
with the transitional Government, leaders of South Sudan and the SPLM-N Al-Hilu
faction. In October 2019, United Nations representatives were able to visit Kauda
locality in Southern Kordofan. The United Nations subsequently conducted a
humanitarian needs assessment mission to the area. In December 2019, United
Nations representatives conducted a mission to oversee the distribution of food and
school materials to flood- and conflict-affected communities in southern Blue Nile
State, for the first time since 2011. On 6 January 2020, a humanitarian mission was
conducted to Ulu, Blue Nile, an area under the control of SPLM -N Agar.
70. The country task force also engaged with parties to conflict not listed in the
annexes of the annual report on children and armed conflict ( A/74/845-S/2020/525)
by advocating for the adoption of measures to end and prevent grave violations
20-08611

15/17

S/2020/614

against children. After advocacy, on 16 October 2018, Musa Hilal, a northern Rizeigat
leader with strong influence over the Border Guards and head of the Sudanese
Awakening Revolutionary Council, issued a command order to all members of the
Council prohibiting the recruitment and use of children and the ab duction, killing and
maiming of and other violations against children. Hilal also agreed to continue
working with the country task force and all relevant actors in the promotion of child
protection efforts. However, Hilal and some of his followers were arr ested in
mid-November 2018.
71. In addition, after engagement and awareness-raising with the country task force,
SLA/PD issued a command order prohibiting the recruitment and use, abduction,
killing and maiming of children, sexual violence against children , and attacks on
schools and hospitals. In the order, which the country task force received for
verification in November 2018, the group emphasized that such acts were prohibited
under Sudanese law and international law. The country task force provided tra ining
on child rights and protection to SLA/PD, supported the dissemination of the
command order in areas where SLA/PD members were present and monitored
compliance.

V. Observations and recommendations
72. The Juba peace process represents an opportunity to sustainably address
the grievances of children affected by years of armed conflict in the Sudan. I call
upon all parties to the peace process to ensure that the rights and needs of
conflict-affected children are taken into account during the talks and in any
future peace agreement, including provisions on the release and reintegration of
children associated with armed forces and armed groups.
73. I am concerned about the violations against children presented in this
report, especially the killing and maiming of children and sexual violence against
children. I urge the Government of the Sudan to undertake further efforts
towards ensuring accountability for grave violations against children by
bringing perpetrators to justice and providing remedies to victims of grave
violations. In this regard, I welcome the commitments made by the Government
of the Sudan in the Framework of Cooperation of the Sudan and the United
Nations on the Prevention and Response to Sexual Violence in Conflict.
74. I welcome the progress made by the Government of the Sudan in the
implementation of the prevention and accountability mechanisms foreseen in
their action plan to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children, which
led to the delisting of the Sudanese Armed Forces from the annexes of my annual
report on children and armed conflict as of 2018. I am, however, concerned about
continued violations committed against children by Government security forces
and about recurrent reports of child recruitment by the Rapid Support Forces.
75. In this regard, I welcome the cooperation of the Government of the Sudan
with the country task force on the screening of Rapid Support Forces barracks
and training sites to identify and release children. I urge the Government of the
Sudan to take measures to prevent the killing or maiming of children by
Government security forces in the context of military operations or when
responding to public demonstrations.
76. I further encourage the Government of the Sudan to sustain the gains of the
completed action plan through the swift implementation of the road map
developed with the United Nations to ensure continued compliance with the

16/17

20-08611

S/2020/614

action plan and through the development and implementation of a national
prevention plan on grave violations against children.
77. I call on the armed groups listed in the annexes of my most recent annual
report on children and armed conflict (A/74/845–S/2020/525) to cooperate with
the country task force on the swift and full implementation of their action plans
to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children to ensure the
identification, release and reintegration of associated children. I urge SLA -AW
to engage with the United Nations on the development of an action plan. I
welcome the road map for the expedited implementation of their action plan
developed by the SPLM-N Al-Hilu faction with the country task force and call
for the swift implementation of that action plan.
78. I call on the international community to ensure that sufficient resources are
available, including in United Nations missions mandated by the Security
Council, to continue supporting the Government of the Sudan in the protection
of children, the reintegration and rehabilitation of children affected by conflict,
the monitoring and reporting on the situation of children affected by conflict,
and the monitoring and implementation of action plans with armed groups.

20-08611

17/17
