S/PRST/2005/5

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 February 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5124th meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 February 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
between Iraq and Kuwait”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council congratulates the people of Iraq on the successful
elections of 30 January 2005. These elections represent a historic moment for
Iraq and a positive step in its political transition. In turning out to the polls,
Iraqis demonstrated their respect for the rule of law and non-violence. They
voted for democracy and full ownership of their affairs. The Security Council
commends the Iraqi people for having taken this step to exercise their right to
freely determine their own political future and encourages them to continue to
do so in moving ahead with their political transition.
“The Security Council congratulates the newly-elected coalitions and
individuals in these elections.
“The elections took place under difficult conditions, and the Security
Council salutes the bravery of the Iraqi people who demonstrated their
commitment to democracy, defying the terrorists. The Security Council
commends the tens of thousands of Iraqis who ran as candidates, administered
the elections, staffed the polls, observed the elections, and provided security.
The Security Council gives special recognition to the Independent Electoral
Commission of Iraq for its fortitude and organizational skill in administering
the elections.
“The Security Council commends the Secretary-General and the United
Nations for successfully assisting election preparations, including advice and
support extended to the Iraqis by the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for Iraq Ashraf Qazi, the UN Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), particularly the lead electoral adviser Carlos Valenzuela, the UN
Electoral Assistance Division (EAD) and its Director Carina Perelli. The
Security Council also appreciates the assistance given by other international
actors, including EU electoral experts.
“The Security Council also notes the commendable role played by the
Iraqi Security Forces and the Multi-National Forces-Iraq in providing security
to the elections.
“These elections are an important step for Iraq’s political transition, as
outlined in UN Security Council resolution 1546. The Security Council looks
forward to the seating of the Transitional National Assembly and the formation
05-24036 (E) 160205

*0524036*

S/PRST/2005/5

of a new Transitional Government of Iraq in the near future. A Constitution of
Iraq, to be drafted under the authority of the Transitional National Assembly,
is expected to be put to a referendum by October 2005 and followed by general
elections by December 2005 under the new Constitution. The Security Council
affirms its continuing support for the Iraqi people in their political transition
and reaffirms the independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of
Iraq.
“Underlining the importance of the maximum possible participation of
all components of Iraqi society in the political process, the Security Council
stresses the need for sustained political efforts aimed at making the next steps
of the transition, in particular the coming constitutional process, as inclusive,
participatory and transparent as possible. The Council welcomes the
statements recently made by Iraqi leaders in this regard, and strongly
encourages the Transitional Government of Iraq and the Transitional National
Assembly of Iraq to reach out broadly to all segments of Iraqi society, with a
view to promote genuine political dialogue and national reconciliation and to
ensure that all Iraqis are duly represented and have a voice in the political
process and the drafting of the Iraqi Constitution.
“The Security Council reaffirms the leading role of the SRSG and
UNAMI in UNSCR 1546 in support of Iraq’s own efforts and as requested by
the Government of Iraq, to promote national dialogue and consensus building
on the drafting of a national constitution. In this regard, the Security Council
urges the UN to prepare itself rapidly and encourages the members of the
international community to provide advisers and technical support to the UN
to help it fulfil this role.
“The Security Council condemns, in the strongest possible terms, acts of
terrorism in Iraq, which should not be allowed to disrupt Iraq’s political and
economic transition. The Security Council calls on those who use violence in
an attempt to subvert the political process to lay down their arms and
participate in the political process. It encourages the Iraqi authorities to engage
with all those who renounce violence and to create a political atmosphere
conducive to national reconciliation and political competition through peaceful
means.
“The Security Council stresses the continued importance of Iraq’s
neighbouring countries and regional organizations in supporting the political
process, cooperating with the Iraqi authorities to control transit across Iraq’s
borders and extending other support for the people of Iraq in their efforts to
achieve security and prosperity.
“Consistent with UNSCR 1546, the Security Council reaffirms its
support for a federal, democratic, pluralist and unified Iraq, in which there is
full respect for human rights. It welcomes the international community’s
support to Iraq and underlines the importance of enhanced and expeditious
assistance from all States and relevant international organizations in support of
Iraq’s further implementation of the political transition process and efforts to
achieve national reconciliation, economic reconstruction, and stability, in
accordance with UNSCR 1546.”

2
