THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 31 MAY 1978

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Puge

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2079)

..........,............,......

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _. . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (S/12710) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security CounciZ. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2079th

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday,
PresirSent: Mr. Ruben CARP10 CASTILLO (Venezuela).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela,

31 May 1978, at 4l pm.
/S/12710/ states in paragraph 36 that ‘the present quiet
in the Israel-Syria sector is, however, basically precarious.
The main elements of the Middle East problem remain
unresolved and the situation in the area as a whole will
continue to be unstable and dangerous unless real
progress can soon be made towards a just and durable
settlement of the problem in all its apsects.’ This
statement of the Secretary-General reflects the view of
the Security Council.”

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2079)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (S/l 2710)
The meeting was called to order at 4.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (S/ 12710)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish): I
should like to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the following documents: the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) covering the period 24 November
1977 to 17 May 1978, contained in document S/12710,
and the draft resolution contained in document S/12721.
2. I shall now put to the vote draft resolution S/12721.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted by 14 votes to none.1
One member (China) did not participate in the voting.
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
connetion with the adoption of the resolu tioll on the
renewal of the mandate of UNDOF, I have been authorized
to snake the following complementary statement on behalf
of the Security Council regarding the resolution just
adopted:
“AS is known, the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
1 Seeresolution 429 (1978).

Further, on behalf of the Chinese delegation, I wish to state
that, as it has not participated in the vote on this
resolution, it takes the same position with regard to the
statement which I have just read out on behalf of the
members of the Council.
4. I have been informed that the Secretary-General wishes
to make a statement and I now call on him.
5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
My report on UNDOF
contained in document S/l2710 of 17 May 1978 speaks for
itself. This has been a generally quiet period in the
Israel-Syria sector and international attention has been
focused elsewhere. However, as long as efforts to resolve
the main elements of the Middle East problem do not make
significant progress, the situation in the area will remain
essentially unstable, The necessity of making progress
towards a just and durable settlement in the Middle East
therefore remains very high on the world’s agendaand I
hope that, despiteall of the difficulties involved, we shallin
the coming months seesomeprogressin the right direction.
I can assure the Council that, with the renewal of the
mandate of UNDOF for another six months, the Force will
continue to do its utmost to maintain quiet in the area,in
accordance with the terms of the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces[S/11302/Add.I of
30 May 19741.
6. Mr. CHOU Nan (China) (interpretation fro17z Gkinese):
With regard to the question of the United Nations Force,
we have alwaysheld a different position in principle. Basing
itself on this position, the Chinese delegation did not
participate in the vote on the draft resolution contained in
document S/12721.

7. Mr. BISHRRA (Kuwait): Mr. President, the delegation
of Kuwait would first like to thank you sincerely for the
able and effective manner in which you have conducted the
businessof the Council during this month.
8. Kuwait voted in favour of the resolution which hasjust
been adopted on the renewal of the mandate of UNDOF

for another period of six montlls solely because the Syrian
Government expressed its wish to have the mandate
extended.

paragraph was inserted in conformity with the requirement
of formality rather than an indication of a serious en.
deavour by the Council to have it implemented.

9. The delegation of Kuwait studied very carefully the
report of the Secretary-General. Paragraphs 33 and 34 do
not indicate any encouraging developments. The report
gives the impression that the situation is tranquil and static.
On the surface that may be so; in fact it only appears to be
quiet. Israel is busy building Jewish settlements on occupied Syrian territory. Jewish immigrants are being brought
from different corners of the world to settle on Syrian land
to cultivate areas that Syrian farmers owned and for which
they sweated. The soil that Syrians tilled is being plundered
by Jewish settlers. Israel has been saying that the occupied
Syrian territory
will never be vacated, even after the
achievement of a peaceful settlement.

14. The Middle East thus provides the best illustration of
the decline of respect for the Charter and for the volume of
booty that force can bring. It is indeed not a pleasant
spectacle, and the inability of the Council to take drastic
measures to put an end to Israel’s occupation of Arab land
adds very considerably to the muddle in this verb unhappy
region.
15. I note with a wry smile that the Secretary-General
reported that “Syrian shepherds grazing their flocks close to
and west of the A lint continue to be a problem for
UNDOF” [S/12710, para. 271. These shepherds, who have
been grazing their sheep for centuries cannot be a sourceof
irritation to UNDOF. The problem comes from the Jewish
settlers and Jewish settlementsbeing built on Syrian land
with a view to securing perpetual acquisition of Syrian
territory in defianceof the Charter and of Security Councjl
resolutions. That constitutes the irritation to UNDOF and
to the United Nations,and to the world in fact.

10. Israel alleges and it claims that the Syrian land is
indispensable for its security. This is not the right time or
the right moment to blunt such macabre lack of logic. But
it is tragic and indeed saddening that the role of the
Security Council should have been sidelined in the expectation that talks conducted outside the United Nations could
bring about better results. And after I1 years of IsraeJ’s
occupation of Syrian territory and other Arab territories,
the Council finds itself unable to rise to the responsibility
conferred upon it by the Charter. Israel’s persistent and
consistent disregard for United Nations resolutions, including those of the Security Council, is due to the opposition
by some permanent members of the Council to the
imposition of sanctions on Israel in accordance with
Chapter VII of the Charter, a course which we have been
consistently advocating. Consequently,
Israel enjoys the
spoils of its occupation of Syrian and other Arab territories
with impunity. Yet we speak endlessly about prospects for
negotiations and the possibility of a peaceful settlement.

16. It is ironic that Syrian shepherdsshould pose a
problem, while thesehumanpredators of Syrian land enjoy
an enviable comfort behind United Nations troops. This
situation, in sum,isintolerable. I hope that this bleak image
will give way in days to cometo a brighter light.
37. Mr. HLJLINSK‘k (Czechoslovakia)(interpretatiotz
from
Russian): As a result of the aggressive
policiesof the lsraeli
Government, the Middle East continues to be a sourceof
constant tension. Events in Southern Lebanon have once
again clearly demonstratedthat Israel is continuing to set
up new obstaclesto a comprehensivesolution to the Middle
East problem.

1 I. This exercise of renewing the mandate of the United
Nations troops in the Middle East has become a seasonal
routine, while more than 1 million Arabs are suffering
odious occupation and while their territories are being
plundered and pillaged by Israeli colonizers brought from
all over. We meet here to renew the mandate of United
Nations forces in Syrian territory invaded by Israel in 1967
and occupied since that year.

18. The Czechoslovakdelegation has already frequently
had occasionto state its position on this problem. However,
we considerit necessaryto state once againthat a durable
peacein the Middle Eastwill only be achievedwhen an end
is put to the occupation of all Arab territories held by
Israel, when the Arab people of Palestineis given an
opportunity to exercise its inalienablerights, including its
right to self-determinationand to the creation of its own
State, and when all peoples and States in that area,
including Israel, have a system of effective international
guaranteesto ensuretheir security and independentexistence.

12. This is a glaring example of how much military force is
able to acltieve. We do this in the midst of a linguistic
marathon on disarmament that is taking place in tile
General Assembly at this very moment. UNDOF functions
on Syrian territory and, behind UNDOF, in the Israelioccupied Syrian land, Israeli settlers are enjoying the quiet
that UNDOI: ensures and provides. In other words, these
Zionist settlers live in a relaxed atmosphere, offered and
provided very freely by UNDOF. This fact sends an
unpleasant chill into the bones of those who expect more
from the Security Council.

19. The latest example of brute force againstLebanonhas
convinced the Arab people not only of the lack of reality
but alsoof the dangerinherent in separatetalks with Israel,
which have not yielded any firm prospects for the
achievementof peace. In other words, the position of the
Governmentsof Arab countries wasfully brought out when
they warned us about the policy of separatetalks. The
point is that through this policy the Government of Israelis
pursuingexactly the sameend, namely to disrupt the unity
of the Arab countries. This policy also represents an
attempt to keep the PalestineLiberation Organization out
of the talks on a settlement in the Middle East. My
Government has frequently come out in favour of a

13. Admittedly, some parts of the resolution whjch the
Council has just adopted go against the grain of my
delegation. The reference to resolution 338 (1973) and
calling upon the parties to implement it immediately is
uninspiring and placid. It gives the impression that tile
2

proposal to the effect that a comprehensive settlement in
the Middle East should be brought about by means of talks
within the framework of a resumed Geneva Peace Conferellce,
with the ptlrtkipation
of all countries concerned,
including the Palestine Liberation Organization as a fullfledged participant.

27. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Repubfics) (kterpretation
from Russian): The Security
Council had just adopted a resolution renewing for a
further period of six months the mandateof the United
Nations Disengagement
ObserverForce betweenSyrian and
Israelitroops in the Golan Heights.It is quite obviousthat
the question
of continuing the mandate of the Force is
directly connectedwith a Middle East settlement. In this
connexion, the Soviet delegation would like to refer
Particularly ta the statementreadout by the Presidentof
the Council, which containeda warning to the effect that:

20. Regarding the presence and the activities of the United
Nations forces in that area, including UNDOF, they are
0n1y
warranted if they can help to create the conditions
whereby a just peace can be achieved in the Middle East
precisely through a comprehensive resolution of all the key
issues in the conflict and with strict observance of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations.

“The main elementsof the Middle Eastproblemremain
unresolvedand the situation in the areaasa whole will
continue to be unstable and dangerousunless real
Progresscan soon be madetowards a just and durable
settlementof the problemin all its aspects.“/,S’ee
para. .j’
above.]

21, In this connexion, my delegation would like to stress
that the presence of United Nations forces in the Middle
East region is regarded by LIS as a provisional measure which
should in no way be aimed at weakening the pressure on
the aggressor or even encouraging it to continue to ignore
the decisions of the Security Council.

28. The entire course of events in the Middle East has
clearly borne out the correctnessof the frequent warnings
given by the Soviet Union to the effect that failureto settle
the Middle East conflict, the continued occupation by
Israel of Arab land and the flouting of the legitimate
national rights of the Arab peopleof Palestinehavecreated
an explosive situation which contains the seedsof new
military conflict. The recent overt aggressionby Israel
againstLebanonhasshownclearly onceagainwhat dangers
are inherent in any delay in settling the Middle East
conflict.

22. The Czechoslovak delegation voted for the extension
of the mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six
months. In doing so, we have taken into account the
position taken by the Syrian Government in giving its
consent to the extension of this mandate.
23. Mr, BARTON (Canada): Since Canada is one of the
countries contributing troops to UNDOF, the Council will
not be surprised that that forms the focus of my remarks.

29. The Soviet Union has always taken a consistent
position regardingthe situation in the Middle East. It has
always favoured and continues to favour the speedy
implementation of a comprehensiveand just political
settlement of the Middle East problem, which should
consistin the following organically interrelated elements:
the withdrawal of Israeli troops from all Arab territories
occupied in 1967; the exercise by the Arab people of
Palestineof its inalienable rights, including its right to
self-determinationand to the creation of its own State;
assuranceof the independentexistenceand security of all
the States in the area. Such a settlementcan only be
achieved through the Geneva Peace Conferenceon the
Middle East with the participation of all the parties
concerned,including the PalestineLiberationOrganization.
The discussionsof the question of the situation in the
Middle Eastat the United Nationsin recentyears,together
with the relevant decisionsof the Security Councilandthe
General Assembly, clearly show that the overwhelming
majority of States Member support this approach to
removingthe sourceof tensionin the Middle East.

24. We take particular satisfaction in noting from the
Secretary-General’s report that for the past six months the
Force has continued to function efficiently in discharging
the terms of its mandate. The conditions in which UNDOF
operates are extremely difficult, and to this was added the
fact that during the period under review the Force was
required to operate at reduced strength because of the
temporary assignment of personnel to the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). Despite this, UNDOF
has fulfilled its tasks and there have been no complaints bY
the parties concerning observance of the cease-fire. This
reflects positively on the Commander and all the members
of UNDOF, and on the direction given to it bY the
Secretary-General and his staff. lt also indicates that the
parties are co-operating well in observing the cease-fire.
25. UNDOF has been operating in the cause of peace since
the signing of the Agreement between Israel and the Syrian
Arab Republic in 1974. It has done an exemplary job in
supervising the cease-fire and the areas of separation and
limitation of armaments. My Governments regrets that,
despite the calm which has existed in the area for the last
four years, Israel and Syria have failed to take further steps
towards concluding an agreement that would move bcYond
their existing understanding on physical disengagement.

30, The Soviet Union has frequently drawn attention to
the fact that to resist the achievementof an over-all
settlementand to delay a decisionon thesequestionscan
only
be the action of those who, for their own selfish
purposes,are trying to maintainthe presentlevel of tension
in the Middle East. Imperialist circlesobviously consider
that tJlemaintenanceof the stufusquo in the Middle Eastis
in line with their long-term plansto strengthentheir own
control over the Middle East region, its tremendousoil
resourcesand important strategicposition. It is precisely
for that reasonthat they want to weakenthe Arab Statesas

26. My country contributes willingly to peace-keeping in
the hope that this will contribute to the search for Peace. It
is in this hope and expectation that the Canadian Government has authorized me to announce that we shall continue
to provide troops for UNDOF at approximately the Present
level for the next mandate period.
3

would be fruitless to COntillUe
to renew the mandateof the
Force every six tnOllthS
unless the parties concerned
comply with the substantive aspects of resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (J973), in other words, unlessthey
meet the urgent need to continue and intensify all
necessaryefforts to establisha just and lastingpeacein the
Middle East.

much as possible, dissuade them from the course of
progressive social development, pit them against each other
and force them to act as separate entities.
3 1. The Soviet Union has never concealed its disapproval
of the policies and actions of certain countries ~h.iCh have
been designed to substitute separate arrangements for a
comprehensive Middle East settlement. Any attempt to
settle the problem of the Middle East by means of such
separate arrangements could damage the vital interests of aJJ
the peoples in the area. The course of events has shown
quite clearly that separate negotiations do not increase but
rather tend to diminish the prospects of achieving a
settlement jn the Middle East.

38. Mr. LEONARD (United States of America): ~~~~
yearshavepassedsinceUNDOF wasestablishedandits first
units sent to the Golan Neights. The purposeof the Force
wasto createand maintain conditions of calmin the areaso
t]lat the searchfor peacecould be pursuedwith vigourand
perseverance.Difficult problemshave been encounteredin
that search,and seriousobstaclesremain. But it is to the
great credit of UNDOF that efforts to reach a lasting
settlementcontinue in a stableatmosphere.

32. The Soviet Union had no objection to renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force in the Israel-Syria sector for a further period of six
months, bearing in mind in particular that the Government
of Syria had given its consent to such renewal. As the
delegation of the Soviet Union has frequently stressed in
the Council, the presence of United Nations armed forces in
the Middle East is purely a provisional measure and should
not be used to protract the efforts to reach a comprehensive settlement in the area.

39. The success
of UNDOF in carrying out its mandatehas
been greatly assistedby the parties’ scrupulousobservance
of their obligationsunder the terms of the Disengagement
Agreement. Another critical factor has been the able
Jcadershipof Major-GeneralCannesPhilipp andthe dedication of his officers and men. Less obvious, but just as
important to the successof the Force, are the impressive
institutional experienceand professionalismthat the United
Nations has developed in peace-keepingoperations.The
Secretary-Generaland his outstanding staff have built up
this expertise, with the help of many countrieswhich over
the years have contributed troops to United bhtiOtls
peace-keepingoperations. The Governments whoseforces
make up UNDOF-Austria, Iran, Canadaand Poland-are
following a noble tradition. To all those who have helped
make United Nations peace-keepingoperationsthe important force for international peace that they are today, my
Governmentpays a sinceretribute.

33. In conclusion, the delegation of the Soviet Union
would like to stress once again the need to take specific
steps in order to effect maximum savings in the funds
expended to maintain United Nations forces in the Middle
East.
34. Mr. ROLON ANAYA (Bolivia) (I’ntcrpretafiun from
Spanish): Mr. President,the Bolivian delegationwould like
once more to expressits appreciationto you for the very
skilful way in which you have presidedover our work and
we shouldalsolike to thank you for conveningthis meeting
of the Council.

40. We are pleasedthat Israel and Syria have onceagain
agreedto extend the mandate substantiallyin advanceof its
termination date. WCseethis as another indication of the
sinceredesirefor peaceon the part of both Israelandits
Arab neighbours.My Government will continue to work
with the parties, with the Security Council and with the
Secretary-General,and with all those who desireajust and
lasting Middle East scttlctnent. We believe firmly that, in
the words of J’residcnt Carter, “this may be the most
propitious time for a genuinesettlementiince the beginning
of the Arab-Israeliconflict”.

35, We supported the draft resolutionsubmittedand the
complementarystatementaccompanyingit on the basisof
the observation made by the Secretary-Generalthat the
cahn prevailing in the Israel-Syriasectoris a precariousone
despitethe efficient andarduouswork of UNJIOF. It could
not be other than precarioussinceit wasdecidedthat the
presenceof the Force shodd be brief, just long enoughfor
the parties concerned to implement the provisions of
resolution 338 (1973), which wasperemptoryin tone.
36. Bolivia, which supported resolution 242 (1967) becauseit felt that it constituteda set of extremely moderate
and well-balancedmeasures,
fully in keepingwith the legal
traditions of Bolivia, alsodecisively supported resolution
338 (1973) which, in paragraphs2 and 3, reiteratesthe
terms of resolution 242 (1967) and setsa clearmandateto
the effect that, “immediately and concurrently with the
cease-fire, negotiations shall start between the parties
concernedunder appropriateauspicesaimedat establishing
a just and durablepeacein the Middle East.” This hasnot
happenedso far.
37. My delegation considersit unfortunate that these
provisionshave not yet beencompliedwith. The resolution
just adopted movesin the right direction again,becauseit
4

41. Mr. RJCI-JARD(United Kingdom): My delegationwas
very pleasedto vote in favour of the resolution whichthe
Council hasjust adopted, renewingthe mandateof UNDOF
for a further six months. The role which the Force has
played for four years now in maintaining the cease-fire
and
in supervisingthe DiscngagcmentAgreementbetweenSyria
and Israelcontinues to be of the greatestimportance.The
lack of incident in the six-month period just concludedis
testimony to the efficiency of the officers and menof the
Force. This relative quiet continues to be important ifl
creating a general climate in the area so that efforts to
arrive at a solution to the underlying problemscanmake
progress.Weagreed,therefore, with the recommendation
of
the Secretary-Generalthat the mandateshouldbc extended
for a further six months.

42. At the same time 1 feel that I should place on record
again our view that the renewal of the mandate should not
be seen as an end in itself but as the means to an end. It is
not a substitute for true peace though there is a danger that
as time goes by it comes almost tacitly to be regarded as
such. The extension of the mandate therefore provides a
further period during which the search for a just and lasting
peace in the area should be actively pursued. In yet another
excellent report, for which we thank and congratulate him,
the Secretary-General has underlined this latter point
by
warning against the dangers of being lulled into a false sense
of security by the current relative tranquillity of the
Israel-Syria sector. As he rightly points out, the situation
remains basically precarious and we would not be doing our
duty if we did not continually point out to the parties
concerned the responsibilities placed on them under resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

constructive, realistic and conciliatory manner. It is therefore particularly sad to note that this unique chance has not
yet been used to the full so as to avert the danger of the
situation deteriorating once again. Without intending to put
the total blame on either party or side, my Government
feels compelled to point out that real progress cannot be
achieved by window-dressing alone, nor by concessions that
remain quite obviously below the minimum the other party
can reasonably expect in return for its own willingness to
compromise. Only if both sides to the conflict can find the
same courage to overcome old prejudices and to forget
painful experiences of the past can progress be achieved. It
is in this spirit that my Government appeals to all parties to
the Middle East conflict to show the courage that is needed
in order not to fall back into the old cliches of sterile hate
and hostility.
47. I should like to conclude my brief statement, as I did
last time, by expressing our gratitude and admiration for
their exemplary performance to the Commander of
UNDOF, Major-General Philipp of Austria and to the
officers and men of the force and its civilian staff, as well as
to the military observers of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization assigned to UNDOF. Our gratitude
goes also to the four countries contributing contingents to
UNDOF.

43. In conclusion, I should like once again to express our
profound thanks to the Secretary-General and his staff, to
the Commander of the Force, Major-General Philipp, and to
the members of the Force for the way in which they have
carried out their role over the last six months. Their task
was not eased by the secondment of half of the Iranian
battalion to help UNIFIL on a temporary basis. The high
quality of their performance continues to reflect nothing
but credit upon the troop-contributing
Governments of
Austria, Canada, Iran and Poland and indeed upon the
United Nations as a whole.

48. Finally, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, as
well as the Secretary-General and his staff, on the successful
effort in bringing about the adoption of this resolution.

44. Mr. VON WECHMAR (Federal Republic of Germany):
My delegation has cast its vote in favour of the resolution
just adopted, which renews, on the recommendation of the
Secretary-General and with the consent of the parties, the
mandate of UNDOF for another period of six months. In
doing so, my delegation was guided by the conviction, also
expressed by the Secretary-General in his comprehensive
and lucid report, that the continued presence of UNDOF in
the area is essential for the maintenance of the cease-fire
between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic. My delegation has noted with satisfaction that the cease-fire has
indeed been maintained and that no complaints have been
raised by either party. This testifies both to the outstanding
performance of UNDOF and the willingness of the parties
to co-operate in order to avoid a dangerous confrontation.

49. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretation from French):
The decision just taken by the Security Council to extend
the mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six months
ending on 30 November 1978, far from being a token
gesture is of great significance for my delegation. First and
foremost it signifies recognition of an renewed confidence
in the peace-keeping machinery of the United Nations,
which is particularly important since we are going through a
period in which there is a tendency to cast some aspersions
on that machinery. This decision signifies also that we are
convinced that the role of the United Nations as the only
earnest for preserving peace in many parts of the world has
been considerable and, in this connexion, my delegation
would like to express the hope that, in the particular case
we are now discussing, the Organization, apart from
successfully discharging the mandate that has been entrusted to it, will contribute to promoting conditions
propitious to bringing about an over-all settlement in the
Middle East that is both just and lasting. However, my
delegation sincerely hopes that this United Nations force will
never become a permanent institution and that the parties
concerned will do everything necessary to give full effect to
resolution 338 (1973).

45. Yet, despite these positive elements, it remains particularly disturbing that no progress has been achieved
towards a peace settlement or at least a revival of the
negotiating process in accordance with resolution
338 (1973). Since its establishment in 1974, UNDOF has
thus
been unable, for reasons beyond its control, to fulfil
its basic aim of ensuring real progress towards a just and
durable settlement in the area. Instead we cannot but agree
once again with the Secretary-General that “the present
quiet in the Israel-Syria sector is . . basically precarious”,
leaving the situation in the area “unstable and dangerous”
[S/l

2 710, para.

50. Mr, HARRIMAN
(Nigeria): First 1 should like to join
preceding speakers in expressing appreciation for the lucid
report of the Secretary-General on UNDOF for the period
24 November 1977 to 17 May 1978.

36J.

46. The same was true when we last renewed UNDOF’s
mandate. There was, however, a ray of hope that a change
for the better lay ahead. Various bfforts were then under
way to create an atmosphere of readiness finally to discuss
the main elements of the Middle East problem in a

51. UNDOF was established in May 1974 to supervise the
cease-fire on the Israeli-Syrian border called for by the
Security Council. The primary responsibility of UNDOF,
therefore, is to ensure the faithful adherence of all parties
5

57. 1 did say that this was the first time that my
delegation has contributed to the debate on this question
and I wish to expand further. For close to three decades,
the protestations of the entire world community to the
effect that the usurping State should respect international
law, morality and decency by withdrawing
from the
territories seized by naked force and aggression have
regrettably remained ignored. What if the world were
thrown into such chaos where every big Power could
expand its territory without concern for international peace
and security, which in effect amounts to anarchy? Even
President Sadat’s spectacular dhzarche of last November,
which underscored the Arab readiness to exchange peace
for Arab recognition of the State of Israel, received only
muted responses from Tel Aviv. Worse still, there has been a
provocative escalation in the establishment of Jewish
settlements in occupied Arab lands in order to create
so-called facts on the ground in the hope that such
settlements would influence the final determination of
Israeli boundaries in the event of a peace settlement, But
far from bringing us close to any peaceful accord, the
settlements have even been admitted by Israel’s backers as
having created serious obstacles in the path of peace.

to the articles of the Agreement on Disengagement, and it is
indeed a tribute to the effectiveness of UNDGF as a
peace-keeping force that this particular part of the Middle
East has been kept quiet in recent times.
52. Admittedly, the co-operation of the parties in the
realization of the basic tenets of the mandate of UNDOF
during the period under review has been quite encouraging
as well, yet we cannot and we certainly should not but be
impressed by the resilience, tact, exemplary efficiency and
devotion to duty demonstrated by all members of UNDOF
in the performance of the delicate and dangerous tasks
assigned to them by the Security Council. This is even
better appreciated when one reflects on the statement of
the Secretary-General in his report that the existence of
mines within the area of separation continues to cause
danger to members of UNDOF as well as to the civilian
population. When fatal explosions do occur- and that has
indeed happened quite often-it has not been easy to
reduce tension and prevent a military flare-up in a generally
explosive situation.
53. As this is the first time we have participated in the
Security Council debate on this subject we should in the
circumstances like to place on record our deep gratitude to
the Governments of Austria, Canada, Iran, Poland and
other troop-contributing
countries whose nationals at present constitute the bulk of UNDOF. We also express the
hope that they will continue to give positive support to the
Council in the fulfilment of its functions as the world’s
custodian of international peace and security.

58. Without wishing to infringe on the prerogatives of
bilateral relations, we have observed how during the last
few weeks Israeli leaders have moved around Western
capitals and publicly campaigned for exclusivity in their
access to Western sources of military supplies, and we all
recall the response.
59. At a time when mankind is preoccupied with the
problem of reducing world tension and strengthening
internationaI peace and security, it is indeed depressing that
this State has engaged in those very activities calculated to
aggravate tension and increase the dangerous possibilities of
a global conflict. In a continuing manner, we observe that it
is either Israeli and international Zionist objectives or peace
in the area.

54. In adopting resolution 420 (1977), the Security
Council agreed to renew the mandate of UNDOF for a
further period of six months, which is due to expire today.
At that time the Council called for the immediate implementation of resolution 338 (1973). It is on record that the
same call was made on eight different occasions, namely in
resolutions
3.50 (1974),
369 (1975),
363 (I 974),
381 (1975), 390 (1976),
398 (1976), 408 (1977) and
420 (1977). The resolution adopted today merely requests
the Secretary-General to submit at the end of the new
period a report on developments in the situation and the
measures taken to implement resolution 338 (1973) thus
creating the atmosphere of a fait accompli in the situation
and merely endorsing with stoic resignation the status quo.

60. My delegation has an obligation to draw the attention
of members of the Council to the intolerable possibility of
this body being relegated to a mere instrument for the
purpose of rubber-stamping unending renewals of the
UNDOF mandate for an unspecified period far into the
future, Peace-keeping forces should be used for the very
purpose they are meant for: that of holding together a
tenuous peace in any area of conflict while political
solutions are sought to the conflict itself. They should not
be a permanent substitute for our search for political
solutions of conflicts. That is not all. United Nations
peace-keeping troops should not be tr‘ansformed into
international military units for shoring up Israeli occupation forces in occupied Arab territories. Unless the political
impasse created by Israel’s acts of aggression is rapidly
removed, the various United Nations peace-keeping forces
now established around the Jewish State may be relegated
to merely providing logistic support for the Israeli occupation army.

55. It is a matter of extreme disappointment to my
delegation that the repeated calls by the Council for the
immediate implementation of resolution 338 (1973), which
would have provided a political solution to the entire
Middle East problem, have remained largely ignored.
56. The problem not only subsists, but new ramifications
extend today into Lebanon, and the situation in the Middle
East
continues
to be as explosive as ever. We cannot conceal
our disappointment at the fact that the country which, in
its inordinate pursuit of its policies of expansion, has seized
large chunks of adjoining territories of Egypt, Jordan, Syria
and recently Lebanon, has stubbornly heId on to these
territories in flagrant violation of the resolutions of the
General Assembly ancl the decisions of the Security
Council.

61. In this regard, I submit that only a political solution of
the conflict in the Middle East is likely to bring us close to
a durable peace in the region, The aggressor State in the
area must be bluntly told that the indiscriminate acquisi6

for a durable peace in the Middle East, we shall certainly
move nearer to peace today than at any other time in the
past. But the opportunity for achieving peace with justice
cannot subsist indefinitely. I only hope that the principal
actors in the Middle East drama, particularly those with the
requisite political leverage, will act now to stave off another
round of fighting which may well develop into a world
disaster with tragic and monumental dimensions.

tion of territory by use of force is certainly not dictated
and cannot be justified by so-called security considerations.
Indeed, security for all States in the area can only be laid
on the foundation of intrinsic respect for the territorial
integrity of States in the whole area. This should be
predicated on a faithful implementation of the resolutions
of the Security Council which would enable all peoples in
the region to live in peace and security within recognized
and secure borders. This naturally involves Israel’s unconditional withdrawal to the borders existing before the June
1967 war and the creation of a Palestinian homeland which
will enable the dispossessed Palestinians to exercise their
inalienable rights to self-determination and national independence.

68. My delegation sees not a silver linil~g on the horizon
but a dark cloud, and we hope that we shall not merely
continue to postpone the day of decision, but act more
positively to fmd a solution to the problems in the Middle
East as well as in southern Africa.

62. A political solution to the Middle East impasse has
eluded us for so long because of lack of political will on the
part of Israel’s Western backers. For the same reasons, the
vicious racist minority rLSgimesin southern Africa have also
survived and persisted in their defiance of the entire
international community. We shall be close to a solution of
the twin problems today-durable peace in the Middle East
and the restoration of genuine majority Govermnents in
Zimbabwe and Namibia and the liquidation of the obnoxious
system of apartheid-only
if the Western world can
bring broad positive support to the concerted international
search for durable solutions based on national justice.
Whether a solution in the Middle East and southern Africa
will be forged out of genuine and sensible peaceful
negotiations or through a bloody conflict may well depend
on Western responses to the twin problems in the immediate future. I sincerely hope that the Western world makes
the right choice at the earliest opportunity.

69. Mr. JAIPAL (India): The item before us is entitled
“The situation in the Middle East”, and it is in that general
context that we have examined the Secretary-General’s
report. My delegation accepts the assessment of the
Secretary-General that the continued presence of UNDOF
in the area is essential for another SIX months only because
we have every confidence in his judgement.
70. We accept the necessity of the presence of this United
Nations force on Syrian territory not only because Syria
has agreed to it but also because the Security Council has so
far failed even to start the negotiating process in terms of
its resolutions 242 (3967) and 338 (1973). As a consequence, peace continues to be precarious and the situation continues to give us cause for grave concern.
71, The responsibility for this sterile situation should be
placed on the Security Council, especially on those of its
permanent members which can and should do more than
they have done so far. In these somewhat petrified
circumstances, the renewal of the mandate of UNDOF or of
the United Nations Emergency Force has become a routine
but necessary procedure, With no prospect of a peace
settlement, the more or less permanent presence of any
United Nations force in the Middle East may well be
apprehended by some as possibly designed to freeze the
status quo indefinitely.

63. In our world today, it is more and more apparent that
what is most crucial is the power that money and influence
can procure. International responsibility within this system
of values and responsiveness to wider international value
judgement become diffused into a rather unsalutary melting
pot.
64. Our experience and knowledge of the situation today
in the Middle East-and I shall be brazen enough to refer
again to South Africa-is that we hitch our wagons to the
periphery of the issues: peace-keeping in the Middle East,
which does not appear to go further than a passive exercise.

72. In our view it is a misnomer to refer to the United
Nations forces in the area as a peace-keeping operation.
There is in fact no peace to keep; maintenance of cease-fires
is not peace-keeping; it is no more than a truce-keeping
operation. These routine renewals of the mandate of
truce-keeping forces of the United Nations do not add to
the glory of the Council or to its prestige and authority,
since nothing was done during the last six months or is
being done at present by the Council itself to bring about a
peace settlement in the Middle East. The Charter of the
United Nations does not expect the Security Council to
maintain international peace and security by maintaining
cease-fires here and there in the Middle East.

05. In southern Africa, we are beginning to build up our
hopes on a similar cordon sanitaire around the problem. We
hope that here again we shall not in the process only help
to perpetuate the core of the problem itself.
66. Our problem is that when the issues bear on South
Africa and Israel-and I say this for a second time-there
automatically emerge value variants which are incomprehensible. Where we should apply pressure, we provide
solace and comfort and arms. We circumvent the issues. We
concoct new idioms and new strategies and, in the process,
become only articulate to the extent that this conforms
with our chauvinistic values,

73. In conclusion, Mr. President, I wish to extend to YOU
on this last day of your high office my delegation’s warm
congratulations on your skilful performance as President of
the Council for this month. YOU have brought to the
Council the courtesy, impartiality and wisdom of Latin
America, which we esteem very highly in my country.

67. My delegation still believes that should the West, and
in particular the United States, decide today to harness its
power, prestige and honour to a genuine international push
7

(France)
(interpretation
from
74. Mr. LEPRETTE
Frendh): The Security Council has just renewed the
mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six months.
This decision, which was reached thanks to the agreement
of the parties concerned, is in keeping with the recommendation made by the Secretary-General in his report of
17 May. It is due to your skill, Mr. President, before this
meeting of the Council. This resolution should make it
possible to avoid serious incidents in the sector and also
maintain the conditions necessary to a search for peace. But
it should not replace the search itself nor serve as an alibi to
maintain the status quo.
75. When we met in identical circumstances last November, many of us mentioned the intense peace efforts which
were then being made and expressed the hope that they
would lead to positive developments. These developments
have not yet occurred. Of course, we know that a rapid
solution to the Middle East problem cannot be expected
and WC understand that a certain period of time is necessary
for the minds of all to adapt gradually to the requirements
of peace. That said, the French delegation hopes that
efforts will be redoubled to achieve negotiations which
would include a.ll the parties to the conflict. This seems to
be the wisest course of action in working towards a
comprehensive settlement of the problem in keeping with
the principles which France has so often expressed in the
Council.
76. In conclusion, I should like once more to express to
the Secretary-General and his colleagues my Government’s
appreciation for the way in which they have discharged the
duties entrusted to them. I should also like to pay a tribute
to the Commander, the officers and the members of the
Force, as well as to the civilian personnel assisting them, for
the quality of their work. Thanks to their action, the

United Nations is able to pursue its peace-keeping mission,
We owe all of them our thanks.
77. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spfwish):
There are no further speakers on the list. I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of
VENEZUELA.
78. I should like to state the importance which the
Venezuelan Government attaches to the role played by
UNDOF in the maintenance of peace in the Middle East.
We have always supported the Force because we
understand that its presence has avoided confrontations,
preserved peace in the area and maintained the cease-fire
since its establishment in May 1974. But we are aware that
only negotiations among the parties can definitively solve
the problem of peace and security in the Middle East. We
hope that there will soon be a resumption of the negotiations which the thunder of guns interrupted and caused to
fail. In my Government’s view, only a negotiated solution
will provide the basis for a just and lasting peace.
79. As PRESIDENT for the month of May, I should like
now to take this opportunity of addressing the members of
the Council for the last time, to thank all the representatives for their invaluable contributions and the Secretary-General for his constant personal efforts to achieve
peace in the Middle East.
80. The assistance afforded me by the Secretariat in
general made it easier for me to discharge my duties and
obligations as President. During the month which is about
to end, my modest experience has been considerably
enriched, and I should like today to place on record nly
appreciation to all.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

Unite.4
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

or

from
bookstores
and distributors
write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier.
Informez-vous
auprks de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations
Unies, Section cles ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

Litho

In United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebm.

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

7&70005-February

1980--2,200
