THE SITUATION IN NAMIBIA13

In the course of its meetings in Africa14 , the Security
Council adopted the following resolutions relating ,to
this question.

Taking note of the statement of the President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia, 17
Gravely concerned over the present situation in Namibia and the repressive measures of the South African
Government, following the strike of the African contract labourers in the country and the widespread and
increasing manifestations of African resistance to the
illegal occupation of the Territory by the South African
Government,
Convinced that the Security Council, as a matter of
urgency, should find ways and means to enable the
people of the Territory to achieve self-determination
and independence,
Conscious of ,the need for full co-operation of all
Member States, in particular the permanent members
of the Security Council and the main trading partners
of South Africa, for this purpose,
Recalling its previous resolutions and those of the
General Assembly pertaining to Namibia,
Conscious of the special responsibilities of the United
Nations towards the people and Territory of Namibia,
Mindful of its responsibility to take necessary action
to secure strict compliance with the obligations entered
into by Member States under the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of the people of
Namibia to self-determination and independence, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV) of 14 December 1960,
Reaffirming also the national unity and territorial
integrity of Namibia,
1. Strongly condemns the refusal of South Africa
to comply with the resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council pertaining to Namibia;
2. Reaffirms that the continued occupation of
Namibia by the South African authorities is illegal and
detrimental to the interests of the people of Namibia;
3. Declares that the defiant atti,tude of South Africa
towards the decisions of the Security Council undermines the authority of the United Nations;
4. Strongly condemns the recent repressive measures against the African labourers in Namibia, and
calls upon the Government of South Africa to end
immediately these repressive measures and to abolish
any labour system which may be in conflict with the
basic provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights;
5. Calls upon all States whose nationals and corporations are operating in Namibia notwithstanding the
relevant provisions of Security Council resolution 283
( 1970) to use all available means to ensure that such
nationals and corporations conform, in their policies
of hiring Namibian workers, to the basic provisions of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
6. Considers that the continued occupation of
Namibia by the Government of South Africa in defiance
of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and

Resolution 309 ( 1972)
of 4 February 1972

The Security Council,
Having examined further the question of Namibia,
and without prejudice -to other rewlutions adopted by
the Security Council on this matter,
Recognizing the special responsibility and obligation
of the United Nations towards the people and Territory
of Namibia,
Reaffirming once again the inalienable and imprescriptible right of the people of Namibia to self-determination and independence,
Reaffirming also ·the national unity and territorial
integrity of Namibia,
1. Invites the Secretary-General, in consultation
and close co-operation with a group of the Security
Council, composed of the representatives of Argentina,
Somalia and Yugoslavia, to initiate as soon as possible
contacts with all parties concerned, with a view to
establishing the necessary conditions so as to enable
the people of Namibia, freely and with strict regard to
the principle of human equality, to exercise their right
to self-determination and independence, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in the
implementation of the present resolution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the implementation of the present
resolution not later than 31 July 1972.
Adopted at the 1638th
meeting hy 14 votes to
none.15

Resolution 310 (1972)
of 4 February 1972

The Security Council,
Taking note of the statement of the President of the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania, 16 in his capacity as
current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African
Unity,
13 Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted
by the Council in 1968, 1969, 1970 and 1971.
14 See above, pages 2 and 3.
15 One member (China) did not participate in the voting.
16 See Official Records of the Security Council Twentyseventh Year, 1627th meeting.
'

11 Ibid.,

4

1628th meeting.

3. Reaffirms also the national unity and territorial
integrity of Namibia;

of the Charter creates conditions detrimental to the
maintenance of peace and security in the region;
7. Calls upon South Africa to withdraw immediately
its police and military forces as well as its civilian
personnel from the Territory of Namibia;
8. Decides that, in ,the event of failure on the part
of the Government of South Africa to comply with the
present resolution, the Security Council shall meet
immediately to decide upon effective steps or measures,
in accordance with ,the relevant Chapters of the Charter,
to secure the full and speedy implementation of the
present resolution;
9. Requests the Secretary-Genera! to report to the
Security Council on the implementation of the present
resolution not later than 31 July 1972.

4. Invites the Secretary-General, in consultation
and close-operation with the group of the Security
Council established in accordance with resolution 309
( 1972), to continue his contacts with all parties concerned, with a view to establishing the necessary conditions so as to enable the people of Namibia, freely
and with strict regard to the principle of human equality, to exercise their right to self-determination and
independence, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations;
5. Approves the proposal of the Secretary-General
to proceed, after necessary consultations, with the appointment of a representative to assist him in the discharge of his mandate as set out in paragraph 4 above;

Adopted at the 1638th
meeting by 13 votes to
none, with 2 abstentions
(France, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

6. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Security Council informed as appropriate and in any case
to report to it on the implementation of resolution 309
( 1972) and of the present resolution not later than
15 November 1972.
Adopted at the 1657th
meeting hy 14 votes to
none. 20

Decision

At its 1656th meeting, on 31 July 1972, in view of
the request of the President of the United Nations
Counc~l fo_r N a~ibi_a that the representatives of Guyana
and N1gena be mv1ted to address the Security Council
on behalf of the United Nations Council for Namibia
in connexion with the item entitled "The situation in
Namibia: report of the Secretary-General on the implemen.t~tion of Security Council resolution 309 ( 1972)
concermng the question of Namibia (S/10738)" 1 8 the
Council decided to extend the appropriate invit;tions.

Decisions

At its 1678th meeting, on 28 November 1972, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Chad
Ethiopia, Liberia, Mauritius, Morocco and Sierra Leon~
to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled "The situation in Namibia: report of the
Secretary-General on the imn!ementation of Security
Council resolution 319 ( 1972) concerning the question of Namibia ( S/ I 083 2 and Corr. I ) ". 21

Resolution 319 (1972)

At the same meeting, the Council decided to extend
an invitation to the President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council.

of I August 1972

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolution 309 ( 1972) of 4 February
1972, and without prejudice to other resolutions
adopted on the question of Namibia,

At its 1679th meeting, on 30 November 1972, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Nigeria,
Burundi and Zambia to particip:ite, without vote, in
the di~cussion of the question.

Having considered the report submitted by the Secretary-GeneraJ19 in accordance with resolution 309
(1972),
l. Notes with appreciation the efforts made by the
Secretary-General in the implementation of resolution
309 (1972);

At the same meeting, the Council decided, at the
request of the representatives of Somalia and the

2. Reaffirms the inalienable and imprescriptib!e
right of the people of Namibia to self-determination
and independence;

20 One member (China)
2 1 See Official Records

did not participate in the voting.
of the Security Council, Twentyseventh Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1972.

18 Ibid.,

Twenty-seventh Year, Supplement for July, August
and September 1972.
19 /bid., document S/10738.

5
