‘UNITED NATIONS

SE

CI

OFFICIAL

RECORDS
,(‘,
‘, i

THIRTY-SEVENTH

(3
,,.‘,
;!

.‘,

;

.., jl I’ ;I..:
i 1. 1 i‘L.
~,,iK

YEAR

*

‘1
! ,a

,’

:
‘I .1

1

I

th
MEETING:

11 JANUARY

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2325) . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(II) Resolution 497 (1981);
(k) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

SIPV .2325

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl . , .) are normally published in
quarterly S~~ppl~rne~~ of the Officitrl Rcco~ds ctf the Seckry
COLI~~;/. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rti.so/uiion.s and
.Zkc~isio~z.sof HAP Scxurity Co~rncil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2325th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,

11 January

1982, at 3.30 pm.

Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Prcsidcnr:

Prewnr:
The representatives of the following States:
China,
France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
‘/

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2325)

1.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
((I) Resolution 497 (1981);
(h) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821)

Adoption

of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(n) Resolution 497 (1981);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821)
I. The PRESIDENT
(interpr’ctntion
~%m Rwsirrn):
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings [2322nd to 2324rh mpeU’ng,s], I invite the
repres’entative of Israel and the representative of the
Syrian’ Arab Republic to take places at the Council
table; I invite the representatives
of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Bangladesh, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, the
German Democratic Republic, Hungary, India, Iraq,
Kuwait, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Morocco, Pakistan, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, the
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic,
Yemen and
Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber. I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)
to take the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT
(irzIclp~cJt~rtion
fbotn Rw.sian):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Bulgaria, Greece, Mongolia,
Nicaragua, Portugal and
Viet Nam in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of
procedure.

3. The PRESIDENT
(intrlprettr~ion
from
Russion):
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/14828, which contains the
text of a letter dated 8 January from the representative
of Jordan to the President of the Council.
4. The first speaker is the representative
of the
German Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
5.

Mr.

Democratic
Republic)
Comrade President, it
is indeed a great honour for me to welcome you warmly
on your assumption of the responsible post of President of the Council for January, Our countries are
linked by close ties of friendship and co-operation.
This fraternal alliance is one of the fundamental
elements in our joint efforts to strengthen peace and

(infqwetorion
At the inlfrution
of the Presidrnf,
Mr. Blrrrn (Isrtrel)
rrnd Mr. El-Fcrttal
(Syricrn Aruk Rap~thlic*) took pltrws
crt ihe Corlncil Irrhl~~; Mr. Zcwif (Afghunisrnn),
Mr. BPdjaoui
(AIguici),
Mr. Kaiser
(Bcrngl~rdesh),
Mr. Rorl
Kouri
(Crrhcr),
Mr.
Ashrol
(Demoucrtic~
Yeomen),
Mr. Florin
(G~~rmcrn Demcwrutica
Republic),
Mr. Rricz

FLORIN

(German

jbrn

Russirrn):

I I, As can be seen from the Secretary-General’s
report of 31 December 1981 [S//482/ I and from the
turn of events. the ruling circles in Israel, despite
widespread condemnation
for their predacious act.
have failed to respond to the demand contained in
Council resolution 497 (1981) and in Assembly resolution 36/226 B.

to continue the process of international dCtente in order
to promote co-operation+ based on trust, with those
states where another socio-POlitiCd
SyStenl
PrCVdS.
~~ delegation wishes you every success in tacklipg the
tasks facing the Council this month and would llke to
express its conviction that your word will have great
weight.

12. On the contrary. Israel is daily taking furthe1
steps to stifle the legitimate protest of the Syrian
population against the act of annexation in the Golan
Heights. which have been illegally occupied: it has
increased the severity of its occupation policies and
made overt preparations
to wage war against the
Syrian Arab Republic, These provocative acts have
been timed to coincide with new acts of Israeli aggression against southern Lebanon.

6. l should also like to thank you for the very kind
words YOUaddressed to my Country and to me Personally at the meeting held on 6 January [2322/?d /nccfitl,s].
7. At the same time, we should like to reiterate our
gratitude to the representative of Uganda, Mr. Olara
Gtunnu, for his remarkable performance as President
of the Council in December 198 1I It WBS indeed a joy
for us to have an opportunity to work under the talented, skilful and knowledgeable guidance of such a
President.

13. This fully bears out the fears expressed by the
representatives of niany States that the present Israeli
Government is pursuing a systematic policy of annexation in the territories which have been seized by Israel
and is preparing for new acts of aggression. No one
can deny that such actions represent defiance of the
United Nations and a failure to heed the will of international public opinion.

8. My delegation would like to welcome warmly the
new members of the Council. We wish the representatives of Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo and Zaire
every success in discharging the great responsibilities
vested in them. During its two years as a non-permanent member of the Council, the delegation of the
German Democratic Republic regarded it a~ an honour
and, indeed, a bounden duty to perform the tasks
entrusted to the Security Council in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations. Once again we
should like to thank all delegations for their very close
co-operation with us.

14. In connection with this constant violation of the
Charter and the systematic disregard for numerous
United Nations resolutions
which have demanded
an end to Israel’s aggressive and annexationist policies,
its withdrawal from all the territories occupied in 1967
and full guarantees of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, the Council is today faced with the
need finally to take effective steps against Israel
pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter.

9. I should like to avail myself of this opportunity
to congratuIate very heartily the new SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Javier Pkrez de Cuillar, on his election
and on his assuming the functions of Secretary-General
starting this year. The weighty responsibilities
conferred by this post on a seasoned diplomat and wellknown statesman are familiar to us all. We are quite
certain, Mr. Secretary-General, that you are familiar
with the complexity of the international situation and
that you will, in accordance with the Charter, do
everything that can be done by the highest official of
the United Nations to serve the purposes of the Organization and the interests of peace throughout the world
and international security. We wish you every success.

15. We shall now clearly see how observance of the
Charter is treated and what deference is paid to numerous Security Council and General Assembly resolutions by those imperialist States which afford considerable support to the ruling circles in Israel, As is known,
primarily the United States, using various contrived
pretexts, has so far prevented the Council from taking
the proper effective steps to ensure peace and security
in the Middle East. This fact cannot be concealed by
statements made by representatives of those Stutes
in which they have expressed regret at the most recent
act of lsraeli annexation, or by the temporary meusures taken by the United States Administration.
The
impression has been created that all they want to do
is assuage the indignation
of world public opinion.
There can be no doubt that this new Israeli act of
annexation should be regarded in the context of the
creation of a so-called strategic alliance and is based
on bringing United States interests into line with those
of Israel in the Arab region. Quite recently senior
officials in the United States stated unambiguously
that nothing had changed in the relations between the
United States and Israel. This position has also been
confirmed by recent reports to the effect that the
Pentagon is planning to increase Israel’s credit for the
purchase of weapons in 1983 by $300 million.

10. On 16 December 1981 [23/7ih mcefing], the delegation Of the German Democratic Republic had occasion very strongly to condemn Israel’s seizure of the
Golan Heights in contravention of international
law.
The German Democratic Republic voted for both
Security Council
resolution 497 (1981) and General
Assembly resolution 36/226 6, which was adopted at
the Assembly’s thirty-sixth session, In those two
resolutions, the Israeli annexation of the Syrian Golan
Heights was decisively condemned and declared
unlawful. At the same time, the Council was requested
to take effective steps, under the Charter, should
Israel refuse to give up its usurpatory
plans.
2

16. The world has seen that at this very time the
ruling circles in the United States are once again
trying to play the part of some sort of “world policeman” and are taking steps that they see fit to take to
“punish”,
as they put it, certain sovereign States
Members
of the United Nations simply because
‘they are not bowing to the will of those imperialist
circles. But, on the other hand, the aggressor, Israel,
is given the help it desires. This can only be regarded
as further encouragement
to the ruling circles in
Israel to continue their policies aimed against peace
and security in the Middle East.

22. My Government
believes that the Council is
bound at this juncture to act firmly in applying appropriate measures in accordance with Chapter VII of
the Charter, as any failure to do so would constitute
a retreat from its resolution 497 ( 1981). In fact, the
Council should have taken measures at its last series
of meetings on this subject IZ.i/6th to 231Yth mcrtings].
particularly as the Israeli representative had made it
abundantly clear that his Government had no inten-.
tion of complying with the Council’s demand that it
rescind forthwith the decision to impose its laws,
jurisdiction and administration on the occupied Syrian
Golan Heights-what,
in fact, constitutes an annexation of that occupied Syrian territory. Nevertheless,
the Council, which unanimously
adopted resolution 479 (1981), wished to make its resolution more
palatable and to give the violating State an opportunity
to rectify the situation before taking appropriate
measures under the Charter,

17. In connection with these imperialist aspirations
so dangerous for the cause of peace, a constructive
programme to reduce tension and to turn the Middle
East into a region of peace requires more than ever
before unity of action on the part of all Arab peoples.
The German Democratic Republic would once again
like to emphasize its full solidarity with the just struggle
of the Arab peoples against imperialist aggression and
oppression. It shares the views of the Arab and nonaligned States that the time has now come for the
Council to take effective steps that will prevent Israel,
the aggressor, from continuing its policy of violating
the Charter and international law.

23. We know that each and every State member of
the Council knew at that time that the period of grace
given to Israel to rescind its illegal measure was an
exercise in futility and was totally inconsistent with
its notorious tradition of defiance and contempt for
the United Nations established over the past 33 years
-a tradition that has been accompanied by a concurrent tradition of vetoes and has been countered by
innumerable
resolutions but no implementation
or
deterrent measures, It is our sincere hope that there
will be no hesitation in the Council regarding the application of stern measures which would force Israel to
rescind its illegal measure of annexation and would
serve as a deterrent against further expansion and
alteration of the physical character, demographic
composition, institutional structure and legal status of
the Syrian Golan Heights or any other part of the
illegally occupied territories.

18. In conclusion, the delegation of the German
Democratic Republic would once again like to emphasize its view that a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution of the Middle East conflict can be sought only
on the basis of Israel’s complete withdrawal from all
the areas it occupied in 1967 and the full implementation of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including their rights to return to their homeland, to
exercise self-determination
and create their own
independent State.
19. I should like to thank you, Comrade President,
and the members of the Council for the opportunity
you have afforded me to put forward the position of
the German Democratic Republic.

24. Once more we urge the members of the Council
to be consistent with their own individual stands on
current world events. The recent measure by Israel
in regard to the Golan Heights and its previous measures in regard to Jerusalem and other occupied Arab
territories are, to say the least, extremely serious in
terms of their implications
for regional and world
peace and security, In fact, they dwarf many of the
crises that face our world at present.

20. The PRESIDENT
(irzterpr’etrrtiorz.~om
Russitrn):
The next speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia.
1 invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
21. Mr. ALLAGANY
(Saudi Arabia): On behalf of
my delegation, I wish to extend to you, Sir, and to the
members of the Council our sincere thanks for allowing
my delegation to participate in the discussion. May
1 also congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the current month. We have
no doubt that you will conduct these proceedings with
the appropriate degree of firmness and objectivity and
in a manner that will preserve the authority of the
Charter of the United Nations, I also wish to commend your predecessor, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for the
skilful manner in which he presided over the proceedings of the Council during the month of December

2.5. There can be no situation which merits the application of Chapter VII of the Charter more than do the
measures taken by Israel on the Syrian Golan Heights
in defiance of the Charter, of the fourth Geneva Convention of I2 August 1949’ and of repeated Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions-specifically, Council resolution 497 ( 1981). As I said earlier, a
that resolution demanded of Israel that it rescind forthwith its decision and made it quite clear that noncompliance would necessitate the reconvening of the
Council on an urgent basis to consider taking appropriate measures in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. Failure to take such measures

1981.
3

c
now, for any reason, would most definitely
all hopes in the Council.

that all the members of the Council are aware of this
and know it beyond the shadow of a doubt. If the
Council is truly concerned about the increasing danger
to peace and security in the region, it is incumbent
upon all its members to act in the interest of intcrnational peace and security, free of any domestic
considerations, My Government continues to enter&tin
its fervent hope that the Security Council this time
will not defeat its own purposes and its own existence
under the Charter and will not fail to reassert its authority in the interest of peace and security.

demolish

In my last statement before the Council on this
subject [23/7th ,necting]. I expressed my Government’s concern at the ineffectiveness of the Security
Council caused by the abuse of the veto prerogative
by some of the permanent members. Being one of the
founding Members of the United Nations, my country
is particularly concerned and alarmed at the erosion of
the prestige and authority of the United Nations, upon
which rest the hopes of all nations. We are also alarmed
because, ever since the creation of Israel by the United
Nations, that lawless State has been the source of hostility, aggression, insecurity and instability
in our
region. Israel has been and continues to be the prodigal child of the United Nations. It was born through
aggression and has never ceased to practice aggression
in the pursuit of its policy of aggrandizement
and
expansion. It has never accepted any fixed boundaries and has used every trick in the book to abort
all efforts directed at a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the region. It has armed itself to the
teeth under the pretext of security for itself, only to
use its arms for aggression against the victimized
Palestinians and against all its Arab neighbours, and
beyond.

26.

29. The PRESIDENT
(intcJ,prctl,tiot2 f~*om Russirr~~J:
The next speaker is the representative of Iraq. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
30. Mr. AL-AL1 (Iraq): Allow me to extend to you.
Sir, my warmest congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month.
We have high hopes that with your wisdom you will
help lead the Council towards the adoption of a resolution in keeping with the dictates ofjustice and law on
the subject before it.
31. I should like also to express my great admiration for the dynamic efforts of your predecessor.
Mr. Otunnu of Uganda, for the outstanding manner in
which he performed the duties of President during the
month of December I98 1.

27. It has accumulated an arsenal of the most modern,
sophisticated and lethal weapons to maintain
superiority over the arms of all the Arab countries combined, including those that are far removed from the
region, It has established arms and aircraft factories
that have made it one of the major exporters of weapons to other countries, including some of the most
industrialized Western countries. It has behaved like
a super-Power both in words and in deeds without
being subject to any of the restraints and international
responsibility which are characteristic of such Powers.
It has maintained the characteristic Zionist profile of
a victimized peace-loving nation while pursuing a
policy of constant aggression, harassment, deportation, expropriation
of property, collective punishment, mass murder and genocide, desecration of holy
places, closure of educational institutions and violation of all basic human rights against the Palestinian
people. It has constantly used the highly publicized
Nazi practices against Jews as an excuse for its
excesses in Palestine but has failed to realize that its
own atrocities against the Palestinian people-knowledge of which has been relentlessly
suppressed
through the Zionist influence-were
not incomparable
to the atrocities attributed to the Nazi rdgime during
the Second World War. A number of renowned,
unbiased historians have testified to that effect.

32. I avail myself of this opportunity to congratulate
Mr. Javier P&rez de Cuillar on his election to the
very esteemed post of Secretary-General.
We wish
him much success in his high office.
33. I should like to express my delegation’s congratulations to the new Council members, Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo and Zaire, and to their representatives.
34. Israel’s policy of aggression and expansion is
not new to the Council, nor is its defiance of the resolutions adopted by this body. The history of the Zionist
entity is nothing but a continuous policy of complete
disregard for the Charter of the United Nations and
for norms of international
law. The savage bombing
of the Iraqi nuclear research installation in Baghdad
and the barbarous killing of civilians in Lebanon have
been the clearest and most recent manifestations
Of
the actions by this outlaw-a
so-called State. These
acts of aggression during the past year alone reached
their peak in Israel’s action on 14 December 1981 Of
imposing its laws, jurisdiction
and administration
on
the occupied Syrian Golan Heights.
35. The international
community has repeated on SO
many occasions that Israel has no scruples about
justice and law in committing
repeated daily violations of all those norms recognized by the cornmunity of nations. This is in fact the consistent behaviour
of a rCgime which continues to base its policies on the
law of the jungle, on terror and on defiance alone.

28. The annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights
cannot help the peace process in the Middle East. In
fact, it was a calculated move, both in terms of time
and of substance, to undermine the peace process and
to render a just, permanent and comprehensive
peace
in the Middle East an impossibility.
We firmly believe
4

’

36.

The Council

had a lengthy debate on the ques-

40. It is very clear to the whole world how Israel
was established. how it has extended itself up to now
and how it plans to exist and expand. This Israeli
madness should be stopped before the whole region
explodes, thus bringing more misery into the area.
The blatant Israeli act of lawlessness should not go
unpunished. It is the duty of the international community to apply the necessary sanctions immediately
in accordance with Article 41 of the Charter.

tion of the Zionist regime’s decision to impose its laws,

jurisdiction
and administration
in the occupied Golan
Heights and on 17 December
1981 unanimously
adopted resolution 497 ( 19811, which, in regard to the
Israeli aggression against Syria, decided that the
Israeli decision was null and void and without international legal effect and demanded that the Zionists,
the occupying Power, should rescind forthwith their
decision.

4 I, The PRESIDENT
(intc/‘prcttrtion
.fi-c~m
Rl/s.siau):
The next speaker is the representative of Qatar.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

37. Council resolution
497 ( 1981) requested the
Secretary-General
to report to the Council on the
implementation
of that resolution within two weeks.
As expected, Israel did not abide by the decision of
the international community represented here. It thus
added to its record another example of defiance as
reflected in the reports of the Secretary-General
dated 2 I December [S//4805] and 3 I December 1981
lS//482/ 1.

42. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar): Permit me, first of all, Sir,
to extend to you our sincere congratulations on the
occasion of your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of January. We welcome especially the fact that you bring to your duties a large
measure of expertise, experience and wisdom-qualities which we are certain will serve the international
community well in this time of crisis and danger. We
are also gratified by the attitude of your country, the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, towards the
situation in the Middle East and the Arab position,
especially the firm support it has shown for the just
cause of the Palestinian people, for their right to selfdetermination
and to the establishment of an independent State of their own in their homeland.

38. My delegation wishes to put on record its strong
condemnation ,of the Zionist regime’s defiance of Security Council resolution 497 (1981) and General Assembly resolution 36/226 B. Their refusal, contained in the
report of the Secretary-General of 2 I December, stated
-in the words of the Zionist representative-that
“Israel cannot and does not accept the resolution just
adopted”. This is no surprise to those who know the
true nature of the Zionist entity, its aggressive, expansionist goals and the policies on which it was established. Those policies are manifested in the occupation of land, the expulsion of the original inhabitants,
the continuing annexation of new territories and the
persistence of aggression. The ultimate aim of the
policies of the Zionists is to eliminate any development possibilities in the Arab countries so that those
countries may remain at the mercy of the Zionists, who
are fully supported by the United States of America,
and be a tool of their aggression against the Arab
nation. One need not go back any further than the
last two weeks, when two Israeli American-made
F-15 jet fighters violated Iraqi airspace; that was
followed on 4 January by the sending by the Israelis
of another two war-planes into Iraqi airspace. These
acts of aggression constitute a clear example of the
true nature of the aggressiveness of the Zionist entity.
The United States bears full responsibility
for such
aggression since, without its multifaceted
support,
Israel would not have dared to commit its aggressive
and expansionist acts and practices.

43. May I also take this opportunity to pay a tribute
to your predecessor, Mr. Otunnu of Uganda, for the
outstanding manner in which he performed the duties
of the presidency of the Council during the month of
December I98 1,
44. On behalf of my delegation and on my own
behalf, I should like to express my warm congratulations to the new Secretary-General, Mr. Javier Perez
de CuelIar. We are all assured that with his courage
and wisdom, his highly praised diplomatic skills and
his well-known dedication to the cause of the United
Nations, he will respond successfully to the challenge
of the lofty post of Secretary-General. In wishing him
success, we should like to assure him of our support
and co-operation, I should like also to pay a special
tribute to the previous Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt
Waldheim, who shouldered the responsibilities of the
post of Secretary-General for IO years, during which
time he served the cause of the United Nations with
great skill and full dedication.
45. The aim of this series of meetings of the Council
measures” to deal with
is to consider “appropriate
Israel’s clear fa,ilure to comply with Council resolution 497 (1981), which declared the annexation of the
Syrian Arab territory of the Golan Heights null and
void and demanded that Israel rescind its aggressive
and illegal decision.

39. My country condemns in the strongest terms
Israel’s defiance of Council resolution 497 (1981) and
therefore calls for a similar strong condemnation
of
Israel for its failure to comply with Assembly resolution 36/226 B, and it demands the application of
Chapter VII of the Charter, which involves severing
diplomatic,
trade and economic relations, and refraining from supplying Israel with any kind of mili-,
tary assistance.

46. However, repeated instances of Israel’s total
rejection of United Nations resolutions in the past
5

action to stop the ever-increasing
by Israel.

su,.ely make it clear that the only “appropriate
measures” now are those that would effectively deter Israel
from further aggression and compel it to heed the will
of the international CommUnitY
I

acts of aggression

55. At this urgent series of meetings, the Council is
faced with yet another escalation of Israel’s acts of
aggression against Syrian Arab Republic territory.
What is needed now is the will-the
determinationto put an end to this blatant behaviour. That can only
be done by making it costly for Israel to continue its
depredations. And past experience tells us that nothing
short of punitive sanctions will stem the tide of Israeli
aggression.

47, There can be no doubt anymore that the only
way of achieving that objective is by the imposition
of strict sanctions-political,
military,
diplomatic
and economic-against
Israel. The community
of
nations has waited too long for a Sign of Israeli Compliance with any of the numerous resolutions meant
to contain its aggressive behaviour. It has waited in
vain,

56. Where will this creeping expansion end? Whose
land is next on the Israelis’ list? And how long will
the international
community
stand by while Israel
brings the carefully built structure of international
law crashing down? If the Council is serious about
preventing further Israeli aggression, then it must
move quickly to restrict Israel’s freedom to attack
its neighbours at wilt.

48, Israel is ai outlaw State which respects no legal
code. lt is a brigand among nations which seizes the
lands of others and massacres innocent
civilians. It iS
a pirate entity whose warplanes roam the skies of the
Middle East looking for victims, and violating the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the States of the
region.
49. The Council is often accused by the representative of Israel of convening too often to discuss
actions taken by his country. It is quite obvious that
the Council spends much of its time confronting the
danger to world peace and security created by the
Zionist entity. But it is also clear to everyone that no
other Government in the whote world has ever committed crimes so grave in sequence and in magnitude
as the crimes committed by Israel against the Arab
nation. It is abundantly clear that no other Government has ever been so totally committed to war and
destruction as the Government of Menachem Begin.

57. One major reason-perhaps
the only one-for
Israel’s aggression is its belief that it will be supported
and protected by the United States regardless of the
enormity of its behaviour. And it is a fact that the
United States veto has consistently prevented the
adoption by the Council of punitive measures against
Israel .
58. When dealing with this important
issue, one
cannot avoid the role the United States Government
can play in this matter. No other country has the
same ability to pressure Israel, since the United
States supplies Israel with all it has, from bread and
butter to Phantoms and F-16s.

50. No other Government has ever launched so
naked an attack on a nuclear research centre in any
country as that of the Government of Begin against
the nuclear reactor in Baghdad.

59. We believe that it is high time to listen to the
warnings of some prominent
Americans,
among
them Congressman Paul McCloskey, who told The
magazine, according to its issue of 27 July: “If this
Israeli lobby is not challenged and if Begin is not
challenged, I think the interests of the United States
will be seriously hurt”.

51. No other Government has ever used such barbaric methods against civilians in a densely-populated
capital city as those of the Government of Begin in
Beirut on 17 July 1981, using sophisticated United
States-made planes sold under the clear condition
that they be utilized solely in self-defence,

60. The United States is a great Power which proclaims its devotion to the rule of law in the world, to
the principles of justice and to international peace and
security. Thus it is duty-bound to take a stand against
those who undermine international order.

52. No other Government has ever posed so grave
a threat to peace and security in the Middle East-and,
in fact, in the whole world-by its deeds and conduct
as that of the Government headed by Menachem
Begin.
53. No other Government has ever shown such
contempt and disregard for international
law, the
Charter of the United Nations and United Nations
resolutions as has the Government of Menachem
Begin.

61. Finally, we urgently call upon the Council to
take concrete action before it is too late. Speeches and
words of condemnation
have not in the past stopped
Begin from pursuing his crimes and it is unlikely that
they will stop him in the future. World public opinion
is demanding
the imposition
of sanctions against
Israel in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter.
This world body must act accordingly.

54. In fact, if the Council is to be accused of anything, it is that it has so far failed to take any decisive

62. The PRESIDENT
(intcrp~eftrtion~om
The next speaker is the representative
6

Russian):

of Hungary.

I invite him to take a place at the Council
to make his statement.

table and

63. Mr. RACZ (Hungary)
(interprettrtion
.fiorn
Fwnch): Comrade President, first of all I should like
to convey my thanks to you, and through you to the
members of the Council, for having afforded me this
opportunity to set forth our position on the item that
is before this important body of the United Nations.
64. At the same time I should like to congratulate you
on your assumption of the functions of the presidency
of the Council for the month of January. These congratulations go to the representative of a State with
which my country maintains very close ties of friendship and which plays a particularly active and constructive role in the efforts to solve the broader problems of the region of the Middle East.
65. I am convinced that your diplomatic
competence, your attachment to the Charter of the United
Nations, to international
peace and security, and
your personal qualities guarantee that the Council
will be able to deal properly with this serious problem
which is of such deep concern to the entire international community and that it will perform its duty, in
full awareness of its particular responsibility
for
international security and in accordance with what is
expected of it by Member States and by international
public opinion.
66. 1 take this opportunity
also to commend
constructive and fruitful activity of Mr. Otunnu,
President of the Council last month.

the
the

67. I should like to avail myself also of this opportunity to welcome, on behalf of my delegation, the new
members of the Council and to wish them every success in performing their responsible tasks in a constructive spirit.
68. I offer my congratulations
to Mr. Javier Perez
de Cuillar on his unanimous election to the post of
Secretary-General of the United Nations and wish him
full success in the discharge of his duties.

tion 4Y7 C/YS/)l declaring that illegal measure null and
void and without legal effect and calling upon Israel to
rescind it forthwith.

72. The Government
of the Hungarian People’s
Republic firmly condemns this Israeli measure aimed
at annexing the Golan Heights, because it is an instance
of a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, an independent country and a Member State of the United Nations. This measure is at variance with the fundamental norms of international
law and the code of
international conduct, with the letter and spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations, with the resolutions
adopted in various bodies of the Organization, with
the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949,’ which applies
also to the Arab territories occupied by Israel since
1967, and with the generally accepted principle of the
inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force.
73. This recent action undertaken by Israel which,
despite the protests voiced by world public opinion.
has continued to occupy alien territories for many
years, is part and parcel of the expansionist policy
pursued by the Tel Aviv Government; it is designed
to perpetuate the consequences of its previous acts of
aggression perpetrated against the Arab countries and
to annex the occupied territories. This act is a further
manifestation of the aggressive policy that is being
pursued by the Israeli leaders with the support of
their chief ally.
74. The responsibility borne by the Government of
the United States must be obvious to one and all,
because its attitude, which provides effective protection and almost unconditional support for the unilateral and illegimate
aspirations of Israel-which
violate the interests of other countries and peoples-,
is of decisive import in the boldness with which Tel
Aviv has gone further and further in pursuing its selfish designs. It is this environment that has made it
possible for Israel once again to challenge the authority
of the United Nations, to ignore its resolutions and to
oppose virtually the entire international community.

70. Once again, the Council is examining the question of another eminently illegal act on the part of
Israel, and this for the second time in a very short
period, because of the Tel Aviv Government’s attitude
of defiance towards United Nations resolutions.

7.5. All this directly endangers peace in the region
and international security, because it further increases
tension in the Middle East, aggravates an already
serious situation and constitutes a fundamental obstacle to reaching a comprehensive, just and lasting solution of the crisis. But the refusal to accept aggressive and unilateral measures and the failure of attempts
at partial solutions have already clearly shown that the
burning problems of the region can be solved only in
the context of a comprehensive, just and lasting
settlement.

71. Hungarian public opinion learnt with profound
indignation of the decision of the Knesset to impose
the laws, jurisdiction
and administration
of Israel on
the Syrian Golan Heights and welcomed the resolution unanimously
adopted by the Council [resoln-

76. It is our opinion that if it tolerated the actions
of Israel aimed at annexation of the Golan Heights,
the international community, far from subscribing to
the norms of international
law and the international
code of conduct, would be accepting the use of brute

69. At the same time, I should like to convey our
thanks to his predecessor, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for the
work that he did during the past decade at the head
of the Organization.

scinded forthwith, It was also agreed that. in the event
of Israeli non-compliance,
the Council would meet
urgently to consider taking appropriate
measures
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations

force in international politics. That is why we demand
that Israel rescind its decision immediately and beiieve
it is necessary and justified for the Council to take
firm and effective measures on the basis of the pertinent provisions of the Charter, including the application of sanctions against Israel, measures that can
prevent the implementation
of Israel’s decision and
force the leaders of that country to abandon their
aggressive and expansionist policy.

~wsolution

83. In the view of the Government of Nicaragua, the i
Council acted responsibly in invoking international
law and appealing for compliance with its previous
decisions, with resolutions of the General Assembly
and with the international
community’s
desire for
peace. Israel arrogantly rejected the Council’s demand. I
It is up to the Council now to respond.

77. The Hungarian Government, while maintaining
and reiterating its position concerning the settlement
of the crisis, a position that has been set forth in detail
on other occasions, would like once again to express
its full solidarity with Syria and all the Arab peoples
struggling against Israeli aggression.
78.

The PRESIDENT

(it~t~vpwtcmh

front

497 (198l)~.

84, My country, which is located in a region in
turmoil, cannot remain indifferent to the possibility
that this response be hesitant and not respond to what
is, according to the Charter, an illegal use of force
and an obvious disregard of legal norms of conduct
on which international
peace and stability
depend.
Countries bent on defending their sovereignty and
maintaining
their independence in the face of pressures from the more powerful countries will keep ii
close watch on the precedent that will be established
by the Council’s decision on this case. There is no.
doubt that in their assessments potential aggressors as
well as potential victims in various regions of the world
take into account the credibility and effectiveness of
the Council.

l?tr.ssian):

The next speaker is the representative of Nicaragua.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
79. Mr, BENDANA
RODRIGUEZ
(Nicaragua)
(intrrpr,~~ttrlion jwn Sperzish): Mr. President, permit
me first warmly to congratulate you on your accession
to the presidency of the Council for the month of
January. My Government and yours enjoy cordial
relations of friendship since, following the triumph
of the Sandinista People’s Revolution,
Nicaragua
no longer needs to ask permission to maintain worthy
relations with socialist countries. Your long experience in international politics and your well-known
skills as a diplomat ensure the efficient and wellbalanced conduct of the work of the Council.

85. In our view, what is under consideration is not
merely the legal status of a given territory but rather
the persistent Israeli practice of committing aggression
against its Arab neighbours and its policy of trampling
on the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian
people.
No one can deny that the brutal raid on Beirut and
the bombing of the Iraqi nuclear installation
were
expressions of the same policy. Given its own decision
to consider the adoption of appropriate measures in
accordance with the Charter, it is now up to the Council to make its authority felt.

I also wish to express special thanks to your predecessor, our friend Mr. Olara Otunnu of Uganda, for
his performance as President last month, Nicaragua
and the non-aligned developing nations will not forget
that his brilliant initiatives paved the way for the
unanimous recommendation
of the new SecretaryGeneral, Javier Perez de CuelIar, a Latin American,
a representative of the third world for a period decisive for our region, for the developing countries and
for international peace and security,
80.

36. Nicaragua
will be closely watching the position taken by the United States in order to ascertain
whether its responsibility
as a permanent member of
the Council to ensure peace will override defence of
its so-called vital interests and its policy of protection of and support for repressive regimes hostile to
neighbouring
States. This carries serious implications for the Middle East as well as for Central America, where an attempt is also being made to impose
the law of the jungle.

81. Mr. Secretary-General,
your election to the
highest rank of the Organization inspires my Government to promote in our region, which is in turmoil,
respect for and observance of the principles of the
Charter and the objectives of the United Nations.
82. A few weeks ago, the Council met at the request
of the Syrian Arab Republic 12316th to 231Yth nwetirTgs]
to consider the serious situation that had resulted from
the aggressive and arrogant decision by Israel to apply
its laws to the occupied Syrian territory of the Golan
Heights-that
is, to annex d4fiwto,
and presumably
de j/Ire, a territory that had, as is well known, been
occupied illegally. At that time the Council declared
the Israeli act null and without any legal force and
demanded that that annexationist
measure be re-

87. Little trust can come from the practice of protecting a country from the illegal consequences of its
acts, which causes tensions in explosive regions of the
world. We must all wonder how long contention will
mount in the Middle East and in other parts of the
world.
88. There exist norms that have been codified
the international
community according to which
8

by
alI

States have the obligation not only to abide by them
but also to respond to acts of aggression wherever
in the world they may occur. Nicaragua therefore
reiterates the request of the non-aligned countries to
the Council to adopt appropriate
measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter, in order to prevail upon
Israel to restore all Syrian occupied territories to the
full sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic.

97. The decision of the Israeli Government is all the
more serious in that it is also a violation of Council
resolution 242 (1967). which remains for the international community
one of the foundations for any
negotiated settlement of the Middle East conflict.
Hence, that decision can only make even more remote
the already unlikely prospects for such a settlement
and runs the risk of making explosive a situation which
is already extremely tense.

89. I thank you, Mr. President, and the members of
the Council for having allowed me to take part in this
meeting.

98. This danger has since then been further compounded because Israel has virtually repeated its
offence by refusing to heed the appeal made to it by
the Council in its resolution 497 (1981) to rescind the
annexation law as quickly as possible. This attitude of
defiance of world public opinion should not surprise
us, since quite recently Israel did not hesitate to
ignore completely the Council’s equally unanimous
condemnations of the bombing of the Iraqi nuclear
reactor at Tamuz and the law annexing East Jerusalem.

90. The PRESIDENT
(iatrlp,‘Pt(rtion
from Russim):
The next speaker is the representative of Greece.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
91.

Mr.

GHIKAS
(Greece) (int(‘I’pI.Ptc/tiolZ fiorn
Mr. President, permit me first to convey to
you on behalf of my delegation ‘warmest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of January.

French):

99. The international community has the duty to react
to this. For its part, Greece categorically condemns
such an attitude and the policy it embodies, which
undermine the. very foundations of peaceful relations
between countries, and wishes to express its full
solidarity with Syria--Lo which, as well as to the entire
Arab nation, we feel linked by traditional friendshipand to assure it of our total support.

92. I would also express to the outgoing President,
Mr. Otunnu, my delegation’s
appreciation for the
really exemplary way in which he discharged his
duties and directed the work of the Council.
93. I should like on behalf of my delegation to offer
warmest congratulations
to the new Secretary-General, Mr. P&ez de CuCllar, whose long experience
and outstanding personal qualities guarantee that he
will successfully discharge the very weighty duties that
he has assumed.

100. The PRESIDENT
(interprcttrtion
,~rn
Russit/n): The next speaker is the representative of Viet
Nam. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
101. Mr. HA VAN LAU (Viet Nam) (intc’rprctotion
$~),n Fwmh):
Mr. President, I should like first of all
to congratulate you most warmly and to express my
great satisfaction at seeing you presiding over the
Council for this month of January. It augurs well fat
the work of the Council-my
delegation sincerely
hopes so-that the first activities of the new year of
this important body of the United Nations are guided
by a representative of the great Soviet Union, the
first socialist State in the world, which since its establishment has always promoted a foreign policy of
peace, national independence, friendship and cooperation among peoples and proved itself worthy of
the trust and the hopes of the oppressed peoples of
the world.

94. Finally, I should like to express to Mr. Waldheim
the esteem and appreciation of my delegation for the
contribution that he has made to the work for peace
and justice throughout
the world during his dual
term of office,
95. A few weeks ago, the Council [2316th to 2319th
ll?rctin,qs] met to condemn the decision of the Israeli
Government to annex the Golan Heights by imposing
on those territories, which it has been occupying since
the 1967 war, Israeli laws, jurisdiction and administration, This further violation of international
law by
Israel was so flagrant and so serious in its implications
that it was condemned by the Council in a rare act of
unanimity
[rcwlution
497 f/98/)1 as well as by the
entire international community.

102. I also wish to pay a tribute to your predecessor,
the representative of Uganda, Mr. Olara Otunnu,
for his valuable contribution to the fruitful activities
of the Council last December.

96. Greece wishes fully to associate itself in the
condemnation of an act that so flagrantly violates one
of the fundamental principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, namely, the inadmissibility
of the
acquisition of any territory by force. World peace and
security cannot be guaranteed if any exception is
allowed to this principle, which flows directly from
the condemnation
of war and, more generally, from
the use of force as a means of settling disputes which
may arise among States.

103. My delegation is pleased to join those that have
preceded it in this series of meetings of the Council in
conveying to the new Secretary-General, Mr. Javier
P&-e2 de CuCllar, most sincere wishes for success and
the assurance of co-operation in the exercise of the
most important task of the United Nations.
9

and does not accept the resolution

104. My sincere congratulations are also addressed
to the representatives of the brother and friendly
countries which have recently been elected nonpermanent members and which will no doubt in the
course of their term make their best contribution to
the accomplishment
of the noble task the Chartel
has prescribed for the Council.

(UlYtlt

just

adopted”

rnccfin,q, purtr. 371.

1 IO. As an act of extreme insolence, in their reP]Y
dated 29 December last addressed to the Secret~WGeneral [.S//4821, prrr’tr. 31, the Zionist authorities
not
only maintained
their refusal to heed the injunctions
of
the Council but, furthermore,
challenged the international community
by their perfidious attitude
of
turning things around and transforming the victim into
the aggressor with regard to the problem of the annex:‘tion of the Syrian Golan Heights. The Syrian A&
Republic, victim of successive acts of Israeli a&Wssion and a part of whose territory is under il]~~~~]
occupation by Israel, according to the Zionist thesis
is the aggressor and the main party responsible
for
breaches of peace in the Middle East, whereas the
Zionist rkgime of Tel Aviv-whose
policies and practices vis-ti-vis the Palestinian people and its vanguard
and leader, the PLO and vis-&vis the occupied AI*&
territories, as well ,is the acts of war and aggression
against the Arab countries of the region, have been
continuously
and universally condemned-considers
itself to be the champion of peace in that region,
arrogating to itself the right to ensure the security of its
country by taking over the territories of others and
renaming all their inhabitants “local population”.

105. At the meeting of 16 December last (2317th
/active], my delegation presented to the Council the
point of view of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam,
on the legislative level, on the nature of the Israeli
occupier’s act of annexation of the Golan Heights, an
integral part of the national territory of the Syrian Arab
Republic.
106. On the same day that that act of piracy on the
juridical level was committed, the spokesman for the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of my country stated:
“The Government of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam strongly condemns this act of aggression”
-1 repeat: aggression- “of the Israeli authorities,
opposes it and demands that Israel rescind forthwith
that illegal decision and that it show strict respect
for the independence and territorial integrity of the
Syrian Arab Republic.”
107. The general indignation of the international
community was spontaneously and firmly expressed in
the adoption of General Assembly resolution 36/226 B
and Security Council resolution 497 (1981)-both
on
the same day, 17 December 1981-by virtue of which
the international community
categorically rejected
the arbitrary decision of the Tel Aviv authorities and
demanded that Israel rescind without delay that decision, regarded as devoid of international legal force.
The Assembly further requested the Security Council, in the event of Israel’s failure to implement the
present resolution, to invoke Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Council decided
that in the event of non-compliance
by Israel, the
Security Council would meet urgently, and not later
than 5 January 1982, to consider taking appropriate
measures in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.

I Il.
Deeply shocked and concerned at this serious
challenge by Israel, the member States of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, in a plenary meeting
on 5 January last at United Nations Headquarters,
of
unanimously
condemned
Israel’s flagrant
act
aggression, as provided in Article 39 of the Charter of
the United Nations and in General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX). That plenary meeting expressed
its firm conviction that the international
community
should immediately
apply the necessary sanctions
in conformity with Article 41 of the Charter. In this
regard, the non-aligned countries called on the Security Council
to take appropriate measures
under
Chapter VII of the Charter to oblige Israel to restc>rc
all Syrian occupied territories to the full sovereignty
of the Syrian Arab Republic$scc S//4820, crnnc’.\-1.
112. Given Israel’s repeated obstinacy in not UCcepting or applying decisions of the Council in accordance with the Charter and the aforementioned
demand
expressed by the international community
to remedy
one of the most serious situations in one of the most
sensitive regions of the world, the Security
Council,
given its principal responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, must adopt measures in keeping with that responsibility.
To evade
that responsibility
not only would undermine
the
authority and prestige of the Council, but wou]d be
tantamount
to allOWing
a crime
to go unpunished,
to
encouraging the guilty party to pursue its policy
of
aggression and expansion, with unforeseeable
cullsequences for world peace and the security of the
Peaceful peoples and countries of the region.

108. The world Organization’s position on Israel’s
illegal decision was unambiguous. Nevertheless, my
delegation believes that in its resolution 497 (198 I) the
Council demonstrated its graciousness by creating
the necessary conditions to make Israe] listen to
reason and giving it an opportunity to accept the verdict
of the international community, thus opening the way
towards a @St and lasting settlement of the Middle
East situation.
109. Unfortunately, the negative response of the Tel
Aviv authorities came without delay. The represen..
tative of the Zionist rCgime cynically stated as soon
as the Counci]‘s decision was taken: “Members [ofthe
Council] will readily understand that Israel cannot
10

!

113. My delegation would like to stress a fundamental aspect of the problem which is being considered by the Council: the relationship of cause and
effect which is found in the untenable behaviour of the
Zionist rlgime towards its Arab neighbours and the
strategic objectives of American imperialism
in the
Middle East.
114. In my last statement in this important
on 16 December last, I said:

body

“following the decision to annex the Arab city of
Jerusalem, the new legislative action by Tel Aviv
shows to those who still harbour doubts Israel’s
clear determination
to expand and annex. This is
not limited to Palestinian and Syrian lands, but
aims much further, to the fulfilment of the dream
of a so-called Greater Israel stretching from the
Nile to the Euphrates.” 12317th me~ti/z,s, ptrra. 121 I
I also stressed that the Washington Government, which
continues to claim so-called strategic interests in that
region of the Middle East,
“bears a heavy responsibility
to the Arab people
and to the peoples of Africa and the world because
of its complicity,
encouragement
and protection
so generously granted to the Israeli aggressors.”
[ihid. ( pa/w. 1241
115. For Israel would not have acted with such
arrogance in recent times if it had not felt supported
by the Camp David accords and the separate treaties
which have betrayed the interests of the Arab peoples
and if it had not profited from the American-Israeli
strategic co-operation agreement. If Israel is spared
once again the sanctions provided for in the Charter
and demanded by the international
community,
the
negative effects of the aforementioned accords will no
doubt continue to result in more serious consequences
for the territorial sovereignty of the Arab countries
of the region as well as for the fundamental national
rights of the Palestinian people and peace in the Middle
East and elsewhere in the world.
116. Consequently, the delegation of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, on behalf of my country, would
like to express its total support for the demand of the
Syrian Arab Republic, unanimously supported by the
League of Arab States and the Movement of NonAligned Countries, that the Council should apply the
necessary sanctions under Chapter VII, Article 41, of
the Charter. As was stressed by the representative of
Syria on 6 January last in the Council: “Sanctions . . .
are the sole avenue left” [2322& rn~~ring, ptrrrr. 701.
It would also be a decision in keeping with resolution 497 (1981), adopted unanimously by the Council.
117. The PRESIDENT
(intop,vtrrtion
j?om Russit/n): The next speaker is the representative of MOrocco, I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

118. Mr. MRANI
ZENTAR
(Morocco) fitltr/pw$+o/?l Ff~nc~h): First, I should like to extend to
you, Mr. President. and to all the members of the
Council my profound thanks for allowing me to participate in this second debate on Israel’s illegal annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights.

tl/tic~n

119. I wish also to express my delegation’s satisfaction at seeing you presiding over such an important
debate on such a critical topic, both because of the
excellent relations that my country maintains with
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and because
your presence in the Chair lends added authority to
the Council at a time when this body is preparing to
take decisions which we hope will be both clear-cut
and energetic.
120. I would not like to fail on this occasion to pay a
well-deserved tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Otunnu
of Uganda, who last month filled that office with
remarkable
skilfulness that won him unanimous
admiration.
121. Finally, I wish warmly to welcome the participation for the first time in the work of the Council
of Mr. Javier Pirez de CuCllar as Secretary-General.
His election to that responsible post betokens much
that is dear to a very large number of States Members of the Organization. I had the opportunity and,
indeed, the advantage of being personally acquainted
with the Secretary-General in the years when each of
us represented our country here at the United Nations.
I discovered his exceptional qualities as a subtle
diplomat, a man of broad culture, devoted to the
soundest international
values, remarkably attached
to everything that could help to allay the fears, the
disquiet and the suffering of mankind, to extend and to
strengthen international
co-operation and to consolidate peace. This is an outlook which I am sure
remains that of the Secretary-General,
as he clearly
showed in the first steps he took in the performance
of his mandate. I should here like to assure him of the
full understanding and support of my delegation and
to wish him every success in the enormous task which
awaits him, for the benefit of the entire international
community.
122. The present series of Council meetings is also
distinguished by the participation of new members
-Guyana,
Jordan, Poland, Togo and Zaire-whose
presence here will, I am sure, make a major contribution to the strengthening of international co-operation and security. My country maintains the best of
relations, and sometimes even the closest of relations,
with them, and I should like to express my conviction that the support they will bring to the Council’s
efforts to maintain peace will be both very valuable
and very effective.
123. The debate held last month [23/6rh to 231Orh
on Israel’s aggressive action against the terri-

tnwtings]

question of Palestine, which constitutes the very crux
ofthe crisis, have invariably put forward as an essential
prerequisite for the return of peace the restoration of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people on its
national territory and the return of all the occupied
Arab territories.

torial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic made it
possible once again to turn a harsh spotlight on Israel’s
unchanging behaviour towards the Palestinian people
and neighbouring Arab countries, in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council.
124, More specifically, that debate made it possible
for us to grasp the origin of the Israeli presence on
the Golan Heights since the war of aggression of June
1967 and Israel’s behaviour since that time in that part
of Syrian territory, which was gradually and methodically reduced to the final status of an Israeli province-flatly
proclaimed on I4 December last.
12.5. The Government of the Kingdom of Morocco,
faithful to the principles and purposes of the Charter
and moved by deep feelings of Arab solidarity, immediately reacted to the announcement of that Israeli
decision by condemning it categorically.
126. Mr. Mohamed Boucetta, Minister
charge of Foreign Affairs, said:

of State

in

“Israel’s decision to annex the Golan is an act of
provocation, an act of flagrant defiance of the Arab
nation, and runs counter to the resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, as well
as to international resolutions and practice.”
Mr. Boucetta condemned, on behalf of the Kingdom
of Morocco, that illegal measure and called for the
Arabs to close ranks in order to put an end to the
Israeli provocations which make it clear that Israel
is set in its expansionist designs, to the detriment
of
the Arab nation, and also illustrate its refusal to seek
a just peace in the region.

I 30. Similarly, the condemnation
of Israeli behaviour
in the occupied Arab territories. including Jerusalem.
the re.jection by the international
community
of the
policy of insidious colonization.
of modification
of
the economic, political and human characteristics
of
those territories, and the categorical rejection of the
decision which proclaimed the Holy City of Al-Quds
the “united and eternal capital” of the Zionist State
were all telling rebukes which should have curbed the
voracious appetite of Israel for the territories
of
others. There can be no doubt that for the Security
Council, for the United Nations, for the Palestinian
people and for the Arab countries whose territories
are occupied, these measures constitute
positive
and clear-cut international
decisions which have
erected a political and juridical
bulwark against the
consolidation
or legitimization
of the annexationist
act by Israel based on force, on ,fuits ocwrnplis
and
on the denial of rights. And in fact, in its resolution 497
(1981), the Councit states that Israel’s decision to
impose its laws in the Golan Heights is null and void
and without international
legal effect and demands that
the decision be rescinded forthwith, if not the SWUrity Council would meet urgently to consider taking
appropriate measures in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.

131. Israeli conduct in the Golan Heights undouhtedly bears all the imprints of an act of aggression IIS
defined in resolution
3314 (XXIX),
unanimously
adopted on I4 December
1974 by the General Assembly, a resolution which has already been referred
to and quoted frequently in this debate.

127. When, as a result of the six-day war, the size
of the territories occupied by Israel suddenly increased
by an alarming proportion, the international community reacted in unambiguous terms and Council resolution 242 (1967) had at least one undeniable merit in
the case of the occupied territories, that of vigorously
refuting the idea of acquiring territory by force and
requiring Israel’s withdrawal to the frontiers existing
before the aggression of 5 June 1967.

132. Israel’s occupation
by force and unilatcrtll
annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights, in spite of
specific and concordant international decisions reluling
to the question, constitutes
the most blatant
rind
intolerable act of defiance of the Council.
133. The Security Council is the custodian of intcrnational security in the eyes of all the States of the
world which, be they large or small, wish to continur:
to resort to this irreplaceable body to defuse intcrnu,
tional crises and more effectively ensure respect f01
the principles and purposes of the Charter, int~crna
tional law and the principles of justice and equity fo
all mankind,

128. The position of the Security Council and the
General Assembly on the question of the occupied
Arab territories,
specifically the Golan Heights,
has been consistent and unswerving. Israeli occupation has always been considered unlawful and the
restoration of the occupied Arab territories has always
been regarded as an essential prerequisite for any
peaceful settlement in the region,

134. We are confident that the members
of thl
Council, all of whom have the same anxiety we huve
will do everything necessary to safeguard the crcd
bility of the United Nations and to strengthen
th
authority of the Council.

129. All the international resolutions adopted since
then on the problem of the Middle East and on the
12

1
!
’
/

t

j
i

be established
East.

135. It is our belief that the time has now come fat
the Council, applying the provisions of Chapter VII of
the Charter and Article 41 in particular, to take the
energetic decisions required to force Israel to rescind
its decision to annex the Golan Heights and to withdraw from all the occupied Arab territories, including
Jerusalem, thus taking a vital step towards the restoration of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
over its national territory, a basic condition that must
be met if a comprehensive, just and lasting peace is to

for the entire

TAP ulcotiu,q

region of the Middle

IW.YCrrt 5.50 /‘./?I.

NW-t
1 United

i

e

13

Nations.

Trcwty

SPI.~~S. ~01. 75. NO. 973. p. 287.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup&
des venter, New York ou Gem&e.

COMO

PUBLlCA’llONS

publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section. New York or Geneva.

CONSEGUlR

PUBLICATIONS

NATIONS

UNIES

sent en vente dans les librairies
et Ies agences
de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations

PUBLlCAClONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas pares de1 mundo. Cons&e
Nueva York o Ginebra.

DES

DE LAS

NAClONES

Unidas esten en venta en librerias
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones

dCpositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas,
