UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

2552””

MEETING:

.UNLIRRARY
MAK L, d i?@?

UN/s/jC(jLL&TioN
29 AUGUST

1984

NEW YORK
..

CONTENTS
Page
1
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2552). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.. .. ... .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 24 August 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16713). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..i...............

SlPV.2552

NOTE
‘: f *. ; is-*, $
‘, L.‘.,.
!.jl f
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations docum%ni’r’
‘

___

, ‘.‘. Documents of theSecurity Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Sippkmknts’bf
the Oficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
I

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

,..

‘.

.

.

I

2552nd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 29 August 1984, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Ltandre

BASSOLE

(Burkina

I have received a letter dated 28 August 1984 from the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, which
reads as follows:

Faso).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France, India, Malta,
Netherlands,
Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
, Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

“I have the honour to request that I be allowed to
participate in the Security Council’s consideration of
the item entitled ‘The situation in the Middle East’,
in accordance with the provisions of rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, in my
capacity as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian
People.”

agenda (S/Agenda!2552)

of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 24 August 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16713)
The meeting

3. On previous occasions, the Council has extended
invitations to representatives of other United Nations
bodies in connection with the consideration of matters
on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in this
matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

It was so decided.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 24 August 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16713)

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should like further to inform members of the Council
that I have received a letter dated 28 August from the
representative of Yemen which reads as follows:
“I have the honour, in my capacity as Chairman of
the Group of Arab States, to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Clovis Maksoud,
Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States to
the United Nations, in connection with the Council’s
consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in the
Middle East’.” [S/Z6722.]

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council I have
received letters from the representatives
of Israel,
Kuwait, Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

.

5. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to grant that request.
It was so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fakhoury
(Lebanon) and Mr. Blum (Israel) took places at the
Council table; Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait) and Mr. ElFattal (Syrian Arab Republic) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The Council is meeting today in response to the request
contained in the letter dated 24 August 1984 from the
representative of Lebanon to the President of the Council [S/26713].

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that

7. The first speaker is the representative
on whom I now call.
1

of Lebanon,

&....

8. Mr. FAKHOURY
(Lebanon) (interpretationfrom
Arabic): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month and to express complete confidence in
your ability, wisdom and experience in guiding the
work of the Council to a successful conclusion.
9. May I also express to your predecessor, Mrs. Jeane
Kirkpatrick,
representative of the United States, our
thanks and appreciation for her leadership of the Council during July.
10. Once again Lebanon has had recourse to the
Council, which remains the haven of small countries
that believe in the principles of the United Nations.
Lebanon has always been devoted to the principles and
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
has always respected the decisions of its organs. We
have come before the Council today on behalf of the
people of Lebanon and the inhabitants in the south, the
western Bekaa and the Rashaya district, numbering
more than 800,000, who suffer from Israel’s occupation
and unjust arbitrary practices. We have come also on
behalf of the whole world, a world that is jealous of
the rights of peoples and responsible for its values.
We have come to appeal to the Council on behalf of
these tortured souls. We have come invoking the right.
and the justice that are enshrined in the principles of the
Charter. We have come to appeal to the Council to help
Lebanon and its people to overcome their sufferings
and to lighten their burden.
11. If it is not Lebanon’s right to describe the human
tragedy to which its sons are being subjected, whose
right is it? If it is not the duty of the Council to deal with
this issue in defence of the rights and destiny of peoples,
what then is the duty of the Council? That is why we are
lodging a complaint with regard to the practices of the
Israeli authorities in our country, and we hope that all
the members of the Council will fully understand the
depth of this tragedy and shoulder the responsibilities
inherent in their membership of the Council.
12. We have come to the Council not to create any
confrontation,
not for rhetorical or sterile discussions,
but to seek an end to certain practices and redress of the
painful situation today confronting our people-and
in
my statement today I shall give proof of these facts.
13. Southern Lebanon is suffocating because of illegitimate practices and inhuman behaviour. Its population lives in a constant state of terror: Israeli tanks,
weapons and guns are always pointed at them; normal
life in their region, which has become a paralysed
part of our homeland, has been interrupted; the daily
storming of towns and villages; the laying siege to
homes and private and official institutions; the indiscriminate detention and arrest of children and the elderly, women and religious leaders, some of whom are
taken hostage; the closing of roads between peaceful
villages; the closing down of shops; the imposition of
curfews; the destruction of crops and orchards and

forced early harvesting-all
these acts are prohibited
by customary law and by international
instruments,
particularly
the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949;’ The Hague Conventions II of 1899
and IV of 1907 respecting the Laws and Conventions of
War on Land;* and the Charter of the United Nations
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
14. As though the occupying authorities with their
vindictive nature were not satisfied with those acts
against a peaceable people, they have resorted to separating the south, the western Bekaa and the Rashaya
district, completely isolating them from the motherland. The occupation of the south, the western Bekaa
and the Rashaya district is a blatant violation of article 42 of the Regulations annexed to The Hague Convention IV of 1907.2 In effect, those regions are being
materially
and militarily
subjected to Israeli rule;
therefore, the people and properties in those regions are
entitled to protection from the excesses of Israeli occupation, in accordance with the provisions of the 1949
fourth Geneva Convention-to
which both Lebanon
and Israel acceded unconditionally.
15. Israel is daily giving proof of its blatant denial of
all rights and its defiance of international public opinion, however, by its arbitrary practices against the people of the occupied regions.
16. On 5 and 6 June 1982, the Council adopted resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982), in the latter of which it
demanded Israel’s immediate and unconditional
withdrawal from Lebanese territory. Had Israel implemented those two resolutions, we would not now be
suffering from its unjust practices and arbitrary measures; we would not now be here in the Council to
expose Israel’s breaches of international agreements.
17. The international
community rejects those practices; it opposed Israel’s continued defiance of intemational norms and instruments adopted by the civilized
world. Furthermore, no people can agree to submit to
such arbitrary measures, particularly since the intemational community has undertaken a commitment
which
is enshrined in many conventions and treaties to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, to
protect all rights and to prohibit the threat or use of
force.
.

18. On this occasion, I should like the Council to take
note that Lebanon considers the Israeli presence on its
territory outright occupation to which the provisions of
international conventions are applicable, in particular,
the fourth Geneva Convention. I request the Council to
require Israel to respect the provisions of that Convention.
19. I do not wish today to bore the members of the
Council with a list of the arbitrary practices undertaken.
daily by Israel against the civilians in the south, the
western ,I3ekaa and the Rashaya district, which are the

occupied regions. Rather, I shall provide the Council
with some vivid examples of repeated Israeli practices
that are prohibited at any time and place by the fourth
Geneva Convention
and by the provisions of The
Hague Conventions, which include rules and regulations that must be respected.

dividual shall be punished for a crime that he or she has
not committed.
25. For the third time in two months, the village of
Maaraka was the object of a suffocating military siege
by the occupying forces, a siege which continued for
15 days, during which the water supplies were cut off
and food supplies were interrupted. A curfew was imposed on the inhabitants; most of the young and old
people in the village were detained and subjected to
various types of torture. Their only crime was their
allegiance to their legitimate authorities. The occupation forces have also clashed with men of religion and
defiled places of worship. The imams of four villages
were detained. Those forces also took the son of a fifth
imam hostage because the imam himself could not be
found. The Mosque was raided in each of those villages.
Such activity is prohibited by article 46 of The Hague
Regulations of 1907 as well as article 27 of the fourth
Geneva Convention.

20. In their endeavours to humiliate the people of the
occupied territories and thus subjugate them to their
will, the Israeli occupation forces have resorted to detaining and imprisoning countless thousands of people,
interfering with their freedom and detaining them in
the many prisons those forces have established for
the purpose. According to available statistics, the
Israeli occupation forces have been detaining an average of 368 individuals every month and have not spared
the aged, minors, women, soldiers, state employees,
students, teachers,
religious
people, journalists,
mayors or chiefs of districts.
21. Last July, those same authorities detained 480 individuals whose only crime was that they were inhabitants of the occupied territories. Special forces of
the occupying authorities in the south often resort to
the assassination of party officials and eminent religious figures as well as average citizens. The occupying forces often clash with employees of the Lebanese State and army personnel. Those forces have
prevented members of the internal security forces from
carrying their hand weapons on official missions. They
have blindfolded and detained a number of soldiers of
the Lebanese army and the internal security forces at
crossing points; they also detain the relatives of wanted
individuals and keep them as hostages until their sons
surrender to the occupying forces. Such activities are a
clear violation of article 34 of the fourth Geneva Convention.

26. As proof of the occupying forces’ defiance of
international
instruments and norms, on 2 August an
ambulance attendant of the Lebanese Red Cross was
detained at the Batir-Jezzin check-point while he and a
colleague were carrying a wounded man to the hospital
in a car belonging to the Red Cross. Such action is in
clear violation of paragraph 1 of article 20 of the fourth
Geneva Convention.
27. I shall not go into the actions undertaken by Israel
against the international
forces in the south, such as
disrupting their activities, since those practices are well
known and the Council no doubt has received reports
sent by the commanders of the international forces in
southern Lebanon.
28. The occupying forces apportion the thousands of
detainees to five subsidiary centres and one main prison
in the township of Ansar. These centres lack adequate
sanitary conditions,
health services and protection
against the weather: a violation of article 85 of the
aforementioned
Geneva Convention.

22. What is more, the occupying authorities often
resort to inhuman reprisals-including
various types of
physical and psychological torture-against
the detainees, practices which again are in violation of articles 27
and 32 of the fourth Geneva Convention and article 46
of Regulations annexed to The Hague Convention of
1907.

29. The Israeli authorities have persisted in their refusal to provide a list of the names of prisoners to the
appropriate authorities, in contravention of articles 43
and 136 of the fourth Geneva Convention. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) made a
sustained effort in Lebanon to obtain permission to
send a representative to visit detainees in the places of’
detention at Tyre, Nabatiyeh, Marjayoun and Sidon,
pursuant to articles 142 and 143 of that Convention. The
Israeli authorities declined to give such permission;
they did not allow the Red Cross representative to visit
or communicate with the detainees until their release,
or until their arrival at the detention point of Ansar and
the end of the Israeli authorities’ investigation.
Such
investigations usually takes several weeks.

23. On 13 June this year, an Israeli patrol raided a
house in the village of Kafr Melki. When the patrol did
not find the individual it was seeking, it let police dogs
loose against the women of the household, three of
whom were taken to hospital in critical condition. Such
practice is prohibited by article 3 (I) (c) of the fourth
Geneva Convention.
24. The latest brainchild of the Israeli occupation
authorities with respect to repression and torture of the
local inhabitants was manifested in their action in the
village of Kafr Shuba, where they raided the houses of
three detainees, sealing the doors and windows with
cement-at
the expense of the owners of the homes, of
course. Such action is prohibited by article 33 of the
fourth Geneva Convention which provides that no in-

30. The arrests and detentions undertaken by the occupation authorities have been accompanied by ter3

rorist actions, such as firing above the heads of the
village inhabitants and rounding up those inhabitants,
including children and the elderly and, under threat of
fire, collecting them in the public squares and forcing
them to stand in the burning sun or in the rain for hours,
again in contravention of article 32 of the fourth Geneva
Convention.

the Rashaya district. It has strengthened its stranglehold on movement between the occupied regions and
the Lebanese capital through complete control of the
two main roads, which are the coastal road and’ the
Batir-Jezzin road. At the beginning of April, the occupation authorities permanently closed the coastal road
and diverted traffic to the south, where one third of the
Lebanese inhabitants live. Traffic was diverted through
the Batir-Jezzin road, where several check-points have
been set up, which use all possible means to disrupt
traffic.

31. As for arbitrary practices against properties, the
occupying authorities often resort to reprisals against
Lebanese citizens in the occupied territories, including
the burning of crops, the disruption of the harvesting of
grains, the uprooting and consequent destruction of
citrus trees and the destruction of orchard fences, all in
contravention of article 53 of the fourth Geneva Convention, which clearly prohibits such acts. The area of
orchards destroyed by the Israeli forces in southern
Lebanon and the western Bekaa have an estimated
value of more than 15,000 dunums. Press correspondents as well as agencies have noted that Israeli barriers
on the Awali River disrupt the transport of citrus fruits
to Beirut. Furthermore, millions of oranges and lemons
rot on the trees because the expense of carrying such
fruit to Beirut has become exorbitant, and because at
least five days are needed-if
permission is granted for
transport-for
this fruit to reach the capital, which is
only 45 kilometres away. This is in contravention of the
substance of article 53 of the aforementioned
Geneva
Convention.

36. The authorities close that road to all cars in both
directions every Saturday, and whenever. they seek
revenge upon the inhabitants of the occupied territories. Hardly a week goes by without that road being
closed; it is the only access between the south and the
rest of Lebanon. This road has been cut off up to
18 days a month. The occupying authorities have recently decided to close the road indefinitely, although it
is the only link between the south and the north. They
went even beyond that retaliatory action and made a
decision to prevent tourist vehicles from crossing from
the south to the north, and vice versa. Travellers are
forced to cross over to the other side on foot and to rent
another vehicle to ensure that they will arrive at their
destination in the south. Foreign diplomats have not
been excepted. On 22 August, the British newspaper
The Times described these practices as being the climax
of previous actions undertaken by the Israeli authorities to strengthen their stranglehold and to cut off the
, south from Beirut.

32. When the occupying authorities raid the houses
of wanted individuals, they resort to smashing down
doors, and in many cases Israeli patrols have stolen
jewelry, electrical equipment and household appliances
which they stumble upon when searching houses; they
have also confiscated a number of cars belonging to
wanted individuals or their relatives.

37. To date, vehicles at the Batir-Jezzin check-point
have had to wait a number of hours, for permission to
cross, and this lengthy waiting period has led to some
tragic incidents for the passengers. For example, one
citizen died while waiting for his turn to cross the BatirJezzin check-point. A new-born infant died at the Iraeli
check-point at Gaza-Jubb Jannin in the western Bekaa.
A woman gave birth on the road while waiting to cross
over at the Israeli check-point at Batir.

33. Moreover, the occupation forces have not confined themselves to the plunder of movable and immovable property; they have also destroyed an ancient
Greco-Roman
temple in the city of Tyre, and their
patrols continually
plunder historical ruins, in clear
contravention of article 56 of The Hague Regulations
of 1907 and The Hague Convention for the Protection
of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict,
of 14 May 1954.3

38. In order to strengthen the siege against the south
and isolate it completely from other regions of Lebanon, the Israeli authorities have cut all telecommunications and postal communication
and very rarely are
such services restored. Israel has forbidden newspapers printed in the capital to be circulated in the occupied territories. It has also jammed other media,
including audio-visual.

34. In Sidon, the capital of the south, the occupation
authorities have occupied the Government palace. The
Governor and Government officials were evicted and
the building was then confiscated, as were all the official archives, in flagrant violation of The Hague Regulations of 1907.

39. As for the movement of individuals from and to
the south, it is subject to prior permission from
the occupation forces. However, the occupation forces-have reduced the number of such permits from a
few hundred daily to 30, obtainable at the occupation
authorities’ headquarters in the village of Kafr Falous
in the south, and the Israeli military administrator of the
Sidon region, Captain Albert, declared that “citizens
from outside the south must try to obtain Israeli passes
from the Lebanese Government”.

35. As for those practices aimed at isolating the south,
it should be noted that southern Lebanon, the western
Bekaa and the Rashaya district are connected to the
rest of the nation by two main roads and a number of
secondary roads. A few months ago Israel cut off all
secondary roads leading to southern cities and villages,
as well as cities and villages in the western Bekaa and
4

ures undertaken by Israel in the past and which are still
being carried out in the south, the western Bekaa and
the Rashaya region show the real scandalous face of
Israeli occupation.

40. The Israeli authorities, however, grant only a oneway pass to leave the region; this is a very clear indication of Israel’s intentions to empty the occupied territories, in particular the south, of their inhabitants so
that it can carry out its expansionist ambitions. Article 49 of the fourth Geneva Convention prohibits such
arbitrary behaviour.

46. As for Israeli practices in the south concerning
water, they can be summarized as follows.

41. In this context our doubts are strengthened by
what happened last June when the Israeli occupation
authorities summoned the Mayor of the Al-Adeissa
township and informed him that its inhabitants had
to either obtain Israeli identity cards or leave the area.
The occupation authorities have also harassed State
employees by preventing them from reaching their places of employment.
Last June they forbade secondary
school students from sitting for their final graduation
examinations,
after first having attempted to obstruct
the holding of those examinations by forbidding the
international forces in the south from bringing official
examination papers to the schools.

47. First of all, let us look at the facts: The Ministry of
the Interior of Lebanon has information that the engineering branch of the Israeli Defence Ministry under
Colonel Shawool,has for the past 15 days been digging a
tunnel 3 kilometres long from the Lebanese-Israeli border near the township of Kafr Kila to the township of
Deir Mimas at the Valley of Deir Mimas, which is the
part of the Litani River nearest to Israeli territory. The
source supplying this information to the Ministry of the
Interior added that this tunnel can absorb all the water
of the Litani River, and it seemed that all the fuss made
about the Wazzani was only an attempt to divert public
opinion from the main tunnel I have mentioned.
48. The Governor in the south added that the Israeli
forces had started to fence off a number of private and
public properties up to the Wazzani and that metal
posts had been placed alongside the roads constructed
by the Israeli authorities. A bridge had been built over
the river and a lZkilometre-long
road constructed from
the western part of the Wazzani to the Syrian township
of Ghajar. That road has been asphalted and barbed
wire placed alongside it and the population is allowed
nowhere near it; what is more, fishermen can no longer
fish in the Wazzani River. The barbed wire runs inside
Lebanese territory for about three to five kilometres.
The line is one-kilometre
long, and the fenced-in territory is about 5,000 dunums.

42. The climax of these arbitrary measures was
reached last week when the two Governors of the south
were prohibited from assisting at the official meeting
held in the Presidential Palace to discuss the situation in
the occupied territories and the social, sanitary and
housing services that may be provided to the citizens.
This is a clear contravention of article 43 of the Regulations annexed to The Hague Convention of 1907.
43. Furthermore, asphalt was not allowed to be transported to the south either by land or by sea. Road
maintenance has been halted and this has severely hampered land transportation in the area. The occupation
authorities prevented fuel oil from reaching the refinery
in Zahrani and thereafter the Al-Jiyeh generating plant,
as well as denied employees of the plant access to their
place of employment--all
in an attempt to inflict harm
on the Lebanese economy and deprive the inhabitants
of electricity.

49. Those fencing activities and the digging of ditches
for new posts have stopped now; the judiciary Lebanese police has informed the Governor in the south,
however, that there are many ditches ready to receive
new metal posts, that Israel will not abandon its ambitions over Lebanese waters and that 80 per cent of the
work to that end has been completed.

44. As for the situation in the south, in the western
Bekaa and the Rashaya district 40 villages are isolated
by Israel every month. Israel’s activities of siege and
isolation continue daily and vary between one and fifteen days, during which time all roads leading to a
particular village are closed. All this is accompanied by
raids on homes in the village and the collective detention of its inhabitants-again
in contravention of article 33 of the fourth Geneva Convention.

50. Our suspicions and fears about Israel’s undertaking water-diverting activities have been confirmed
for the following reasons.
51. First, since July Israel has prevented patrols of
the international
emergency forces in the south from
reaching the work sites so as to prevent the gathering of
any proof. As reported by press agencies, the official
spokesman of the international forces in Beirut said on
15 August that Israel had fenced in two parts of the
Hasbani River.

45. Israel does not stop at these arbitrary measures
aimed at besieging the occupied territories, because
from time to time it closes the two ports of Sidon and
Tyre, the only two harbours in the south. No ships,
fishing or transport of goods or persons are allowed; nor
is any contingency aid allowed to reach the south. The
Israeli occupation authorities have on more than one
occasion prevented the unloading of wheat for the people in the south, again in contravention of article 59 of
the fourth Geneva Convention. These arbitrary meas-

52. Secondly, on the same date, Agence FrancePresse reported that Tahall, the Israeli Government
water engineering firm, “decided to exploit the unused
portion of the fuel pipeline which runs through the
Golan Heights for a length of 50 kilometres for transporting water”.
,
‘5

53. Thirdly, Israel prevents the villagers and farmers
from returning to their cities and villages in the aforementioned region, despite the fact that they live in other
occupied areas.

reign again in Lebanon. Given that idyllic situation, he
has therefore seen tit to direct his attention to the area
south of the Awali. With the Council’s permission,
I will now endeavour to give a true picture of the situation in Lebanon, for the situation in Lebanon is indeed a
matter for grave concern.

54. Despite all that information reported in the press
inside and outside Lebanon-which
strengthens our
suspicions-we
are still awaiting the results of the investigations by officers of the international forces in the
south. In the light of those investigations, we request
the Council to stress anew our established inalienable
right to our own waters and provide sufficient guarantees so that Israel will no longer even think of seizing
our waters. I believe that.it is not too much to ask of the
Council to take time to consider the suffering of our
peoples in the occupied territories.

60. For some time we have been witnessing a further
deterioration,
if such is still possible, of the already
shaky security situation in Lebanon arising out of the
ongoing internecine warfare in that country, in particular in and around Beirut and in the north.
61; The following brief and by no means exhaustive
chronology of events highlights the inability of the
Karame Government to bring under control the situation in the country.

55. The information
I have given provides painful
examples of Israeli practices in the occupied Lebanese
territories. The danger of these practices and the resulting pain and damage will not be altered by any
denial or justification.
As I said before, the aim of this
complaint is not to engage in discussions, rhetoric or
useless talk. What Lebanon seeks is for the Council
to do the following: first, to implement
its resolutions on complete Israeli withdrawal from Lebanese
territory to the internationally
recognized borders,
immediate
cessation of Israeli practices against the
inhabitants of the south, the western Bekaa and the
Rashaya district, and respect for their legitimate right to
live in peace, security and dignity; secondly, to compel
Israel immediately
to lift its siege of the occupied territories; thirdly, to insist on the necessity for Israel
to respect the Charter, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the norms of international law, the 1949
Geneva Conventions, other international
conventions
and The Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907; and
fourthly, to stress Lebanon’s inalienable right to its
waters, so that Israel will no longer even think of seizing
those waters.

62. According
1984,

to The Los Angeles

Times of 4 July

“The security plan for Beirut has been under negotiation for months, while hundreds of people-most
of
them civilians-were
being killed by militia artillery
on both sides of the city.”
63.

According

to The New York Times of 6 July,

“Fighting continues for the fourth day with 36 people
killed in clashes between militia forces siding with or
opposing Syrian troops in Tripoli.”
64.

The New York Times of 9 July reported:

“Opening of new Beirut crossings is thwarted by kin
of missing . . . The total number of persons seized by
militias over the last few years is in the thousands . . .
The blackout surrounding this problem indicates that
many of those kidnapped may have met a fatal end.”
65.

56. The Council is urged to accede to those Lebanese
requests. We ask the Council to maintain peace and
security in the Middle East and the world, that being its
primary responsibility.

According

to The Washington

Post of 22 July,

“Three days of vicious lighting in Khoura. Ex-President Franjieh, a Christian Maronite leader, apparently was trying to expand the territory he commands
at the expense of Inaan Raad, a Greek Orthodox,
who heads the National Syrian Socialist Party and
whose strength lies in the Khoura district on the
edges of Franjieh’s traditional fiefdom . . .”

57. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next spearker is the representative of Israel, on
whom I now call.

An anonymous Lebanese political analyst comments
on Syria’s intervention in this latest flare-up:

58. Mr. BLUM
(Israel): Although the month of
August is almost over, Sir, permit me at the outset to
pay my respects to you on your accession to the presidency of the Council for this month. May I also take
this opportunity to express our appreciation to the representative of the United States for the exemplary manner in which she carried out the functions of the presidency last month.

“ ‘Make no mistake about it, the real Government
of Lebanon sits in Damascus these days, not in
Beirut.’ ”
66.

The New York Daily News of 27 July reported:

“Death toll rises in the north from fighting for
fourth straight day between fundamentalist
Islamic
group and ‘pink panthers’. Twenty-five killed and
100 wounded.”

59. We have just heard the statement of the representative of Lebanon. He brought us happy tidings. Apparently north of the Awali River peace and harmony
6

67.

The New

York Times of 28 July reported:

77.

“Artillery duels break out in mountains south-east of
Beirut between Lebanese army and Druze militia in
Suq al-Gharb.”
68.

78.

The Nenj York Times of 29 July said:

70.

The New

people killed

The Washington

“In Tripoli
72.

According

of July in

79.

York Times of 4 August said:

“Fighting
in Tripoli
21 wounded.”
71.

in month

continues.

Total

to The New

battles kill five more.”
York Times of 6 August,

“Emergency
cabinet meeting cancelled”-that
is,
the Lebanese cabinet-“
because of internal dissension. In addition to the usual Christian-Muslim
differences, a Berri/Jumblatt
rift is occurring over
where on the Damascus highway would soldiers
operate and whether they would replace the garrison
at Suq al-Gharb or be deployed in Druze villages.”
73.

The Associated

The New

The New

York Times of 26 August reported:

80. On 22 August, Beirut Radio stated in its domestic
service:
“From 11 o’clock this morning shells have been
falling on various sectors of Tripoli, killing 80 and
wounding 250. Heavy property damage has resulted
from the artillery barrage. The recurrent fighting is
the result of the breakdown of the cease-fire between
the pro-Syrian Knights of Islam and the Democratic
Arab and the Islamic Union militias. Hospitals are
already overflowing with the wounded from previous
incidents. The firefighters are unable to extinguish
the many conflagrations in the different sectors of
Tripoli. Shops have completely closed down.

Press said on 16 August:

“Syrian army takes control of Baalbek in Lebanon
from Iranian revolutionary guards and radical Muslim militia, in an effort to shore up support for Shia
leader Berri.”
74.

to Reuters on 24 August,

“Fighting outside Beirut and in the northern port of
Tripoli attested to the Lebanese Government’s
ineffectiveness in extending its authority beyond Beirut
and in getting the country’s many factions to replace
fratricide with co-operation. In Tripoli, 105 people
were estimated to have died last week as fighting
erupted again between Sunni Muslim fundamentalists, who control most of the city, and Syrian-backed
Alawite Muslims. Since the start of 1984, more than
500 people are believed to have been killed in fighting
in the city.”

of 5 dead,

Post of 5 August reported:

. . . overnight

According

Hakim

“Shi’ite
Moslems sack Saudi consulate as armed
Lebanese police watched without intervening. The
chanted slogans included, “At your command, Khomeini’, and ‘We’ll show you, House of Saud’ . . . In
another incident,
gunmen fired two rocket-propelled grenades at the British embassy in Beirut last
night.”

Reuters reported on 2 August:

“Seventy-eight
Tripoli.”

York Times on 23 August reported:

“Lebanese army’s top Druze officer Nadim
dies in helicopter crash.”

“Rival leftist militias battle in Beirut. Three people
killed and six wounded.”
69.

The New

York Times of 19 August reported:

“Shells hit grounds of presidential palace in heavy
fighting between Christian and Druze forces . . .
Third consecutive day that fighting takes place.”

Post of 23 August,

“In Beirut, Druze leaders have not been able to
arrive at Baabdeh, the Presidential Palace, for the
meeting of the Cabinet, due to their inability to cross
streets blocked by relatives of the kidnap victims.
The Government has been unable to carry out any
action with regard to this problem. The Cabinet held
a closed meeting under the chairmanship of the President in the Presidential Palace which was damaged
in the course of fighting in the second week of
August.”

“Fighting continues for third straight day in Tripoli.
One hundred people killed since Monday and many
more wounded . . .

Indeed, the President of Lebanon himself asked at the
meeting of his Government on 22 August, according to
the domestic service of Beirut Radio:

“Clashes continue between Lebanese army and
Christian militia on one side, and Druze fighters on
the other, near Suq al-Gharb.”

“How will we be able to send the Army to the
south when we have not been able to send it to AshShuwayfat and Khaldeh? How can we restore civil

75.

The New

York Times of 21 August said:

“Heavy fighting breaks out overnight in Tripoli between Sunni Muslims and Syrian-backed militiamen
-30 killed, 25 wounded.”
76.

According

to The Washington

7

85. The priorities of the Lebanese Government seem
to be clear: to ignore the necessity of putting out the
fires in its own backyard and to shrug off the mass
killings of its hapless citizens in Beirut, in Tripoli and
elsewhere in Lebanon where foreign-backed factions
sow disorder and destruction. Instead, that Govemment apparently prefers to indulge in an international
diversionary exercise meant to conceal the sagging fortunes of the Karame Government. All this, however,
cannot hide the inability of the Lebanese Government
to control the various militias and prevent the continuous shedding of blood-a
manifestation
of fatalism stemming from an impotence induced by the total
Syrian domination of the Lebanese Government. How
else can one explain why the Lebanese representative
should complain of the situation in the south, which in
human and political terms is far less of a pressing problem than the very real predicament in which other parts
of Lebanon find themselves?

administration
to the south when we have not been
able to reactivate and liberate the administration
in
Beirut? How can we attack Israel for dividing the
southerners” -that
according to President Gemayel- “when some seek division and classification
in Beirut?”
Those are the questions raised by President Amin Gemayel. For some reason the distinguished representative of Lebanon has ignored them here today in his
statement.
81. Ironically but characteristically,
though not surprisingly , this meeting of the Council has been called to
discuss not these very pertinent questions raised by
President Gemayel but instead the situation in southern
Lebanon where the overall situation-including
security-is far better than in any other part of that war-torn
country.
82. The present debate on Lebanon in the Council, as
so many that have preceded it, has a surrealistic quality
not unknown in the annals of the modem Middle East.

86. There is and there can be no comparison
whatsoever between the frightful chaos prevailing to
the north of the Awali river and the security situation
that obtains in the area to the south of it. It will be
recalled that when Israel withdrew its forces beyond
the Awali river last summer, that redeployment of the
Israel Defence Forces was matched by a corresponding
Syrian advance into other areas of Lebanon, directly or
through Syria’s proxies. The situation in the north of
Lebanon, in Beirut and. in the southern approaches to
the capital can be best desc’ribed as tragic. The areas in
question are controlled by Syrian-supported
militias
and proxies. The terrorists also are slinking back into
Beirut. The area of Lebanon to the north of the Awali is
racked by civil strife and bloodshed, as evidenced by
the following facts:

83. The Lebanese Government, whose house is literally on fire-in
its capital city Beirut, in the city of
Tripoli and elsewhere-is totally under the political and
military domination of its “fraternal” neighbour, Syria.
The Karame Government is now turning to the Council
to talk of problems in the south of Lebanon, an area
which for many years was virtually under the rule of a
terrorist organization that reduced to a nightmare the
life of Lebanese citizens there. During all those years
the Lebanese Government had in effect written off the
south. It is certainly worth.mentioning
in this connection the role of the Cairo agreement of 3 November
1969, which sanctioned the terrorist takeover of the
south, thus attesting to the Lebanese Government’s
very peculiar concern for the lives and security of the
inhabitants in the south of its country.

87. First, the area of Tripoli is afield of battle between
pro- and anti-Syrian militias and is subjected to the
repeated violent and brutal interventions of the Syrian
army and the PLO [Palestine Liberation Organization]
terrorists of the Abou-Moussa colouring, who support
their Syrian godfather. Over 500 have been killed in
Tripoli since the beginning of this year and thousands
were wounded. Many are fleeing the city. For the umpteenth time the cease-fire has been broken again only
some days ago and severe fighting resumed.

84. It is of course evident, not only to members of the
Council but also outside it, that the Lebanese Govemment has initiated the present move in the Council
under heavy constraints emanating from its lack of
independence. Its purpose seems to be to divert attention from the disasters overtaking the north, the centre
of Lebanon and Beirut. The domestic service of Beirut
Radio could not have been more explicit on this point.
On 13 August is stated:

88. Secondly, the area south of Tripoli is in the throes
of a struggle led by Franjieh against his opponents.
Franjieh is, as we all know, supported by the Syrians.
In all of the areas to the north of Tripoli as well as in the
north-east and east, full control is in Syrian hands.

“Prime Minister Karame today received Hammad
as-Sid, personal envoy of the League of Arab States
Secretary-General.
A&id
was told: Lebanon has
requested that a propaganda campaign be launched
abroad regarding the south. What moves have been
made in this respect? He answered: Your information Ministry knows that the League of Arab States
has sent several hundreds of thousands of dollars to
,Lebanon to help launch this campaign.”

89. Thirdly, President Gemayel controls the East
Beirut salient and the shoreline up to the Matan sector,
south of the port of Junieh.
90. Fourthly, in West Beirut the Shia militia are
lighting the Sunni Nasserist Mourabitoun
and the
Druze, the latter blocking the coastal highway down to
Damour. The presence of the Muslim sixth brigade of
the Lebanese army in West Beirut is utterly irrelevant.

We are confronted here today with one of the manifestations of that propaganda campaign.
8

91. Fifthly, the Lebanese forces arein control of East
Beirut, of the Kisrawan-Jebayel
sector and of the
Eklim-el-Harub
area south of Damour.

have focused his attention on the much more secure
southern part of his country, which, as already mentioned, had been thoroughly neglected by successive
Lebanese Governments over the years?

92. Sixthly, the coastal highway from Beirut to the
Awali has been blocked by the Shiites, the Druze and
the Christians since February of this year.

97. Israel’s position with regard to Lebanon is and
has been clear. It has been stated and reafftrmed on
numerous occasions by the Government of Israel, in
the Council and elsewhere. Israel wishes to see Lebanon free and independent, and exercising its full territorial sovereignty over all of its territory. Israel has
no territorial ambitions whatsoever in Lebanon. Israel
desires to live in peace with Lebanon and to maintain good-neighbourly
relations with Lebanon. Israel
wishes to see the whole of Lebanon entirely free from
any foreign domination, with peace and calm returning
to all its troubled people and land.

93. Seventhly,
the Shouf and Aley sectors are
blocked off by the Druze, in contravention of the security agreement with the Government of Lebanon. Recently, fighting has again broken out between the Druze
and the army of Lebanon, including in the Suq al-Gharb
area.
94. So much for the situation north of the Awali.
I must express my admiration to the representative of
Lebanon for his ability to pass over in silence all these
events when addressing himself to the situation in his
country.

98. The Israel-Lebanese
Agreement of 17 May 1983,
which was approved by both the Lebanese and the
Israel parliaments,
solemnly reaffirmed those basic
principles. The opening paragraph of article 1 of that
Agreement states:

95. By contrast, to the south of the Awali, Israel has
made great efforts to ease the normal life of the inhabitants in the areas under its control, which had been
a PLO state within a State up until June 1982. There can
be no better evidence of the fact that the civilian population is aware of Israel’s efforts than the massive return
of the Lebanese civilian population to the area under
Israel control, even before the end of the fighting in
August 1982. These civilians had been forced to abandon their houses and property as a result of the chaos
caused by PLO depredations,
abetted by the Arab
Governments since the late 1960s. A second massive
wave of returnees came to the Israel-controlled
area as
a result of the severe fighting to the south of Beirut in
February of this year. Israel’s military presence in
southern Lebanon is only of a provisional nature. That
is why it has been Israel’s policy all along to leave the
day-to-day administration
of the area, wherever and
whenever possible, in the hands of the Lebanese civilian authorities, while maintaining
the security in the
area pending its withdrawal. The ICRC is aware of the
fact that Israel has been applying the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’ in the area of Lebanon under its control, and Israel’s conduct in southern
Lebanon meets the requirements of that Convention as
well as of other relevant rules of international law aimed
at protecting the civilian population.

“The parties agree and undertake to respect the
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of each other. They consider the existing
international boundary between Lebanon and Israel
inviolable.”
The Agreement provided, inter alia, for the withdrawal
of Israel’s armed forces from Lebanon. Israel has not
changed its position. Israel desires to withdraw its forces from Lebanon in spite of the unjustified unilateral
renunciation of the aforementioned
Agreement by the
Government of Lebanon. We all know that the Lebanese Government went back on its signature under
heavy pressure from Syria, whose goal is to continue its
subjugation of Lebanon politically, militarily and economically. Israel will indeed withdraw its forces from
Lebanon as soon as adequate provisions have been
made for ensuring Lebanese sovereignty in the south
and for the security of Israel’s northern border from
attack and harassment from Lebanese territory. Unfortunately, the situation that prevails in Lebanon today
indicates the total inability of the Lebanese Govemment to assert its sovereignty over its territory, and the
chronology of recent events read out by me earlier
clearly points to the fact that the Lebanese Government
is far from being the master of its own house even in its
capital city, let alone -in those areas that are totally
dominated by Syria, as, for instance, in Tripoli.

96. There is thus not the slightest justification for the
Lebanese complaint that has brought about this meeting of the Council. The reason for the Lebanese initiative that resuited in today’s Council meeting is amply
clear to all seated around this table. It is the combined
effect of both Syrian pressure and domestic Lebanese
politics and constraints. It is a diversionary exercise of
the highest degree. How else, may I ask, does one
account for the curious phen menon that the current
Prime Minister of Lebanon, B native of Tripoli, should
have disregarded the very real plight of his home town
and of his immediate constituents and, instead, should

99. It is a fact that the feuding, the bloodshed and the
civil war that are still plaguing the areas of Lebanon to
thynorth of the Awali are inspired and engendered by
,the warring factions and outside Powers which seek to
prove their influence and dominance by encouraging
terrorism also in the south. This terrorism and chaos
have been contained by the Israel Defence Forces. But
their threat and the need to combat them obviously
entail a certain amount of hardship for the civilian
population.
9.

100. At the same time it must be stated in all candour
that the Karame Government is itself in a very large
measure responsible for much of the difficulties and
inconvenience caused to the civilian population.
By
bringing about the recent closure of the Israel Liaison
Offtce in Dibayeh, under the relentless and self-serving
pressure of the Syrians, the Lebanese Government has
removed the means and the machinery, one of whose
main purposes had been to assist the civilian population
in the south, including its access to the area in question.
Responsibility
for the resulting discomfort caused to
the civilians in the south therefore lies squarely with the
Karame Government itself. But now that the Karame
Government has been completely overtaken by events
and is unable to cope with the fires eating away at the
body politic of Lebanon, it is the long-forgotten and
much neglected south that is made the object of the
Karame Government’s
sudden zeal.

tion with UNRWA,
UNRWA.

whenever requested to do so by

105. We heard in the statement of the representative
of Lebanon another false allegation concerning, so we
are told, widespread searches in the villages of the
south. There is absolutely no truth to those malicious
accusations, spread by the Arab propaganda machine,
which is trying in vain to hide or minimize the slaughter
and the depredations that go on in other parts of
Lebanon.
106. Let me emphatically state here that there are no
arbitrary measures of any kind taken against any village
whatsoever. Sporadically and only upon strong and
reliable information indicating planned terrorist activity against local inhabitants or the Israel Defence Forces, searches and ad hoc security measures of a limited
nature are undertaken to prevent outbreaks of violence.
Those measures are meant to assure the security in the
south, which, regrettably, is so glaringly absent elsewhere in Lebanon.

101. In his statement the representative of Lebanon
made a series of utterly false and totally unfounded
allegations against my country. I could refute at length
each and every one of those allegations. However,
I shall confine myself to some of the most blatant of
those falsehoods so that members of the Council can
judge for themselves what credibility, if any, attaches
to those allegations in their entirety.

107. We heard accusations with regard to the alleged
mistreatment
of local Government
offtcials in the
southern part of Lebanon. Let me tell the members of
the Council that, contrary to the accusations of the
representative of Lebanon, Israel has done a great deal
to assist and co-operate with the local Lebanese administration. Since 1982, the Israel Defence Forces have
permitted the return of local administrators and enabled
judges, police, teachers, doctors and electricity and
water utility workers to work and operate in a manner
that is beneficial to the local population. And this after
many years during which they had not been able to do
so when the area was dominated by the terrorist PLO, a
period about which, as I have already indicated, the
representative of Lebanon has strangely remained silent in his statement.

102. One of those false allegations related to what the
representative of Lebanon termed arbitrary detentions
of civilians in the area under Israel control. Let me
present the true facts to the Council.
103. In order to prevent the spreading of malignant
terror against the local population and the Israel Defence Forces, it is necessary from time to time to detain
terrorist suspects or proven criminals, or both. That
is being done with the full knowledge of the ICRC,
which is being kept informed by the Israel Defence
Forces of the identity of all the detainees. I invite the
representative of Lebanon, as well as members of the
Council, to.compare this situation with that in other
parts of Lebanon where people simply disappear. In the
south, there are no such disappearances. This is a direct
result of the time and effort the Israel Defence Forces
invest towards the prevention of kidnappings by assisting both the local police force and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA)
in this regard.

108. There are many cases in which the Israel Defence Forces have supplied building materials for the
purpose of constructing and renovating the infrastructures of the cities of southern Lebanon. The Israel
Defence Forces are not only engaged in the protection
of life and property in southern Lebanon, but also
greatly contribute to the renovation of past destruction
and to the advancement of daily life after so many years
of criminal negligence. One ought to remember that in
the past two years the only area in Lebanon that was not
troubled by civil strife and daily clashes has been southern Lebanon.

104. Speaking of kidnappings,
that, of course, is
another phantom allegation recently made by the Lebanese authorities. The Israel Defence Forces are certainly not involved in this heinous crime, which has,
regrettably, evolved into a common practice throughout Lebanon. We would do well to remember the 3,000
victims of abduction and kidnappings in the many battles in Beirut and its environs, of which, apparently,
only a few dozen survived. The Israel Defence Forces
are investing much time and effort towards preventing
these tragic events in southern Lebanon and are assisting the local police in this direction in conjunc-

109. In this connection, let me refer also to two other
falsehoods contained in the statement of the representative of Lebanon. One is regarding the alleged plundering by Israel of archaeological
sites in southern
Lebanon. This allegation, too, is untrue; the truth is
different. From 1982 onwards the Israel Defence Forces have taken measures to renew the work of local
officials in charge of archaeological sites and have also
supplied technical assistance to them. A delegation of
10

115. Another canard that has been revived here today
relates to the alleged diversion of Lebanese waters by
Israel. This is a calumny that has been repeated by
various Lebanese officials over the years and has been
spread again by the Lebanese Government in recent
weeks. It was repeated here today by the representative
of Lebanon. This time the claim has been that Israel is
in the process of diverting the waters of the Wazzani.
This allegation, as so many before it regarding Lebanese waters, has been conclusively proved wrong-this
time also by a group of United Nations observers invited to the area in question by the Israel Defence
Forces. They saw for themselves that the Lebanese
claim was entirely unfounded and that no work had
been done in or near the springs of the Wazzani to
divert it, or for any other purpose. It should not go
unnoticed, however, that this preposterous claim emanated from no less a personality than Prime Minister
Karame himself, which sadly reflects on his other declarations regarding the south.

the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization visited several sites in Tyre and did not
find any proof of damage done to the sites, as alleged by
the representative of Lebanon. That official visit took
place under the auspices of Israel, and that after the
PLO had repeatedly denied any official inspection of
those sites when they were under terrorist control.
110. The representative of Lebanon has also revived
the canard already spread by his Government regarding
the alleged denial by Israel of high school students in
the south to enter their final examinations.
When he
circulated a letter to that effect on 30 July [S/16682],
I replied in a letter dated 7 August [S/26691]. As
I pointed out, that allegation, too, is untrue, and may
I quote from my letter: “the Government of Israel has
no intention whatsoever to interfere with the matriculation examinations of the students in southern Lebanon
or to obstruct them in any manner.” The rest of the
answer can be found in the letter.
111. We have also heard in the statement of the representative of Lebanon a repetition of the falsehood
regarding the alleged blocking of movement by Israel
to and from the south. What is the truth? The heavy
fighting in Beirut and its suburbs since February has
resulted also in the blocking of the Beirut-Sidon road by
the Druze and the Christian militia. It is this development which has been impeding the passage to southern
Lebanon from the north. Every effort has been made by
the Israel Defence Forces to ensure open and free passage of the Beirut-Sidon road, but the various Lebanese
militias have repeatedly prevented the reopening of the
road, thus causing unnecessary suffering to the Lebanese population.

116. May I just add, for the sake of the record, that
there is as much truth to the Lebanese calumny with
regard to the Litani as there is with regard to the Wazzani.
117. No State, including Lebanon, can be absolved
from its duty to prevent its territory from being used for
terrorist attacks against other States. This duty is based
on general international law. It is certainly not open to a
State to invoke in its favour benefits deriving from
certain principles and’rules of international law, unless
it is at the same time prepared and able to abide by the
concomitant duties.

112. Let me also recall in this connection that the
terrorist action in November
1983 directed against
Israel Defence Forces headquarters in Tyre resulted in
dozens of soldiers.and local residents being killed, and
as a result the Awali bridge had to be temporarily closed
at the time to help apprehend the perpetrators. It was
reopened shortly thereafter.

118. If Lebanon is either unable or unwilling-and
for
purposes of international responsibility the distinction
is immaterial-to
prevent its territory from being used
as a base of operations for terrorist activities against
another State, it must be prepared to expect that State
to take appropriate self-defence measures to protect
itself and its citizens.

113. In view ofthe closure of the Beirut&don
road by
the various Lebanese militias, as a result of the fighting
between them, the Israel Defence Forces opened up an
alternative route in Batir-A-Shouf. This crossing had to
be shut down in mid-August for a period of three days,
in order to construct the new inspection terminal which
would provide greater security against the passage of
arms and drugs into the south. An additional crossing
exists in Jubb Jannin, located in the Bekaa, which is
being used for commercial purposes as well.

119. In this connection it is also pertinent to mention
article 4 of the Israel-Lebanese Agreement of 17 May
1983. Paragraph 1 of that article provides
“The Territory of each Party will not be used as a
base for hostile or terrorist activity against the other
Party, its territory or its people”.
Paragraph 2 goes on:
“Each Party will prevent the existence or organization of irregular forces, armed bands, organizations, bases, offices or infrastructure, the aims and
purposes of which include incursions or any act of
terrorism into the territory of the other Party or any
other activity aimed at threatening or endangering
the security of the other Party and safety of its people. To this end all agreements and arrangements
enabling the presence and functioning on the ter-

114. In all, overland communications
between the
north and south cannot but be affected by the precarious security of and the incessant fighting in Lebanon. It has been Israel’s aim to maintain security south
of the Awali, and also to assure the normal flow of
traffic. The Israel Defence Forces have been trying
very hard to minimize the difficulties in so far as possible, and will also continue to do so in the future.
11

ritory of either Party of elements hostile to the other
Party are null and void.”

or to Israel, either to the north of Israel or to the
surrounding areas. Instead, it has brought schism and
dismemberment.
The continued occupation
entails
widening the cycle of violence and the continuing oppression entails increased resistance. Israeli practices
have become more diversified and have covered every
segment of social, cultural, economic and human life,
affecting primarily the civilians in southern Lebanon
and Bekaa. No city, school or village has been spared
Israeli violence. According to the letter dated 28 June
from the representative of Lebanon to the SecretaryGeneral [S/16650], the Israeli authorities have closed
the ports of Tyre and Sidon to commercial traffic and
stopped the movement of passengers and fishermen.

120. Clearly, the Lebanese Government,
which put
its signature on the Agreement of 17 May, also recognized these fundamental duties incumbent on a State
under international
law. However, as already mentioned, the Agreement in question, although subsequently approved by the Lebanese Parliament by an
overwhelming majority, was not permitted to enter into
force because of the political blackmail and blatant
abuse by Syria of Lebanon, its Government, its Parliament and its people.
121. In conclusion, let me say very briefly that, contrary to Syria, which is the only real occupying Power in
Lebanon and has no intention of withdrawing from
Lebanon, Israel has every intention of doing so, but
Israel will not sit by and permit anyone to incite, arm
and direct terrorists to mount attacks on Israel and on
its soldiers in Lebanon. While peace with all of its
neighbours, including Lebanon, remains Israel’s objective, Israel is prepared to negotiate with the Govemment of Lebanon with a view to reaching at this stage
appropriate mutual security arrangements in the south.
In the mean time and pending the conclusion of such
mutual security arrangements, Israel will continue to
protect its interests to the best of its ability.

127. Israel has also blockaded villages, damaging
harvests, and has carried out raids on hospitals and
schools. Israel has also arrested hundreds of persons,
even children, taking them as hostages to force the
surrender of their parents and detaining them in camps
at Ansar or in Israel itself. Even religious people have
been detained and humiliated by Israel.
128. After the detailed and documented statement of
the representative of Lebanon, I need hardly expand, at
this late hour, on the description of the acts visited by
Israel upon the civilian population of Lebanon. There
has been a whole series of flagrant violations of the
Geneva Conventions and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. This is a challenge to all the principles of
our civilization and the norms of international
law.

122. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt) (inrerpretation
from
Arabic): It is a pleasure for me to congratulate you, Sir,
on your election to the presidency of the Council for the
month of August. I am both gratified and honoured to
see you guiding our work as we consider the serious
complaint before us.

129. I think other persons might also have been struck
by what the representative of Lebanon said. He stated
that frequently the occupation authorities have prevented the ICRC from carrying out inquiries into certain specific cases.

123. I also take this opportunity to express our deep
gratitude for the effective way in which Mrs. Jeane
Kirkpatrick discharged the functions of President of the
Council last month.

130. In the light of that unhappy background, we cannot but demand an immediate investigation of those
practices, so that the Council and international public
opinion can be informed of the gravity of those Israeli
acts that have taken the form of violations of human
rights and be aware of the obligations incumbent upon
Israel as the occupying force in southern Lebanon and
the Bekaa. In the light of the occupation and use of
force by the Israeli authorities, a fierce national resistance has naturally resulted; the people have the legitimate moral and political right to struggle to remove the
occupation forces from all the national territories.

124. Obviously I shall be confining my remarks to the
present agenda item, the letter from the representative
of Lebanon, in which he requests the Council to consider all practices and measures taken by the Israeli
occupying authorities in southern Lebanon, the westem Bekaa and the Rashaya district.
125. After suffering destruction and dismemberment
during the civil war, Lebanon is trying, as part of a
national consensus, to reunify itself by drawing up a
national security programme to be carried out in stages.
Yet, the Lebanese Government has been facing the
arbitrary actions of the Israeli occupation forces in
southern Lebanon and the western Bekaa, the purpose
of which is to perpetuate a divided Lebanon stricken
with internal strife.

131. In a work published recently, the Israeli authors
themselves have described the war waged by Israel in
Lebanon in June 1982 as a “war ofdeception”-which,
incidentally, is the title of the book: War ofDeception.
132. If Israel believes that it has besieged southern
Lebanon and the Palestinians in Lebanon, the fact is
that it has fallen into its own trap. To force a military
solution or one dictated by Israel’s security concerns in
southern Lebanon is futile. Israel’s leaders and citizens
have been tom between the desire to withdraw from

126. The policy initiated by Israel in Lebanon in
March 1978 has failed to gain its so-called ends. Neither
the policy of deterrence and abortive actions nor the
policy “Peace for Galilee” has brought peace to Galilee
12

Lebanon

rity.

and the need to protect their so-called secu-

cil, through your wisdom and efforts, succeeded in
adopting a resolution in which it rejected current attempts to split the ranks of the South African people
and to entrench those structures aimed at increasing
social slavery and displacing all those not born white or
whose ancestors’ blood was not mixed with the blood of
the white settlers.

133. Israel must fully realize that neither a military
solution nor protecting its security will make it possible
to achieve a modus vivendi with the Lebanese or the
Palestinians. The outcome for Israel must necessarily
be a peaceful political solution-Israel’s
unconditional
withdrawal behind the internationally
recognized frontiers. That is what is stated in the book to which I have
referred. That is what the Isareli authors of the book
themselves have said. It is not an invention of ours.

139. In response to a request from the Government of
Lebanon, the Council is once again looking into the
practices of expansionist Zionist colonialism in southem Lebanon. We have great hopes that the Council,
under your wise leadership, will rise to meet its responsibilities vis-d-vis Lebanon and the Lebanese people,
stemming from the Charter of the United Nations and
the Council’s own resolutions, in particular resolution
509 (1982), demanding Israel’s immediate and unconditional withdrawal to the internationally
recognized
boundaries of Lebanon.

134. The peace-loving
forces which are fighting
against Israel within Israel-including
the “Peace
Now”, “Parents Against Silence” and “There Is a
Limit’* Movements-refuse
to support the occupation,
the settlements policy and the policy of terrorism. The
persistence of Israeli actions in southern Lebanon and
Israel’s continued occupation of Lebanon make devoid
of any sense talk of future peace and security in Lebanon. By the same token, the unabated building of
settlements and spread of settlers in other occupied
Arab territories reverse all known scales of value be-,
tween legitimate rights and illegal claims.

140. What is now taking place in the occupied Lebanese territories confirms once again that the Israeli
occupation authorities did not undertake their insane
attack against Lebanon to ensure what was deceptively
called “Peace for Galilee”; rather the aim of that attack
was to implement a plan laid down at the beginning of
this century by international
Zionism, in co-operation
with the forces of colonialism.
This was many years
before Israel was founded. In December 1919, Chaim
Weizmann wrote a letter to Lloyd George, Prime Minister of Great Britain, which appears in the Jewish
Observer and Middle East Review, volume II, of November 1973. It included the “demands”
ofintemational Zionism in Palestine, Lebanon, eastern Jordan
and Syria. In the eighth paragraph of the list of demands
in that letter we read:

135. It is now more than five years since Israel first
invaded Lebanon in March 1978, and the invasion of
southern Lebanon is entering the third year, having
begun in June 1982. The continuing acts of aggression
and occupation by Israel in southern Lebanon show
that they are not isolated incidents but that they must be
regarded as part of a far-reaching plan to annex the
occupied territories of Gaza and the Golan Heights.
136. We hope that the Council at this decisive stage
will adopt all steps that will make it possible to meet the
Lebanese demands listed in detail by the representative
of Lebanon at the end of his statement: first and foremost, to compel Israel to abide by the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’ and cease all its
practices in the Lebanese territory it controls; to condemn the occupation by Israel of Lebanon which is
designed to isolate the southern part of that country and
disrupt its unity and independence; and to implement
Council resolutions demanding that Israel withdraw
forthwith and unconditionally
from all the occupied
territories to the internationally
recognized boundaries
of Lebanon.

“For these reasons we consider it essential that the
northern frontier of Palestine should include the valley of the Litani, for a-distance of about 25 miles
above the bend, and the western and southern slopes
of Mount Hermon, in order to ensure control of the
headwaters of the Jordan and to permit reafforestation of this region.“*
141. These claims were accompanied by maps which
included the prepared expansionist plan to engulf not
only the whole of Palestine but areas beyond its borders. These maps were documented in the book Backdrop to Tragedy: the Struggle for Palestine, by William
R. Polk, David N. Stamler and Edmund Asfour (Boston, Beacon Press, 1957). It is clear from studying those
maps that southern Lebanon, the Golan Heights and
eastern Jordan along the Hijaz Railway to the Dead Sea
all came under the plan for the creation of the Zionist
expansionist State. As soon as the Zionist theories were
translated into actions by Israel’s colonialist violence in
1948, Tel Aviv began to expand to the north, the south
and the east. As for expansion northwards, implemen-

137. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
138. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) [interpretutionfrom
Arabic]: I have already had the honour
of congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month, when the
subject of new racist measures by the Pretoria regime
was brought before the Council. At that time the Coun-

* Quoted in English by the speaker;

13

side in the internal affairs of some country in order to
support a political movement inside it aiming towards
some target it is only when that movement shows
some independent activity which there is a chance to
enhance and maybe to bring to success by encouragement and help from the outside. There is no point
in trying to create from the outside a movement that
does not exist at all inside”*

tation of the plan had three basic requirements: first,
expansion to the Litani River, if not beyond it; secondly, plotting against the independence and unity of
Lebanon to achieve this expansion; thirdly, using conditions to create small states that would be satellites of
Israel to give a false legitimacy to the racist sectarian
Israeli entity as a pure Jewish State.
142. The second stage in this long chronological chain
of violence plotted by the Zionist movement that took
place in 1954 against the independence, unity and sovereignty of Lebanon was effectively implemented
in
1982 because the “appropriate conditions” Sharett, the
former Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel and later
its Prime Minister, spoke of were actually ripe at the
end of the 1970s as a result of the defeatist Camp David
conspiracy, which disrupted the strategic balance in the
Middle East as a whole.

-inside

Lebanon,

that is.

“It is impossible to inject life into a dead body. As
far as I know, in Lebanon today there exists no
movement aiming at transforming the country into a
Christian State governed by the Maronite community.
“This is not surprising. The transformation
of
Lebanon into a Christian State as a result of an outside initiative
is unfeasible today. . . . I do not
exclude the possibility of accomplishing this goal in
the wake of a wave of shocks that will sweep the
Middle East . . . will destroy the present constellations and will form others. But in the present Lebanon, with its present territorial and demographic
dimensions and its international relations, no serious
initiative of the kind is imaginable.“*

143. On 27 February 1954, Ben-Gurion, who had by
then stepped down from power, wrote an extensive
letter to Sharett setting forth his plans and those of
his two colleagues Lavon and Dayan. I am quoting
from a book entitled Israel’s Sacred Terrorism, by
Livia Rokach. The following is taken from the letter
Ben-Gurion sent to Sharett:

145. Certainly, members of the Council who read
these well-known letters will draw their own conclusions about the significance of these Israeli plans.
Yakov Sharett, the son of Moshe Sharett, in Le Monde
Diplomatique
of December 1983, wrote:

“The creation of a Christian State is therefore a
natural act; it has historical roots and it will find
support in wide circles in the Christian world, both
Catholic and Protestant. In normal times this would
be almost impossible, first and foremost because of
the lack of initiative and courage of the Christians.
But at times of confusion, or revolution or civil war,
things take on another aspect, and even the weak
declares himself to be a hero. Perhaps (there is never
any certainty in politics) now is the time to bring
about the creation of a Christian State in our neighbourhood. Without our initiative and our vigorous
aid this will not be done.“*

“The time for the achievement of these ambitions
was in June 1982 and not in 1978 at the time of the
‘Litani campaign’, which was limited from the beginning-both
from the territorial point of view and in
its objectives. The State of Israel was then dominated
by a ‘revolutionary’
troika par excellence-BeginSharon-Eytan-convinced
of the political need for
the ‘iron fist’ and whom no obstacle could hold
back. Did not Mr. Begin state at the beginning of the
war that it would bring 40 years of peace to the
country? But while in 1956 Ben-Gurion had come up
against the refusal of Guy Moliet, Christian Pineau
and Bourgbs-Maunoury
to endorse his plans, in 1982
the Israeli leaders managed to win the support of the
United States, in the person of Secretary of State
Alexander Haig.“**
146. The brutal Israeli practices against the inhabitants of occupied southern Lebanon are due not only to
the conflict between the occupying forces and the inhabitants; they go beyond this relationship,
because
they stem from a firm Israeli policy which has been and
continues to be practised in the West Bank, Gaza and
the Golan Heights and which is based essentially on
creating hardship for the inhabitants to the point where
they are forced to emigrate. The emigrants are then
prevented from returning. In Lebanon this policy aims
to sow religious discord among inhabitants of every
village.

I would repeat that:
“Without
. . . our vigorous aid this will not be done.
It seems to me that this is the central duty, or at least
one of the central duties, of our foreign policy. This
means that time, energy and means ought to be invested in it and that we must act in all possible ways
to bring about a radical change in Lebanon.“*
144. The plot contained in that letter achieves the
demand I have mentioned, that is, the destruction of the
unity of Lebanon and the setting up of a sectarian
regime through the creation of puppet mini-States. In
Sharett’s reply, he said conditions were not yet appropriate in 1954. Allow me to quote from his reply to BenGurion:
“A permanent assumption of mine is that if sometimes there is some reason to interfere from the out-

** Quoted in French by the speaker.

* Quoted in English by the speaker.

14

147. All this is an attempt by the Israelis to lay their
hands on the south, on the one hand, and to practise
hegemony throughout Lebanon, on the other. Thus
Israel will have reaped the fruits of its aggression
against Lebanon by annexing the south at a time when
the United States is rewarding Israel through complementary work with the Zionists to destroy the unity
of Lebanon, to trample on its sovereignty and to deprive it of its national identity. The Agreement of
17 May 1983 was merely an embodiment
of Zionist
thinking and international Zionist and imperialist ambitions. That Agreement has been aborted because of the
awareness of the Lebanese people and their Government and thanks to their heroic struggle against foreign
occupation. That led to the withdrawal of the Marines
and thus aborted the international plot against Lebanon
as a whole. Israel, however, escalated its arbitrary
actions and confirmed its refusal to accept resolution
509 (1982). Today Israel behaves like a master in occupied Lebanon; every morning and evening it escalates its brutal, acts which have been very eloquently
described by the representative of Lebanon, in his clear
and well-documented
speech.

has also limited the use of water for the Zionist settlers
in the occupied West Bank. This in turn has led to the
killing off of Arab agriculture in that region, which
means that the Arabs are deprived of their daily bread
and butter. We are farmers, and the roots of this go very
deep. We cannot be uprooted from our lands.
150. Today Israel is diverting the waters of the Litani
from Lebanon to Israel for the same abhorrent ends.
The ambitions of Israel and the Zionists with respect to
the waters in the north of Palestine are the same as
those adopted by Balfour, the British Minister for Foreign Affairs, at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919. In
Paris Balfour also met Judge Brandeis, a member of the
United States Supreme Court, who was at the same
time the Chairman of the so-called Provisional Committee for General Zionist Affairs in the United States.
The great professor of international
law at Harvard
University, Felix Frankfurter, also participated in that
meeting. He was then an adviser to United States President Wilson at the Peace Conference. The three agreed
on the need for the “promised national homeland for
the Jews” and on the importance of that entity laying its
hands on the waters north of Palestine beyond the limits
of the joint French and British Mandate over the Territory.

148. We conclude from the Lebanese complaint that
Israel in its expansionist ambitions has, since the beginning of the occupation, been creating the appropriate conditions to swallow up the south. The cuttingoff of the occupied south from the rest of Lebanon, the
linking of its economy to the Israeli economy by turning
it into a market for Israeli products to the advantage of
Israel, the harnessing of public and private utilities to
serve Israel, the destruction of agriculture on which the
south lives-as well as the rest of Lebanon-all
these
acts are mere preparations to “Judaize” a part of the
Lebanese homeland and eliminate it economically, culturally and socially. The recruitment of a handful of
traitors and mercenaries such as Lahad is but an attempt to deceive by claiming that there are those who
support Israel in the south. Nevertheless, the Lebanese
people-of
which we are a part because we are both
Arab peoples-through
its awareness and attachment
to its land, values and country and using all means at its
disposal has aborted this Fascist method through its
heroic struggle against the aggression.

151. It is sufficient to cite British Foreign Policy 19191939, first series, volume 4, published by Woodward
and Butler, pages 1,276 to 1,278. Anyone who cares to
consult that volume will learn of the magnitude of the
plots to disrupt the geographical, political and economic unity of the region.
152. The theft of Lebanese water began specifically
with the Israeli invasion of southern Lebanon in 1978,
and has been continuing on a large scale since the
occupation of June 1982. Many Arab sources confirm
this, but I shall refer here only to United States sources.
An article published in the spring issue of Foreign Policy, by John K. Cooley, an American journalist who is
well known as an expert on Middle Eastern affairs,
describes the crucial importance to Israeli policy of
Arab waters in the following terms:
“Since
Phoenician
times, Lebanon’s
coastal
towns and plantations have relied on water from the
short, fast-flowing rivers that cut through the Lebanon mountains. The largest is the Awali, where in
September 1983 Israel redeployed invasion troops
from the Shuf Mountains south of Beirut and established a new defensive line, touching off in the process the fierce mountain war that drew the American
military into its first fire fights since Veitnam. Lebanon also contains the headwaters of the Orontes,
which rises in the upper Bekaa Valley and is so vital
to Syrian agriculture and industry.“*

149. If here we are concentrating on Israel’s ambitions in southern Lebanon it is because we know full
well what the Zionist practices and expansionist
thinking are: Israel is attempting to lay its hands on
Arab water; it runs after it to suck it as a leech sucks
human blood. The importance of Arab water in expansionist Israeli policy provides the main momentum for
annexing land. Whatever we put before the Council
concerning our experience of Israeli practices and plots
to steal Arab water would still leave much unsaid.
However, we wish to warn here, as we have done
before, of this attempt to threaten the Arabs and of the
results of the expansionist policy of Israel, a country of
imported foreigners. Israel has laid its hands on most of
the sources of the Jordan river and its tributaries in
Lebanon and in the occupied Syrian Golan Heights. It

Mr. Cooley goes on, mentioning
Litani River to life in Lebanon.
* Quoted in English by the speaker.

15

the importance

of the

least 3.5 billion cubic feet annually. This loss would
rule out effective irrigation of the southern Lebanon
panhandle and would ultimately turn much of the
region into a desert.“*

“But if Lebanon, or even only its central heartland,
including Beirut, is to survive as a State, and if its
citizens are to continue growing crops and using electricity, they must continue to develop and harness
the resources of the Litani.“*

Cooley underscores that

153. As for control by the Israeli occupation forces of
water for drinking and for the generation of electricity
for Beirut and for the towns and villages of the Lebanese coast, booley speaks of the Qir’awn Dam in the
Bekaa-which
permits storage of 10.2 billion cubic feet
of water all year round-and
of the Marqaba Tunnel
south of the dam, which carries the water 4 kilometres
to,the generating plant. He says that

“The hydraulic imperative, from the Israeli point of
view, is capturing either the Litani or a much greater
share of the Yarmuk.“*
156. I know that the representative of Israel is disturbed at my having cited these Western sources.
157. I would stress that the Yarmuk is an Arab river,
which irrigates Syrian and Jordanian lands. .That is
proof of what we have been saying, that Israeli ambitions towards Arab waters and lands are unlimited.

“Below the power station, a smafl dam channels the
used water westward-toward
the coast-where
it
waters coastal orchards. Litani water not used for
irrigation falls into a power plant 1,300 feet below in
the Awali River bed. Fortified Israeli positions near
a small diversion dam at Awali and another power
plant downstream at Joun give Israel a virtual stranglehold over the main water supplies for Beirut and
the coastal towns.“*

158. Israel’s acts and practices against the population
and the land in southern Lebanon include: the alteration of natural, social and economic factors in that
territory; the killing and assassination of civilians by the
dozen (the representative of Israel did not mention in
his statement the massacres which took place in Nabatiyah during Ashura); the repression of clergymen; the
trampling underfoot of all that is sacred; the defiance
of religious traditions;
the destruction of orchards.
I would mention that Israel has become extremely
experienced in uprooting trees from orchards. The
Israelis say that they have turned Palestine from a
desert into an orchard; Palestine was once an orchard
and has now become a desert, thanks to the insane
industrialization
by Israeli companies, which has destroyed agriculture in Palestine.

Cooley speaks of how, immediately
following the occupation of southern Lebanon, the Israelis plundered
maps of the Litani and plans for the dam and for the
technical installations.
154. He also speaks of other Israeli excesses involving the theft of the waters of the Hasbani and other
Lebanese waters. These acts are very similar to Israeli
acts involving the waters of the Golan. Cooley goes on:
“The Israelis were openly augmenting the flow of the
Hasbani across the frontier into Israel by laying surface pipes to catch the run-off and other water from
the mountains and nearby springs.

159. Other Israeli acts include closing down schools
and preventing examinations
from taking place, imposing curfews, controlling
harbours and imposing
high taxes and its shaky shekel on the inhabitants.

“Moreover, a watchful American military observer claims to have seen Israelis burying pipes deep in
a hillside near Maxj’Uyn after the Israeli incursion of
1978, indicating that the Israelis might be secretly
syphoning water underground from the Marj Plain in
southern Lebanon into Israel, . . . . Such a diversion would tap the extensive underground aquifer,
which is fed by seepage from both the Litani and
the Hasbani rivers and by underground streams from
the Mount Hermon region. The site where the pipes
and pumping equipment seem to have been secretly
buried is near a World War II airlield built by the
British and repaved and extended in fall 1983 by the
Israeli Defence Forces.“*

160. All those actions are in clear contravention of the
basic principles of international
law and are flagrant
violations of the 1949 Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949,’ and the provisions of the Additional
Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions,’
a Protocol
which, by the way, was not signed by Israel. Israel will
not sign that Protocol. According to Western mass
media, Israel is creating a new West Bank, a new Golan
Heights and a new Gaza Strip in southern Lebanon. By
cutting off communication
from and to the land that it
occupies in Lebanon, Israel is flagrantly violating an
inalienable principle of international
law and human
law, which is the right of man to go back to: his home,
the right of the individual to move freely m his own
land, in his own country-not
the right of the individual
to emigrate from the United States to occupy Arab
territories. I am talking here of the right of the Lebanese
to go back to his homeland, the right of the Palestinian
to go back to his land-not
the right of the American
Jew to go back and invest his money in Israel. I am

155. Cooley quotes Lebanese engineers concerning
the impact of these Israeli plans on the future of
Lebanon:
“Lebanese water engineers estimate that an Israeli
downstream diversion effort could cost the Litani at
* Quoted in ‘En&h

by the speaker.

16

community because it stems not only from international
law but also from human nature. Human nature requires man to defend himself, to defend his dignity, his
land and his national identity. We stand by and salute
the heroism of those who are defending themselves
against Israeli occupation.

talking here of the right of the Arab to stay in his
homeland, in his country, in his nation. That right is the
right of the original inhabitants, and not of those who
were imported from all parts of Europe. I am speaking
of the right of the original inhabitants to return to their
homes-not
the right of those imported from outside,
from the consumer society of the United States. The
United States is exporting Jews to our region as if they
were mere goods, just for purposes of its elections. It is
turning that person from being a citizen, who may be a
good or a bad citizen-that
is irrelevant-into
a colonizer. That is a crime against Judaism and the Jews.

164. We recall here-and I speak to those who have
known the tragedies of the Second World War-what
has been written, said and done to bestow dignity on
those who fell under Nazi weapons and bullets.
165. I should like to conclude by expressing my
deepest concern about the deterioration
of intemational peace and security in the Middle East as a result
of continued Israeli aggression and the policy of force
undertaken by the United States. The United Nations,
and more particularly the Security Council, are called
upon to put an end to this deterioration which threatens
international peace in the region and in the world. The
United States must live up to its commitments
under
the Charter. I note that the representative of the United
States does not seem concerned with the words “international peace and security”; he rebuffs the Council.
I insist that the representative of the United States
listen to what I am saying. His country is a permanent
member of the Council and he should be listening to
what we, a non-member of the Council, have to say.
The United States is responsible for what is happening
in the region and I address these words to him directly.
The United States must live up to its responsibility as a
permanent member of the Council and it must take back
from Israel its right as a super-Power to take its own
decisions. The United States, as a super-Power, should
reassert its right to take decisions; it should not relinquish that right to Israel, by virtue of Zionist pressures
which allow Israel to meddle with the political life of the
United States and to commit aggression against our
Arab nation wherever and whenever it pleases.

161. I wonder whether there is any difference between the Zionist practices in the Arab territories occupied from 1967 until today and the practices of nazism under which Europe suffered so much. Is the fourth
Geneva Convention, which was established on the basis of the experiences and suffering of Jews and others
in Europe, applicable only to Europe and to the United
States and not, as Israel claims, to the Arab occupied
territories? What then is the difference between Israeli
practices against non-Israeli citizens, non-Jewish citizens, and the practices of the Pretoria regime against
non-white citizens in South Africa and Namibia?
162. We call on the Council to rise to its responsibilities, because the subject before the Council now
is not concerned only with a violation of human rights,
it is concerned also with foreign aggression against a
sovereign, independent State. The Council has a responsibility to put an end to the Israeli occupation and
to implement resolution 509 (1982) which was adopted
unanimously
by the Council. What has been called
“Peace for Galilee” is merely a fig leaf. The truth is that
Israel, supported by the United States, is attempting to
spread its hegemony over the whole Arab region. The
annexation of Jerusalem and the Golan Heights, the
building of hundreds of settlements in the Palestinian
and Arab occupied territories, the moving of settlers to
those settlements and forcing Arabs to emigrate-all
that shows a never-ending arrogance, which is not
based on Israel’s own force, but on the force provided
by American support, a support which has become a
strategic alliance in all fields. Every time that alliance is
escalated and every time it becomes more aggressive,
we Arabs become stronger in our will to achieve strai
tegic balance in the region, to face international imperialism and Israel. The heroic struggle and opposition of
the people of Lebanon, who are suffering under the
Zionist occupation, shows the capability of the Arab
people to struggle against Zionist terrorism, which is
being fed by every means by Washington.

166. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Kuwait,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
167. Mr. ABULHASSAN
(Kuwait) [interpretation
from Arabic]: Although I have, on a previous occasion,
congratulated you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month, I wish to voice my
gratification at the wise and able manner in which you
have been conducting our business.
168. Israel has once again committed a heinous crime
in this long chapter of aggressive crimes, which has had
no end since the creation of Israel.

163.
Here we salute that struggle, about which one
can read in The New York Times and The Washington
Post, that struggle which was not recognized or even
mentioned by the representative of Israel in his famous
statement before the Council today, a statement which
was disgraceful and deceitful. We salute that struggle.
And we must recall here that the struggle against the
occupying colonizers is supported by the international

169. Israel invaded Lebanon at the beginning of June
1982 claiming to be protecting its settlements in the
north, despite the fact that those settlements had not
experienced such tranquillity
as they had during the
whole year preceding that act of aggression.
17

170. That feeble pretext, however, adduced to send
new military contingents along with naval and air combat troops to bomb the area and tarnish its skies and
waters, gave way to a new and even more lame pretext,
followed by a third and a fourth. These various pretexts
were advanced as Israel advanced into Lebanese territories.

than it would seem at first sight and it clearly reflects Israel’s tactics of deceit and treachery which
have been brought to light.
176. In his very important statement made here today, my eminent colleague, the representative of Lebanon, was kind enough to give us a clear, detailed
account of all the criminal acts committed by Israel in
occupied Lebanese territory. The matter was also the
subject of letters exchanged with the Secretary-General. These are all part of obsolete colonial practices,
the vestiges of which our modern-day world is trying to
cast off.

171. Israel has committed
unspeakable crimes and
brutal acts in Lebanon. Sufftce it to say that since that
savage aggression, the Council has adopted successive
resolutions concerning the situation created by the
Israeli invasion. There are 18 such resolutions, some
calling for a halt to hostilities and others calling for the
immediate, unconditional withdrawal of Israel from all
occupied Lebanese territories.

177. The practices of the occupation forces, however,
are not confined to closing roads. They encircle villages
and send policemen to villages. They arrest old people,
women and children. They damage crops. They launch
illicit raids and make all kinds of arrests, but it does not
stop there: they defile religious dignity in places of
worship. They close sanctuaries. They close ports to
prevent ships from discharging emergency foodstuffs
sent to help the plagued inhabitants of southern Lebanon. And obviously the question arises, what crime is
the Lebanese people guilty of? Under the banner of
protection, Israel viciously and brutally attacked Lebanon in pursuit of its grand designs. The Israeli practices in the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since 1967 are part and parcel of the
same policy.

172. When we review these criminal events, when we
look at our television screens and measure the brutal
nature of these acts, when we review all the feeble
attempts to justify these brutal acts against the Palestinian and Lebanese people, culminating in the Sabra
and Shatila massacres-an
affront to human dignitywe rightly wonder whether Israel invaded Lebanon in
order to provide itself with a safety net in the north or to
force the Palestinian people in Lebanon into a new
diaspora, or to safeguard Lebanese legitimacy, as was
claimed by Israel at the time. Why is Israel still in
Lebanon to this day, more than two years after the
initial Israeli invasion? More than two years have shed
light on this hoax of Israel to assure long-term territorial
ambitions in the area.

178. The Litani River is an old Israeli target, but
events in southern Lebanon underline the Israeli
expansionist ambitions and reveal that this target was at
the origin of the Israeli invasion of Lebanon two years
ago. The mass. media mentioned Israel’s attempt to
eliminate the border strip between Lebanon and Palestine. We hear that the Israelis have established certain engineering works to divert the Litani River towards Lake Tiberias. We have also learned that the
Israeli occupation forces are doing everything to force
as many inhabitants of southern Lebanon as possible
to leave. The mass media have mentioned an Israeli
attempt to create a new road network in order to enable
it to annex part of southern Lebanon and link it to
Israel.

173. What is happening in the southern part of occupied Lebanon is irrefutable proof that Israel certainly
does not intend to leave Lebanon. Quite the contrary, it
wants to entrench itself, to tighten the noose around
southern Lebanon, to transform that country, which is
cherished by Arabs in general, into a northern strip
which would be added to the West Bank and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967, and add another fait
accompli to its collection.
174. Israeli practices in southern Lebanon, as has
been stated by Lebanese officials, are no different in
their goals and scope from what is occurring in the Gaza
Strip, in the Syrian Golan Heights and on the West
Bank. These practices flagrantly violate international
law, primarily the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949,’ as well as the Charter of the United
Nations and the Israeli-Lebanese
General Armistice
Agreement of 23 March 1949.5

179. The people of Lebanon is a peace-loving people.
That is why it has so patiently borne its suffering. It has
been the target of aggression and inhuman practices by
the Israeli occupying forces. The continuation of these
acts of aggression, on the one hand, and Israel’s refusal
to withdraw from Lebanese territory, in spite of the
repeated resolutions of the Council, on the other hand,
have given rise to fierce resistance daily against Israel.

175. Israeli practices in southern Lebanon have nothing to do with the goals stated by the Israeli authorities when the invasion took place more than two years
ago. Otherwise, would it not have been logical for Israel
to withdraw from all these Lebanese territories when
it could no longer sustain its attempted justification
of that completely illegal invasion? The question that
emerges here today, however, is much more complex

180. It is ironic that Israel, which invaded Lebanon
two years ago in order, according to the Israelis, to
protect its northern territory, cannot now ensure the
protection of its own forces in the occupied territories.
They cannot protect themselves from the wrath of the
Lebanese people, and the security called for loud and
clear by Israel in order to justify its criminal and in18

human acts has turned out to be a mirage. In using
weapons supplied by the United States, Israel is the last
State that should speak of security. We should not be
surprised at this turn of events whereby Israel, as a
result of its reckless acts, is incapable of maintaining its
own security, the Israeli leaders having lost all control
because of the radicalization
of the Lebanese resistance.

other. The United States voted for resolution 509
(1982), which demanded that Israel withdraw all its
military forces forthwith and unconditionally
from
Lebanese territory. The responsibility,
however, lies
first and foremost with the international
community,
represented by the Council, and we request it today to
act promptly.
187. My brother, the representative of Lebanon, in
his very complete statement made a few moments ago,
described what we expect the Council to do-fully
meet
our rightful and legitimate demands. Kuwait supports
these demands as being fully in keeping with international instruments,
in particular previous relevant
resolutions adopted by the Council, especially resolution 509 (1982).

181. Israel’s behaviour is in flagrant violation of the
most basic human rights that are guaranteed in all international instruments both in times of war and in times of
peace.
182. So long as the United States is at its side, Israel
behaves as if the whole world did not matter. This
highlights the role the United States could play to bring
the situation in that part of the world back to normalcy.
The United States must make Israel understand-presuming that Israel would be willing to understand-that
the security of the Israeli forces in Lebanon depends
on their withdrawal beyond the border of southern
Lebanon, especially since the United States voted for
resolution 509 (1982), which demanded that Israel withdraw all its military forces forthwith and unconditionally to the internationally
recognized boundaries of
Lebanon.

188. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that in
view of the lateness of the hour certain representatives
scheduled to speak have been understanding and cooperative enough to agree that their statements should
be postponed until tomorrow, and I thank them on
behalf of the Council.
189. The representative
of Lebanon has asked to
speak in exercise of the right of reply and I now call
on him.

183. The international community has been following
with great attention certain long-standing attempts to
establish a linkage between the problem of the Middle
East and the American or Israeli elections. They clearly
seek to bring about successive periods of respite during
which Israel would enjoy impunity. We are aware that
the Israelis use this argument during election time
-especially
during this election-to
escalate its arbitrary rule and to continue with its territorial expansion in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and southern
Lebanon.

190. Mr. FAKHOURY
.(Lebanon)
[interpretation
from Arabic]: Thank you, Sir, for allowing me to exercise the right of reply at this late hour. I shall be brief.
191. In my statement before the Council .I set out
the substance of our complaint and I repeated twice that
the aim was not to engage in a sterile discussion or
exchanges of rhetoric. However, the representative of
Israel, the State that has committed aggression against
Lebanon and occupies one third of its territory, lectured us on the situation in Lebanon for three quarters
of his statement. The policy of hoodwinking intemational public opinion and diverting it from the real situation and our complaint against the Israeli practices in
the occupied territory cannot be hidden from anyone.

184. My country’s delegation believes that we should
not be silent about this fact, because the cause of international peace and justice cannot depend on any local
elections that may be held. We must tackle this international problem compromising
international
peace
and security without waiting for these elections, which
may drag out for a whole year. The international community, which unfortunately is beginning to consider
this linkage as fact, must not be misled by schemes
designed to allow Israel to carry out its ambitions sheltered from any pressure or intervention.

192. The last one who has a right to speak of Lebanon
and the situation there is the representative of Israel.
He did not mention in his statement or in what he
quoted from Radio Beirut that the President of Lebanon
placed responsibility
for what is happening and has
happened in Lebanon squarely on Israel’s shoulders.
Perhaps the representative may be a little more faithful
in the future in giving us information.

185. The situation in southern Lebanon is explosive,
If the international community does not take effective
steps to restore the situation, it might find itself faced
with anotherfair accompli imposed by Israel enjoying
full impunity.

193. Lebanon is the one which decides whether or not
soldiers are to be sent to the south.
194. Those who have listened to the representative of
Israel may well think that life under Israeli occupation
can be compared to life in paradise. No, they are occupied Lebanese territories, and members know full
well what occupation means and what life is like under
occupation. Therefore, let us not deceive ourselves

186. My delegation believes that the United States
has a special responsibility in this respect because of its
relationship with Israel, on the one hand, and the fact
that it is a permanent member of the Council, on the
19

with rhetoric and empty talk. This occupation must be
ended in accordance with relevant Council resolutions.
The inhuman practices must be stopped immediately.

attention to one ominous sentence in his statement in
which he said “the Lebanese people-of which we*‘that is, Syria--“are a part”. That, of course, is a
euphemistic way of stating the long-standing claim of
Syria that Lebanon is an integral part of Syria. We are
grateful to the representative of Syria for having at last
clarified this claim also to the Council It is a clear
indication of Syrian ambitions with regard to Lebanon,
and it also explains why the representative of Lebanon was compelled to make here the statements that
we heard from him today. I wish to assure the representative of Lebanon that we have the fullest understanding and sympathy for his situation.

195. I reject and denounce the way in which the representative of Israel has spoken about Lebanese officials. I reject the adjectives he used to describe them.
I will not stoop to that level and thus degrade the debate
in such a forum as the Council.
196. I reserve my right to reply at a later stageto other
statements made by the representative of Israel.
197. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom
French):
The representative of Israel has asked to be allowed to
speak, and I call on him.

The meeting

198. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I, too, shall be very brief in
my reply to the statement of the representative of Syria.
The brevity of my reply is dictated by a variety of
reasons and not only by the lateness of the hour.

rose at 7.25 p.m.

NOTES

I United Nations, Treary Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
2 Carnegie Epdowment for International Peace, The Hague Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York, Oxford
University Press, 1915).
3 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 249, No. 3511.
’ Ibid., vol. 1125. No. 17512.
s Ibid., vol. 45, No. 655.

199. I believe the monumental statement of the representative of Syria, the representative of the subjugators of Lebanon, fully speaks for itself and really
requires no reply. I merely wish to draw the Council’s

20

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMAMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATJONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans Ies librairies et les agences dkpositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprts de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Get&z.
IiAK

COMO

IIOXYYZiTh

CONSECUIR

A3AAHHH

OPrAHN

PUBLICACIONES

RAI[UZI

OIX~E.‘~HHEHHJdX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAllHA.

UNIDAS

L;ls publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en lib&as
y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes del mttndo. Cons&e
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ciinebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00400

90-61313-Febrwy

1993-2,050
