TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 24 JULY 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l489)

.,,.,....,,,..,.,......,......

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , , , . . , . , . ._. . . , . . . . . . , , , . , . . . , . . . .

1

Letter dated 15 July 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/933 1) . , . . . . . . , . . . .

1

SIPV.1489

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council(symbo1 S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York

AND EIGHTY-NINTH

on Thursday,

President: Mr. Ibrahima BOYE (Senegal).
PvesenE: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l489)
I.

Adoption of the agenda.

2. Letter dated 1.5 July 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/933 1).
Adoption of the agenda
712s agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 15 July 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9331)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from l+ench): In accordance with the decisions taken at previous meetings of the
Council, I invite the representatives of Portugal, the United
Republic of Tanzania, Somalia, Kenya and the United Arab
Republic to participate in the debate of the Council,
without the right to vote. In view of the limited space
available at the Council table, J propose to invite the
representative of Portugal, who is directly concerned, to
take a seat at the Council table, and to invite the
representatives of Tanzania, Somalia, Kenya and the United
Arab Republic to take the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber, on the understanding that
they wiI1 be invited to take a place at the Council table
when their turn comes to speak.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. B. deMiranda
(Portugal) took a place at the Council table, and Mr. M.
A. Foum (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. A. A. Farah
(Somalia), Mr. A. E. Osanya-Nyyneque, (Kenya) and Mr. A.
El-Brian (United Arab Republic) took the places reserved
for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT (translated porn French): I have just
received a letter [S/9355] signed by the representatives of
Liberia, Madagascar, Sierra Leone and Tunisia and also a
letter [S/9356] from the representative of Gabon requesting that they be invited to participate in the debate of the
Council on the item before it. With the consent of the
Council, and in accordance with the rules of procedure and

MEETING

24 July 1969, at 3 pm.

the customary practice, I shall invite the representatives of
Liberia, Madagascar, Sierra Leone, Tunisia and Gabon to
participate in the debate, without the right to vote, and to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that when one of these
representatives wishes to speak he will be invited to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. L. H. Diggs
(Liberia), Mr. E. Rabetaj%a (Madagascar), Mr. F. B. Savage
(Sierra Leone), Mr. M. Mestiri (Tunisia) and Mr. J. Davin
(Gabon) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): Before
calling on the first speaker on the list, I should like to draw
the attention of the members of the Council to the fact
that the representative of Nigeria, in a letter dated 24 July,
has asked that Nigeria be added to the list of co-signers of
the letter of 18 July 1969 [see S/9340 and Add-l-31.
4. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Gabon. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
I give him the floor.
5. Mr. DAVIN
(Gabon) (translated from French):
Mr. President, I wish to thank you and the members of the
Council for kindly allowing me to present the views of the
Gabonese delegation on the acts of aggression committed
by Portugal against the friendly and fraternal State of
Zambia.
6. First, however, on behalf of my Government, I should
like to associate myself with the stirring and unanimous
tribute which has been paid here to the genius of the
American people on the magnificent feat it has just
accomplished with Apollo 11. I hail with enthusiasm the
glorious return of the three gallant astronauts who, according to the latest press reports, landed safe and sound a little
over two hours ago.
7. The Security Council is meeting at the request of
Zambia, follbwing attacks launched against its territory by
the Portuguese armed forces illegally stationed in Mozambique and Angola. This request for a meeting of the Council
was supported by the African States, acting on behalf of
the Organization of African Unity, which thereby wished to
demonstrate Africa’s unwavering solidarity in the face of
Portugal’s policy of aggression and its expansionist aims in
Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau), where its OCCUpation troops have illegally stationed themselves.
8. 1 say “illegally” deliberately, since neither Angola nor
Mozambique ndr Guinea (Bissau) has recognized Portugal’s

right to occupy its territory, let alone to use it asa base for
aggression against the sovereign and independent States of
Africa. In his statements, the representative of the Lisbon
Government has spoken of Portuguese frontiers and territories. This is a ridiculous assertion which should be
rejected categorically. As everyone knows, Portugal is a
European country, and does not and cannot have common
frontiers with an African country. Portugal is located in the
Iberian Peninsula, which it shares with Spain. It is therefore
Spain with which Portugal has a common frontier and
certainly not Zambia, which is in Africa. Zambia has
common frontiers with Angola and Mozambique, which are
in no way Portuguese provinces like Estremadura and the
Algarve. The geographical inaccuracies deliberately put out
by the representative of Portugal are a manoeuvre designed
to sow confusion in our minds and to give credibility to the
absur,d hypothesis of the alleged legitimacy of the Portuguese presence on African soil. Nobody here will have been
taken in by this crude and futile manoeuvre.

15. Mr. RABETAFIKA (Madagascar) (translated fytm
French): My first words shall be to expressmy thanks to
you, Mr. President, and through you to the eminent
members of the Security Council for having permitted my
delegation to take part in your debate acting on tile
authority delegated by the Heads of State of the Organiza.
tion of African Unity to my country’s Minister for Fore@
Affairs, whom I represent here. We share with other States
a mandate which was conferred upon us in 1963 by the
African Heads of State and we intend to carry it out
conscientiously, bearing constantly in mind the aims of our
common Organization. That mandate is the expression of
our deep-rooted solidarity;of our unity of purpose in the
struggle against colonialism and its manifestations, and of
our unanimity in seeing certain princi$es asthe conditions
for trusting and mutually beneficial relations between
peoples and nations.
16. Before taking up the item on the Council’s agenda,
and speaking now on behalf of my own delegation, 1 should
like, with your permission, Mr. President, to express our
warm congratulations to the United States delegation on
the unique exploit which has just been achieved, The
honour reflects mainly upon the United States people, but
we share with that people the pride which can only arise
from the certainty that there are now no limits to human
genius but those which it imposes on itself. Thisprogramme
is the culmination of efforts in which traditions, ways(of
thinking and knowledge, as well as substantial material
resources, have been drawn upon so that all mankind might
benefit. May it always be thus for the progress of this
world, a necessarycondition of man’s freedom!

9. The distinguished representative of Zambia has drawn
attention here in the Council to the numerous acts of
aggressioncommitted by the Portuguese troops against the
integrity of Zambian territory. The list of such attacks and
the toll they have taken is a very long one. More than 60
aggressive acts are on record. This state of affairs clearly
shows that, despite the repeated appeals to common sense
and reason, and despite the many condemnations to which
Portugal has been and continues to be subject because of its
aggressive policy, the Lisbon Government pays scant
attention to international norms and morality, or to the
right of the peoples of Africa to live in peace in their own
countries.

17. At its 1486th meeting on 18 July 1969, the Council
heard a detailed statement of Zambia’s complaint and we
have no intention at this stage of going over once againa111
the arguments and counter-arguments advancedin support
of the casespresented. We must, however, expressour keen
anxiety, and, indeed, our condemnation in the face of
deliberate repetition of acts which, in our view and
according to international law and practice, are beyond all
doubt acts which run counter to the peaceful intentions
professed by those who enjoy the status of Members of this
Organization.

10. Not only does Portugal claim the right to occupy
Mozambique, Angola and Guinea (Bissau) against the will
of the population of those Territories, but the Libson
Government no longer even hesitates to attack sovereign
and independent African States openly and deliberately.
Il. Today, following many other countries, it isZambia
which is the target of Portuguese commandos and bombers,
who have caused many innocent victims and considerable
material damage in that country. The armed attacks against
Zambia clearly demonstrate Portugal’s aggressive policy,
since they have been going on for many years now despite
the efforts made by Zambia to put an end to them by
peaceful means.

18. There have been bombings of villages causing the
death of innocent victims; there have been raids into
foreign territory by military units; there have been violations of air space; regular military formations have occupied
Zambian territory and taken up positions there, althou@
only temporarily. All these acts, which have been prove’d
and admitted in certain cases, represent so many acts elf
defiance of the principles contained in Article 2, psr:k
graph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations. The
circumstances do not matter if the facts are established,
std
the Council’s view of the subject can only be based,on the
results of an impartial analysis of the incidents and the
reasonsand motivations behind them.

12. It is high time that the Lisbon Government understood, once and for all, that its insane policy of colonizing
Africa by force can lead nowhere. Sooner or later, the
peoples .of Mozambique, Guinea (Bissau) and Angola will
manage to secure the triumph of their legitimate claim to a
free and independent existence.
13. The Council should therefore display firmness toward
Portugal, and invite it to cease its aggression immediately
and to grant Zambia due compensation for the damage
causedby the attacks of the Portuguese forces.

19. In our view, it would be normal for the international
community to feel a concern commensurate with its sense
of responsibility over a situation where the use of force
seeks to prevail over recognition of, and respect for, tl~
sovereignty of a Member State of this Organization, in this

14. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Madagascar. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and I give
him the floor.
2

case Zambia. Small countries such as those belonging to the
Organization of African Unity expect that, in relations
between nations, through the commitment and good faith
of the members of our Organization, principles should
retain their full validity and should at no time become
subject either to unilateral interpretation or to partisan or
partial application. It is at this price and at this price only,
that we can be sure of being able to safeguard our
independence and freedom.

parties concerned. The representative of Zambia has told us
that these negotiations, or at least their outcome, have not
satisfied his Government’s demands and claims which are
aimed at obtaining recognition of its rights and adequate
guarantees against any repetition .of such acts. Zambia
considers that the negotiations, which have been conducted
in various placqs and at various levels, have not succeeded in
settling its dispute with Portugal, and the Charter offers it
the opportunity of submitting the dispute to the Security
Council,

20. Portugal may claim that the acts committed were
dictated by considerations essential to the maintenance and
defence of the internal or external security of Angola and
Mozambique. In what way can Zambia, which has no
territorial claim to assert arid whose energies are devoted to
other than military ends; threaten the external security of
those two Territories? To claim that it could would be
tantamount to reverting to the practices of the distant and
not so distant past when any problems arising in relations
between nations and peoples had to be settled by systematic or occasional recourse to threats, force and violence.
This we categorically condemn, since it is clear that such
practices cannot offer us the slightest guarantee of stability,
peace or security.

24. Negotiations, the virtues of which are recognized in
the Charter and in the practice of this Organization, are
binding to the extent that the parties concerned decide to
make them so, and provided that the situation arising from
a dispute lends itself to negotiations conducted in good
faith. This means that, at any time and for reasons inherknt
in the defence of its own interests and respect for its own
obligations; either party may choose to proceed in whatever
way seemsmost appropriate to it.
25. It is obvious, moreover, that the continuation and
deterioration of the situation now being considered by the
Council, involving the repetition of acts of aggression
against an independent and sovereign State, may constitute
a threat to the maintenance of international peace and
security in that part of the world. It is, accordingly, up to
the Security Council, which has been informed of the facts
and their development, to recommend the procedures,
measures and methods laid down in the Charter. Respect
for the principles of our Charter demands that we should
denounce aggressive acts such as those committed by
Portugal. International morality demands that Zambia’s
legitimate claims should be satisfied and, in doing this, we
shall not merely be stating the law, we shall also be
performing an act of justice.

21. As for the internal security of Angola and Mozambique, can one in all conscience hold Zambia personally
responsible for it? Liberation movements exist in the
Portuguese colonies, and their existence is not the result of
outside influences. They are inspired from within and are,
as we know from experience, the living expression of a
people’s aspirations, aspirations which may often be ignored but which will triumph in the end, if not through the
solidarity and sympathy which the world shows them, at
least by virtue of their own merits. If insecurity prevails in
the Territories of Angola and Mozambique, Portugal is
primarily responsible, since, despite the recognized laws of
peoples and nations, Portugal refuses to grant the peoples
of those Territories the right to self-determination, That
right, as we understand it, is defined in General Assembly
resolutiori 1514 (XV) and confirmed in resolution 183
(1963) adopted by the Security Council on 11 December
1963.

26. We wish to appeal once again to the great Powers and
to remind them, if this is necessary, that the Security
Council, in its resolutions 180 (1963) of 3 1 July 1963 and
218 (1965) of 23 November 1965, requested: “that all
States should refrain forthwith from offering the Portuguese Government any assistance which would enable it to
continue its repression of the peoples of the Territories
under its administration” -and-“to take all the necessary
measures to prevent the sale and supply of arms and
military equipment to the Portuguese Government for this
purpose, including the sale and shipment of equipment and
materials for the manufacture and maintenance of arms and
ammunition to be used in the Territories under Portuguese
administration”.
A strict application of this recommendation, whose effects over six years might have completely
chapged the nature of the problem, would have had the
advantage of preventing those reprehensible acts and of
making a decisive contribution to the liberation of our
brothers in Angola and Mozambique.

22. It pertains to man to be able to choose his fate freely
and in accordance with what he believes to be his interests.
Similarly, it pertains to a people and to a nation to
determine its own destiny according to methods and
objectives which will safeguard its personality and assureit
that its aspirations have not been in vain. It is unwise to
impose on a people criteria which are basically alien to it
whatever the intrinsic value oflthose criteria elsewhere.It is
also unwise to direct the mind of a people towards forms
which do not correspond to its real wishesin the definition
and construction of its political future. As long asPortugal
refuses to admit that it is urgent and necessaryto give its
concept of self-determination the meaning accepted by the
international community, the liberation movements will
continue to exist despite the repressive actions which
endanger security and peace in that part of the world.

27. The great Powers agree with us that recognition of the
right to self-determination is essential in order that the
relations between peoples and nations may finally be rid of
this obsolete feature of a bygone age and the traces of an
outdated philosophy. They should agree, on the basis of
conviction and tradition, that it is the duty of us alI and
that it is their responsibility, in particular, to ensure that

23. A dispute has arisen between Zambia and Portugal, as
a result of acts which have been described as acts of
aggression. Negotiations have taken place between the
3

the exercise of this right is not hindered by considerations
incompatible with the professions of faith we have all made
and which we have defended in this Organization.

Zambian territory and the killing, maiming and &happing
of Zambian nationals in what can only be described a
deliberate attempts by Portugal to create an atmosphere. for
the armed invasion of the territory of a Member of the
United Nations and the commencement of sophisticated
warfare on the African continent by foreign Portuguese
troops, and the widening of a conflict that will involve
more and more African countries.

28. We turn to the Security Council since, for us, its
authority is itself the guarantee of the principles upon
which our sovereignty, our independence, and our freedom
rest. We have, of course, the firm intention of defending
them and the moral force to do so, and indifference and
inaction should therefore not drive us to resort to violence,
since the main responsibility for such violence would lie not
with the desperate, but with those who have driven them,
possibly unconsciously, to desperation.

36. It is the opinion of my delegation that this sad state of
affairs has been brought about by the refusal of Portugal to
abide by the decisions of the United Nations, and by ol.her
members of this Organization who have openly aided and
abetted the Portuguese regime and who engage in interns
tional wheeling and dealing with that fascist regime.

29. On the decisions which the Council takes and on the
measures it recommends will depend our estimate of the
importance which the specific case you are considering
-and hence all questions relating to the exercise of
self-determination and to the independence of peoples and
respect for their sovereignty-can assume in the eyes of
world public opinion.

37. The decision of the African countries to show their
solidarity against Portuguese imperialism is an indication
not only that are we allied in fact but that the collapseof
the Lisbon regime is imminent because of its illegitimacy.
No regime in the world built on such specious, illogical and
shaky claims can survive.

30. Formal commitments have been undertaken under the
United Nations Charter and they have been confirmed
many times, in the General Assembly and in this Council; it
is hardly fitting that the helplessness of the weak should be
compounded by the frustration of those who rightly believe
that history and right are on their side.

38. When the Portuguese attempted to settle in Moza.mbique, the African population resisted; and if the representative of Portugal does not know about the battles of the
Zulu wars of 1893 and 1896 under Chief Gungunhana and
the revolt of the Macua tribes, I am not the one to
enlighten him. But since we did not come here to recite
history, suffice it to say that no claim that Portugalmakes
in Africa remains valid today or has any legal base,

31. The PRESIDENT (translatedfiom French): I have just
received a letter /S/9357/ from the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo asking to be invited to
participate in the debate of the Council on the question
before it. In conformity with the provisional rules of
procedure and the practice of the Council, and if I hear no
objections, I propose to invite the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote.

39. My delegation is aware that certain alliances, the
product of long-past fears, have been responsible for CIUI
present difficulties with the fascist regime of Portugal; but
we are also convinced that our friends here, whether they
support us or not, cannot but know that Portuguese
chicanery or legal gymnastics with the Portuguese Constitu
tion will not bring to a halt the onward march of the
African people to self-determination and a place in their
own sun. I should like to remind the representative of
Portugal that there was once an integral part of Port@
called Goa.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. K. N’za
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council chamber.
32. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The next
speaker is the representative of Liberia. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and I give him the floor.

40. We are embarrassed by the fact that an otherwise
impoverished European State seeks to maintain its status
quo by clinging to another part of our continent, claiming
that it is a part of Europe; we are embarrassed that a
substantial number of Member States, whilst proclaim@
their adherence to the United Nations Charter, are me&en
of an alliance that has nothing to do with. the furtherance
of the highest aims and aspirations of the African people
and their continent, and at the same time give support to
that tottering regime. We are embarrassed at the fact that
the Union of South Africa, a Member of the United
Nations, gave Portugal $145 million in 1968, and has, thk
year alone, already advanced to that country $120 milliea
to shore up an anachronistic regime that negates all the
aspirations and hopes of mankind. We are embarrassed at
the fading and frayed glory of the Portuguese empire.

33. Mr. DIGGS (Liberia): Mr. President and eminent
members of the Security Council, my delegation would like
to take this occasion to thank you for acceding to our
request that we be allowed to join the debate on this very
important item.
34. Permit me to join other delegations and to extend the
sincere congratulations of my delegation to the representative of the United States on the successful completion of
the epic Apollo 1 I moon flight. It is hoped that now that
man has conquered space trave1 and proved that mankind is
able to achieve the impossible, we will now apply some
time, effort and money to the solution of our pressing
earthly problems.

41. We do not desire to humiliate any country. Thereare
many places in Liberia bearing Portuguese names; we do
not wish to deny the Portuguese their well-deserved niche

35. The matter before us concerns the repeated air and
ground attacks by foreign Portuguese armed forces on

4

in the history-making process. But now the pendulum
seems to have gone full circle, and Portuguese terrorism m
Africa has assumed new facets which the people of Africa,
from Guinea (B&au) in West Africa to Mozambique in East
Africa, have experienced with an ever-increasing brutality
and disrespect for the fundamental human rights of the
African population of those Portuguese colonies.

him to take a place at the Council table and I give him the
floor.
48. Mr. MESTIRI (Tunisia) (translatedfromFrench): The
Tunisian delegation is very grateful to the Security Council
and to you, Mr. President, for giving it the opportunity to
express its views on a problem which is of the greatest
importance to the African continent asa whole.

42. The countries of Africa are united and are resolved to
use aH efforts to stop the uncivilized and inhumane policy
of Portugal backed by the weapons of NATO and the gold
of South Africa.

49. I should also like to associatemyself with those who
have congratulated the United States delegation on the
extraordinary feat achieved by the United States scientists,
technicians and astronauts, who have succeeded in an
enterprise which will for ever leave its mark on the history
of mankind.

43. The representative of Liberia, Mr. Padmore, when
addressing the Council on 1.5 March 1961, nearly eight
years ago, concerning this same problem, stated:

50. As our joint letter [S/9340 and Add.l-31 indicates,
Tunisia is one of the 35 countries to which the Organization of African Unity has entrusted the task of following
the question of the Portuguese colonies in this Council. The
aspect of this question which you are considering today is
Of outstanding importance since it showshow, and to what
extent, the colonial war which Portugal is waging against
the African peoples constitutes a direct threat to international peace and security. Now the Council is once again
confronted with the problem of colonial wars spreading to
the territories of neighbouring independent States. The
Council has, unfortunately, already had long experience of
this kind of problem, since it is inevitable that the powerful
armies which wagecolonial wars-warswhich, by definition
are doomed to failure-should try to overcome the frustrations inherent in such wars by diversionary operations
against neighbouring independent States. At times they
claim some alleged right of pursuit, and at others the right
of legitimate self-defence,as though the word “legitimate”
could be used by a colonial regime.

“We are concerned here with no transient problem
which the mere passage of time will palliate. You may
seek to avoid the issue today, but the problem will come
to haunt you tomorrow and for a series of tomorrows, in
an even more acute and aggravated form, until eventually
YOU are driven to take your stand on one side or the
Other.” /946th meeting,para. 161.1
44. There is no doubt that the Republic of Zambia has
been the victim of foreign Portuguese aggression, and the
victim of that aggression has come before this Council to
seek redress. The representative of Zambia, in his factual
and detailed statement at the 1486th meeting on 18 July
1969, gave us a blood-curdling account of foreign Portuguese aggression against Zambia. It is also a well-known fact
that Portuguese aggression is not limited in its scope. This
atavistic attitude manifests itself from the harassment of
innocent African passengers, including Liberians, at the
airport in Lisbon to the atrocities so well documented by
the representative of Zambia.

51. Today, more than ever, it is clear that a colonial
regime can in no case claim any legitimacy whatever, let
alone legality. Since the adoption of resolution 1514 QCV)
on the granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples, the General Assembly has on many occasions
proclaimed the inalienable right of the peoples under
Portuguese domination to self-determination, to freedom
and to independence. It has recognized the legitimacy of
the struggle which the national liberation movements are
waging against the colonial Powers. On several occasions
also, and most recently in its resolution 2395 (XXIII) of 29
November 1968, the General Assembly has expressed its
grave concern over the Portuguese Government’s constant
threats against and violations of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the African States bordering on the
Territories under its domination.

45. The Foreign Minister of Liberia, Mr. Grimes, speaking
before this Council on 22 July 1963, in relation to this
question, said:
“The Portuguese Government is now faced with a
historic choice to continue to rely on the use of force,
with the inevitable miseries, economic losses and expanded military action that this would certainly entail; or
to respond to world opinion, to the request of the United
Nations to take immediate measures to reassure the
population, ensure the return of the refugees, and to
build a new relationship with the peoples of the Territories, a relationship based on self-determination and
independence. Much time has been lost in a critical
situation, with heavy casualties and bitterness. The
independent African States are not prepared to wait
much longer.” [104Oth meeting,para. 8O.j

52. This means that the question now before the Council
oniy confirms what the United Nations has always stated,
namely, that the deterioration of the situation in the
Territories under Portugal’s domination is a serious threat
to international peace and security.

46. In his statement made at the 1486th meeting, the
representative of Portugal refused the offer of sympathy
made in good faith by the representative of Zambia. He
would have done well to accept it, because in the not too
distant future he will need all the sympathy he can get.

53. The casewe are considering today is only the latest in
a long series of incidents of varying gravity which the
representative of Zambia described to US in his first
statement before the Council. That statement was charac-

47. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Tunisia. 1 invite
5

colonial struggle. They are reproached even more however,
for being independent, thereby giving the subject peoples ia
bad example of freedom, which is always contagious, In
this kind of situation, we should also ask ourselves how fair
the Government of the colonial Power controls its armies
which are constantly frustrated by an incomprehensible
failure against an enemy they consider weak, the concept ol
freedom and of the invincible moral force attached to
freedom being so alien to them.

terized by dignity and moderation, the moderation of those
who believe in the justice of their cause and the inevitabiIity of victory, Although subject to constant harassment
both from the east and the west, Zambia has never
abandoned its attitude of moderation, an attitude which,
however, does not preclude a firm resolve to put an end to
these flagrant and repeated violations.
54. The representative of Portugal has chosen to regard
this moderation and the Zambian Government’s desire to
settle these incidents amicably, as far as is possible, as a
kind of weakness and passive acceptance of Portuguese
colonial activities on its borders. It is clear, however, that
after having exhausted all other means, the Zambian
Government’s patience has reached its limit and it has no
choice but to have recourse to the Council to try to bring
Portugal to its senses.

57. The statement of the Portuguese representative also
contains some other curious features: thus, he speaks quite
calmly of Portuguese frontiers in Africa before a United,
Nations organ which, as he knows very well, has on several
occasions condemned Portugal’s presence in Guinea (Es.
sau), Angola and Mozambique, a presence based solely on
armed force. I shall not dwell on this attitude, which is
unfortunately not new and which justifies the accusation of
arrogance made against Portugal, but I must also say that it
is extremely disappointing to those who, like ourselves,had
thought that in the recent changes which have occurred in
the Portuguese Government they perceived a source of
hope, those who, like ourselves, had asked Portugal at the
twenty-third session of the General Assembly to make the
necessary effort to rejoin at last the community of just
nations, to reform and modernize itself, and to identify
itself with the world’s present course.

55. By emphasizing the bilateral discussions in what he
thought wasa clever way, the representative of Portugal has
only succeededin demonstrating Zambia’s goodwill, on the
one hand, and, on the other, he has demonstrated the
impossibility of fruitful negotiations with a State which has
deliberately flouted the resolutions adopted by the international community by an overwhelming majority. He even
goes so far as to attempt to draw the most astounding
conclusions from Zambia’s co-operative attitude. Thus, he
says, the fact that the Zambian Government agreed to talks
meant that it “was satisfied with the honesty and reasonableness of the Portuguese Government and its desire to
negotiate in good faith” [S/PV.1486, para. 761. It is
difficult to understand how the distinguished representative
of Portugal arrived at such conclusions, since it is obvious
that if the Zambian Government requested this meeting of
the Council, it did so becauseit is entirely convinced to the
contrary. In this the Zambian Government is not alone, and
we may even say that no Government in the world
considers Portugal’s colonial policy reasonable, not even
those countries inclined to be very indulgent towards the
Lisbon Government.

58. There is another aspect which cannot have escapedthe
attention of representatives. The representative of Portugal
has informed us that in just a few weeks over 100 acts of
sabotage have been committed by the liberation forces
against the occupation troops. He has even added that some
of them have been extremely serious. Yet the PortugueSe
Government has always maintained that resistance in the
Territories under its domination was insignificant. Here, at
last, is an admission that will enable those countries which
still hope to entertain doubts on this subject to become
convinced that Portuguese colonialism in Africa has already
entered its final stage and that the most important thing
today is to awaken Portugal to this reality and to remind it
of its responsibilities as a Member of this Organization.

56. The representative of Zambia has read out to us an
impressive list of incidents provoked by Portuguese military
personnel in Zambian territory. He has given us very
specific data regarding the places and dates of these
incidents. He has cited the names of personswho have been
kidnapped, killed or wounded. The representative of
Portugal, for his part, has confined himself to denying these
accusations in general terms without refuting the specific
points mentioned. Nevertheless, he has recognized in
passing that in certain casesthe colonial authorities have
recognized their responsibilities and have even agreed to
pay reparations to Zambia and to apologize. And to think
that he, who throughout his statement reproached Zadh
for having recourse to the Council, is surprised that Zambia
has waited so long to denounce these aggressiveactsbefore
you. In fact, this contradiction hardly conceals the
embarrassment of the Portuguese representative, who can
neither refute the facts nor deny the goodwill shown by
Zambia, a goodwill which runs headlong into the wall of
obstinacy of the occupation troops. To explain the failure
of their enterprise, those troops can only look for scapegoats in the neighbouring independent countries which are
being publicly reproached for the aid they give the anti-

59. Such a reminder could only be beneficial at the very
moment when Portuguese colonialism is in its death throes
and when, in the face of approaching panic, the expeditionary corps is likely to try to carry the war to other
African countries, thereby adding a new dimension to the
already existing threat to international peace and security.
60. The danger is becoming increasingly apparent: what is
today only a threat to international peace and security may
become a reality tomorrow, enveloping the southern part of
the continent in the flames of a horrible racial war. There is
a great temptation among the frustrated colonial armies to
resort to such extremes. That is why it is important that the
Security Council should take the necessarymeasuresnow
to prevent such developments,
61. There can, of course, be no true peace as long as
Portugal continues to subjugate the African peoples of the
region. Others have said this here in other words.When the
representative of France stated: “That situation cannot be
improved in any truly lasting manner until the time when
6

-

all the peoples of that region are in a position to exercise
their right to self-determination” [S/PV.l488, paru. 951, he
was saying what we are saying. It would be ideal if the
Security Council could cut off the evil at the root and rid
southern Africa of the colonialism and racism which, in the
middle of the twentieth century, the European minoritiessupported, it is true, by a formidable military and industrial
complex-cause to prevail in that area.

68. A few years back, the Council was seized of a
complaint by Senegal of attacks from Portuguese soldiers
stationed in Bissau-so-called Portuguese Guinea. Similar
raids wereorganized and carried out by Portugal against the
Republic of Guinea and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Since then, the young Republic of Zambia seemsto
have become the target of Portugal’s atrocities,
69. What has Zambia done to deservesuch rabid hostility
from its aggressor? its gee-political position in Africa
makes it imperative for Zambia to provide shelter and
assistance to Africans struggling for self-determination as
well as human respect. In so doing that country is merely
implementing the various resolutions adopted by over=
whelming majorities in the General Assembly.

62. We have heard some delegations advocate that the two
parties should resume what have been termed here bilateral
negotiations, although it is evident that the attempts
Zambia has made in this respect have failed. To demand a
return to this procedure would be tantamount to punishing
the Zambian Government for the goodwill it has shown. We
think it is the duty of the Security Council to condemn this
latest act of aggression committed by Portugal against the
village of Lote, as well as all the previous violations, and to
demand in the firmest possible terms that Portugal should
refrain from committing any further violations against the
territorial integrity of Zambia and other territories bordering on the Portuguese colonies, and to do so immediately.

70. We have seen a demonstration on the part of that
country of its readinessto be on good terms with Portugal
in spite of the latter’s reluctance to observe and comply
with decisions of this world body. Zambia has again and
again indicated its willingness to hold bilateral talks on a
number of problem situations with the Portuguese, arch
enemies as they are of African liberation. But, notwithstanding its exemplary demonstration of restraint and
goodwill, Zambia has had causeto bring this matter before
the Security Council.

63. In so doing, the Security Council will be doing justice
to Zambia and a service to the Portuguese people, who
cannot and should not support colonial wars which are all
the more futile in that they are lost before they have begun,

7 1. Why was this necessary? It wasnecessarybecause of
the lack of good faith on the part of the Po.rtuguese
authorities. In spite of the joint declaration resultmg from
one of those meetings held between Zambia and the
Portuguese delegation, which read in part: “The Portuguese
delegation formally accepted the incidents as unfortunate
and promised to recommend to its Government, in face of
this concrete evidence and in accordance with the agreement reached in New York, that it apologize and pay to the
Zambian Government a fair and reasonable compensation
for tile damage” [see the 1486th meeting, para. 1111, we
have learned that several other similar incidents of aggression against Zambia have taken place. It is only natural for
Zambia to conclude that bilateral negotiations and other
means for the pacific settlement of disputes detailed in
Article 33 of the United Nations Charter are a sheer waste
of time when dealing with a determined and resolute enemy
of Africa such asPortugal.

64, The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Sierra Leone. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and I give
him the floor.
65. Mr. SAVAGE (Sierra Leone): Mr, President, permit
me to convey to you and to the members of the Security
Council the profound gratitude of my Government and
myself for inviting me and my delegation, at our request,
submitted conjointly with Liberia, Madagascar and Tunisia
/S/935.5/, to participate in the current meetings of the
Security Council, convened to consider the complaint of
the Republic of Zambia regarding the recent Portuguese
violation of the fonner’s territorial integrity.
66. The representative of the Republic of Zambia has
drawn attention to the numerous instances of aggressionhis
country has suffered at the hands of Portugal. Starting from
1966, no less than 66 casesof Portuguese military and air
incursions into Zambian territory and harassment of its
people have taken place, often ‘resulting in the loss of
human lives.

72. The representative of Portugal has told the Council, in
passing, of unspecified instances of Zambian aggression on
Portuguese territory. If there is any foundation to his
statement, I am certain the Council would like to hear more
of it* otherwise, such a statement should be automatically
dismised for what it is worth. Had there been an iota of
truth in their allegations, the Portuguese authorities in
Lisbon would certainly long before now have drawn world
attention to them.

67. After listening to the exhaustive details provided by
the representative of Zambia in his address to the Council
on 18 July [1486th meeting] my delegation does not
consider it necessary to waste the time of the Council by
recounting those incidents, Attacks of this type by Portugal
against the African States bordering its Territories is not
new. It is a common facet of its disposition, containing
evidence of premeditation, and can be explained as a
deliberate and systematic policy to try to bring to their
knees all States which share common frontiers With
Portuguese Territories and from which there is a likelihood
of freedom fighters receiving assistance.

73. My delegation firmly adheres to the Charter of the
United Nations and lays emphasis on General Assembly
resolution 15 14 (XV); it is doubly convinced that as10% as
part of the continent of Africa remains enslaved, the rest
stands a risk of losing its freedom. Over and above this, the
continued aggressiveactions of Portugal against Zambia, in
defiance of the collective will of Member States and in spite
of the numerous resolutions passed both in the General
7

Assembly and in this important body, constitute a serious
threat to world peace and stability. In the circumstances,
therefore, my delegation supports the complaint brought
forward by the representative of Zambia against the
Portuguese aggressorsand requests the Council to take
appropriate measures to see that just compensation is made
to that young nation for the damages done to it.

actions relating to it. In the particular case before us,
howeve$, it is clear that we sense the shadow of situations
going far beyond the aformentioned complaint. I refer, of
course, to the general situation in the area, which is the
most critical situation in the entire African continent and
which is characterized by the struggle being waged by the
peoples of Angola and Mozambique to acquire the full
exercise of their right to self-determination; to the situation
in Southern Rhodesia, where the Zimbabwe people groan in
oppression; to the Territory of Namibia, which is awaiting
the hour when it can become the master of its own destiny,
and to the policy of apartheid applied by the Government
of South Africa, which is oppressing millions of human
beings.

74. My delegation would be ‘remiss if it concluded this
intervention without congratulating the Government and
people of the United States for their extraordinary achievement in sending the first human beings to the moon and
bringing them safely back to earth. Such an achievement is
an indication of man’s prowess and accomplishments when
he gears himself seriously to attaining a goal. We trust that
the knowledge gained from the vast research programmes
entailed will be used for the benefit of mankind.

81. Personally, I cannot put this general situation from my
mind. Nevertheless, I shall try to confine myself strictly to
the subject. I must point out, however, that incidents which
are serious in themselves become much more serious when
they occur in an area where peace and security are so
precarious. Having heard the parties concerned, and in
particular the statements made at the 1486th meeting, we
would have preferred to have these parties seek a satisfactory solution through use of the means provided for this
purpose under the Charter. Nevertheless, even if these
means had been used and the parties, that is to say, Zambia
and Portugal, had reached an agreement they considered
mutually acceptable, the fact would still remain that one or
more incidents have occurred, that these incidents have a
tendency to be repeated, and that each repetition, however
slight it may seem, introduces a further disturbing element
to add to those which constantly endanger peace and
security in southern Africa where, I repeat, peace and
security are indeed precarious.

75. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): Mr. President, before speaking on the item on the
Council’s agenda, I should like to associate myself with the
words of congratulations which you extended, on behalf of
us all, to the delegation of the United States of America
and, through it, to the people and Government of that
country, on the successof the voyage of Apollo 11 to the
moon. We whole-heartedly endorse these congratulations.
The complete cycle of the journey to the moon and the
successful return to earth was concluded just a few hours
ago. The magnitude of the feat performed by the United
States astronauts, supported by a host of almost anonymous scientists and experts, is such that it is difficult to
find fitting words to expressour profound admiration.
76. We give thanks that these three astronauts went to the
moon on a mission of peace. We give thanks that they have
returned to earth safe and sound. And we give thanks, too,
that, thanks to modern communications media, we have
had the good fortune to be eyewitnesses to this extraordinary event which ennobles the twentieth century.

82. We are determined advocates of the most scrupulous
respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
States, and of unwavering observance of the norms governing the relations between States. Our own security as a
small country depends on universal respect for those
principles which today are sanctioned by international law,
independently, moreover, of concurrent obligations as a
Member of this Organization.

77. Some obvious conclusions can be drawn. First and
foremost, perhaps, we now have incontrovertible proof of
the almost unlimited possibilities open to man when
determination, talent and science are harmoniously combined with that element which is as unpredictable as it is
indispensable-man’s courage. Another conclusion is that
seldom, if ever in our time, have three men-only three
men-been so representative of the human species. Our
common hopes went with them, and our prayers accompanied them. In return, they have opened up a vastly
broader horizon far beyond the hitherto known boundaries
of earth.

83. This being so, we cannot and, moreover, we should
not pass over in silence acts which violate these principles,
or which do not conform to these norms. Our main
function in this Council is to seek the means at our disposal
to prevent international peace and security from being
threatened and, if they are threatened, to find ways and
means of putting an end to such threats.
84. My delegation has acted and will continue to act in
this Council in accordance with these principles, and in that
spirit it will seek, together with other delegations, mutually
acceptable formulas which will represent the Council’s
viewson the acts which have given rise to our debate.

78. With these few words I wish to hail this feat achieved
by the United States and the gallantry of its astronauts,
79. I come now to the item on our agenda, namely,
Zambia’s complaint concerning violations of its territorial
integrity by Portuguese military forces and the bombing of
a village resulting in the destruction of property and the
loss of lives.

85. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I give the
floor to the representative of Zambia to exercisehis right cf
reply.

80. In other circumstances, a debate on such a complaint
might easily be confined to the complaint itself and to the

86. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing me to intervene again in this debate in exercise
of my right of reply.
8

L

87, Mr. President, you have already, on behalf of all of us
in this Council, expressed our profound admiration and
wishes for that one historic small step by man, which is
indeed a great leap by mankind, that over the weekend
crowned American ingenuity, perseverance and courage.
But in the light of the successful return of those noble
astronauts, I crave your pardon t,o be allowed personally to
say a few words of congratulations to my friend and
colleague, the representative of the United States of
America. I hope that my friend will not be embarrassed
when I say that he should consider himself as being in the
shoes of the most attractive young lady at a party who
should be prepared for the most generous remarks and
offers. To lessen my colleague’s embarrassment, however,
apart from admiration ‘and genuine praise, we shall only
offer him, unlike the glamorous young lady, our best wishes
for further exploits for the good of the American people
end of mankind as a whole. May this successbe crowned
with severalmore,

whose intransigence is only too familiar to this Council to
appear that ready to investigate issues which it claims are
devoid of any foundation, Portugal must have undergone
what may be considered a revolution.
91. But we in Zambia, having lived witb. Portuguese
aggression for four years, know that Portugal’s premeditated acts of aggression have been on the increase. They
have become more intense and frequent.
92. In recognition of the need to settle disputes peacefully, and in light of the customary denials on the part of
the aggressor, we tried, in respect of three series of
incidents, to prove to the Portuguese that our complaints
were not only serious but also genuine. We invited their
representatives to come to Zambia to see for themselves the
results of their shameful aggression.Despite all the available
evidence, they rejected two of these, which were extremely
grave, and accepted responsibility in respect of only one,
where a village of 40 houses was completely wiped out.
While admitting that their armed forces were responsible
for the aggression in respect of the other two as well, they
arrogantly claimed that they attacked in exercise of the
so-called right of pursuit. It wasirrelevant to the aggressor
that the victims of these incidents were all Zambian
civilians who had no intention whatsoever of attacking
Portugal. Nor did the total lack of so-called elements hostile
to Portugal induce them to adopt a more reasonable
attitude, Following this unreasonable rejection, we came to
the sad conclusion that pacific settlement had no meaning
to the Portuguese. Our efforts would have been fruitful had
the aggressorbeen ready to accept full responsibility for the
hostile actions of its armed forces against Zambia.

88. I shall now turn to the item on the agenda. In the
course of his interventions at the 1486th and 1488th
meetings, the Portuguese representative asked us if Zambia’s request for this meeting was not strange. Having done
that, he suprisingly tried to mislead the Council by stating:
“It may be that a clue is given by the reports which have
appeared in the press regarding the case of two Portuguese
military persons unlawfully and faithlessly detained in
Zambia” [148&h meeting, para. 631. Is it not asking too
much for my friend, whose Foreign Minister in response to
our letter dated 15 July /S/9331] sent a telegram dated 16
July [S/9335] addressed to you, Mr. President, requesting
his participation in the discussion, to begin his contribution
in that negative manner? Why should he draw a red herring
across our smooth path? In case he did not do his
homework properly, I shall, at the expense of my colleagues’ time, tell him all this once again.

93. The Portuguese representative accused Zambia of
negotiating in bad faith. I wish to remind him that during
the investigation of one of the three incidents referred to
above, and despite assurancesthat instructions had been
issued by Lisbon to the effect that there should be no
aggression against Zambia, at least not during the investigations, two serious attacks were made. While the investiga.
tions were going on, Portuguese forces struck at Shangombo and the Luangwa Bridge wasblown up. If that is not
negotiating in bad faith, what is? , I ask the aggressor.

89. Zambia brought the Lote incident to this Council
because, despite our proven restraint, Portugal has for four
years been violating our territorial integrity. We came to the
Council because over these four years Portuguese armed
forces have killed many innocent civilian men, women and
children in my country, I cited no fewer than 20 on Friday
out of a long list of well over 60. In addition to the specific
casesI referred to, I drew the attention of the Council and,
I hope, of the Portuguese representative to the many
Zambians who have been wounded in these unprovoked
Portuguese raids. Many have been kidnapped, and women
hafe been violated. Zambian property has been destroyed,
in other cases stolen. Our cattle have also been unlawfully
taken.

94. But, as many speakers pointed out, Zambia is an
unfortunate victim of colonialism, racism and imperialism
in southern Africa. We have been accused by Portugal of
authorizing in our territory “the establishment of training
and supply bases for armed attacks” against Portugal. Time
and again we have made it absolutely clear, and I make it
clear again, that all Zambia has done is to carry out its
responsibilities to the Organization of African Unity and to
the United Nations. Thus, despite all our difficulties created
by the unholy alliance of Portugal, South Africa and
Rhodesia, we have adhered to the principles of the Charter
by opening our doors to hundreds of thousands of refugees
from those oppressed territories bordering on Zambia. It is
worth noting that while we adhere to the United Nations in
this regard, the Portuguese have planted mines all along the
Zambian-Mozambican border, and inside Zambia, in an
effort not only to make it impossible for refugees to run
away from their oppressive regime, but also wickedly to
prevent refugees already in Zambia from going back to

90. But, of course, when even he himself could not hold
any further to the judiciary-executive myth, the resourceful
Portuguese representative discarded it rather unceremoniously. Having categorically rejected the Lote incident,
he considered us very credulous when, out of obvious
frustration, he told the Council that bilateral negotiations
were in hand between Zambia and Portugal to settle this
incident. We were called upon to be content with continued
Portuguese aggression because a mythical Luso-Zambian
commission was already dealing with the issue which he
described as “devoid of any foundation”. For a country
9

harvest their crops. Naturally, when one notes the thieving
character of the Portuguese soldier, one can see why the
Portuguese forces feel. very happy when hundreds of
refugees leave behind their ripening crops. It is in their
nature to take awaywhat does not belong to them.
95. The Portuguese representative tried to mislead this
Council concernhg the year 1966, claiming that in that
year my country departed from its policy of good-neighbourliness. ,He would wish us to believe that up until 1966
there Cas tranquillity in Angola and Mozambique, and that
trouble started only when so-called Zambian-trained
“elements” began to infiltrate into those Territories in that
yeai-. I wish to inform him that the Council knows only too
well that, following many years of fascist oppression, the
peoples of Angola and Mozambique had taken up arms as
early as 1961 against the Portuguese invader. In 1961 alone,
over 1,500 Portvguese colonialists were killed, and 100
administrative posts and towns and over 3 districts within
30 miles of Luanda we& either tiiped out or taken. The
economy of Angola wasalmost paralysed. Whom does the
representative of Portugal blame for that disaster to his
Government? And how about the uprising in Mozambique
which followed immediately?
96. I can only conclude, naturally, that our friend from
Goa, who is now masquerading as the representative of
Portugal, has spent the last few years hopelessly and
unconvincingly trying to defend Portuguese oppression
against the Angolan and Mozambican peoples and has had
too little time to learn Portuguese colonial his’tory.

for the protection of human rights, individual liberty and
the right to life.
99. I was amused when the Portuguese representative
unashamedly referred to our detaining the two invaders as
an act that would be regarded “as shocking by all those
who have a sense of propriety and justice”. All I can do is
to advise the Portuguese representative to call upon his
Government to exercise this propriety and justice with
regard to the 13 million people of Angola, Mozambique and
Guinea (Bissau). If Portugal were to do that, there would be
no need for it to send poor students like Freitas to fight
anachronistic colonial wars, nor would there be any need
for my Government to detain any Portuguese in self.
defence.
100. In any case,while the representative of Portugal can
call on the Council for the release of Freitas and his
colleague, I can only inform him that in another recent
incident two of three of our nationals who had gone
hunting near the Angola border were shot dead without
warning by the Portuguese, who suspected them of having
crossedthe border. As for Freitas and his colleague, we see
no justification for the Portuguese representative further to
burden the Council with this matter. If they release our
kidnapped nationals today, we shall hand over the invaders,
despite the fact that Freitas was the leader of the earlier
invading unit on 24 January 1969, to which I referred, that
wasrepulsed after an exchange of fire in which three of the
invaders were killed,
101. The false assertion that our Air Force has displayed
aggressiveintentions against Portugal is too ridiculous and
tenuous to be pursued in this Council.

97. In case he is unaware of it, I wish to reiterate that the
struggle for freedom and independence is as indigenous in
Angola as it wasin India; it is asindigenous in Mozambique
as it was in the American colonies; it is as indigenous in
Guinea (Bissau) as it wasin Algeria. That being so, neither
he nor the Portuguese armies of oppression can reversethe
tide of history. Africa has chosen the course of liberation,
the course of democracy, and no amount of collaboration,
not even within the unholy alliance, can halt that momentous march to total victory. Already it must be meaningful
that in all Portugal’s attacks on Zambia only white
Portuguese soldiers have been involved. The enemy continues to look over his shoulder and his defeat is imminent.

102. Perhaps, at this stage, I should take up the question
of Portuguese aggressionon Lote again. You will recall that,
in stating our case on 18 July /1486th meeting/, I pointed
out that two weeks had elapsed before my Government
appealed to the Council for a hearing. I had then pointed
out that the delay was due to our desire to settle this and
other similar matters outside this chamber. We therefore
drew the attention of the aggressor to that grave incident.
But typical of their behaviour, they rejected our complaint.
The Portuguese representative here also rejected the corn.
plaint on 18 July. Only yesterday, the Council heard him
say: “We gave our answer to that allegation, Werejected it
as false. We reiterate that position.” (1488th nteeti~~g,
Para. .U./ Is it surprising that, faced with such intransigence, we decided to come to this Council?

98. I do not intend to afford the representative of
Portugal another excuse for wasting the Council’s time by
referring to the facts I have presented to the Council as
slogans. I wish, therefore, to take up one of his ridiculous
assertions, namely when he said, rather astonishingly, that
he considered because his Government had accepted
responsibility for only 1 of the 60 acts of aggression,all the
rest were settled. Is it conceivable that any Government
worth the name would abandon so many of its nationals,
kidnapped by the enemy? Is there any credibility in the
suggestion that because the Portuguese have paid compensation for 42 houses destroyed by their armed forces, the
Zambian Government has forgotten so many of its
nationals who have been killed in cold blood, or the many
scores who have been injured? Or our innocent women
who have been violated? Or our cattle that have been
stolen by the invader? But, of course, to the Portuguese
mind government is an instrument for oppression and not

103. In reiterating their rejection, the Portuguese told US
that they did this because when I made the claim, which
they rejected, they did not have the text of my speech;
presumably, they wanted some time to study our complaint. If this were so, why reject it off-hand on 18 July,
even before studying the text of my speech? Besides,wasit
not the subject of my letter requesting a meeting of the
SeCUrity
Council? They knew what I was complaining
about. Their representative in London had earlier rejected
it, so it needed no further study on their part. It is
significant that the Portuguese representative, out of step
with his colleague in London, gave this Council his version
of the incident, despite his having denied it earlier.
10

104. In the light of our irrefutable evidence, the Portuguese representative, having said it was difficult to know
what happened at Lote from this distance, proceeded to
give us a “yam” about clean-up operations. “The attacking
raiders”-he suddenly concluded his little story-“fled back
into Zambia and possibly went to the village of Lote [ibid.,
pm-a. 281. He does not, however, tell us what followed.
There was no clean-up operation. There were, I agree,
attackers, Portuguese attackers, who flew to the village of
, Lote and committed the aggressions I recounted. They
struck on 30 June and on 3 and 4 July. The story of
“clean-up” operations cannot be plausible when you recall
that the border is mined by the Portuguese. To cross it
from Mozambique to the village of Lote in Zambia, one
needs a plane; and, of course, that is what the Portuguese
aggressorsused.

some of the people kidnapped are members of the ruling
United National Independence Party. We are happy that in
promising that evidence the Portuguese representative may
in fact be providing us with more evidence to prove his
country’s actsof aggression against Zambia.
109. I am gratified that no sooner had the Portuguese
representative challenged this Council to prove that NATO
arms were used against us than my illustrious friend the
representative of France confirmed that, as a result of
proven cases,France had warned Portugal not to abuse its
NATO privileges regarding arms. If our overwhelming
evidence was rejected with customary impunity by the
Portuguese side, perhaps the French warning will bring
them face to face with facts at long last. We would also
hope that other NATO members will follow the excellent
example of France.

105. The reference made by the representative of Portugal
that the Zambian authorities are not quite clear about the
boundary line is not only mischievious but also misleading.
His own words have left no doubt that he has recognized
Lote as a Zambian village. The map we have continually
displayed, in any case, should leave no room for any more
doubts.

110. To conclude, my Government wishes to make it
quite clear that, despite all their sweet words here or
elsewhere, the Portuguese have proved to be extremely
intransigent in their persistent aggressionagainst Zambia,
My Government, gravely concerned about the tension in
southern Africa, has done everything in its power to help
reduce that tension. If anything, our restraint over the past
four years should be a testimony to our desire for peace. It
is significant that it was in Lusaka, the capital of Zambia,
that the Fifth Summit Conference of the Heads of State of
East and Central Africa adopted the Manifesto on Southern
Africa, a copy of which I now submit, with the request that
it be circulated as an official document of the Council,
since it has such a bearing on this subject. The Portuguese
would do well to study that document before they accuse
us of being hostile to them. In view of the celebrated
Portuguese tradition of reading United Nations resolutions
and decisions upside down-and this in a way explains their
upside-down logic-we hope that the Secretariat will be
kind enough to translate the Manifesto for the benefit of
the Portuguese delegation.1

106. In regard to the kidnapping of our national, Jeremiah
Lushindu, the Council has been told a fantastic story. It is
claimed that Lushindu was a victim of an international love
affair, Are we to believe that this African “Helen” of
Rivungo was so popular with the white Portuguese forces
that they considered it worthwhile to engage a launch,
violate Zambia’s territorial integrity, and mount a big
man-hunt just for her? Since when have Portuguese forces
shown any concern for the rights of an Angolan?
107. But, of course, the representative of Portugal is the
paragon of contradictions. Only yesterday, we saw him
exemplify this very amply. Accusing Zambia of hostility, he
stated:

I 11. We are grateful to those delegations which expressed
their desire to seethese acts of aggressionbrought to an end
through discussion between the parties. But, alas, even
while they were making vague appeals for bilateral talks,
the Portuguese aggressorswere adding insult to injury by
shamelessly rejecting our genuine COmplaint3.
We
are
convinced that, in keeping with their attitude towards the
resolutions of the General Assembly and Security Council,
they have chosen the path of intransigence and continued
aggression.

“Either the Zambian Government can control its
frontiers but does not wish to do so, or it cannot. If it
cannot, its responsibility is grave enough; it is even greater
if it can control its frontiers and will not do so. In either
case the Zambian Government cannot escape responsibility for the attacks made on Portuguese territory by
elements proceeding from its territory and fleeing back
for sanctuary, which is given them in Zambia.” [Ibid.,
para. 41.1

And yet, having given us that interesting lecture, the
Portuguese authorities do not pause to realize that it is
Zambia which should give them that lecture in respect of
Lushindu. After all, even according to their version of the
incident, Lushindu was kidnapped by elements from the
colonial territory of Angola.

112. We believe that, since our only mistake is our support
for self-determination and our giving shelter to genuine
refugees in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, the Organization has a duty to listen to our case.
We expect, in this regard, that other Members of the world
body will come to our support instead of helping to
increase tension in the area. Having done everything
possible to avert the threat to international peace and
security for as long as we have done under such difficult

108. With regard to the only exhibit the Portuguese side
has promised to produce before this Council-that of party
cards of the ruling United National Independence Party-I
wish to draw the attention of the Council to the fact the
Lushindu was a regional official of the United National
Independence Party, Besides, we have reported here that
several cases of kidnapping have taken place. Naturally,

1 Subsequentlycirculated as document S/9363 dated 28 July
1969. For the text of the Manifesto, see Official Records of the
General Assembly, Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agendaitem
106, document A/7754.
1

conditions, we should not be held responsible for any
consequencesof Portuguese aggression. While those farther
removed from the area of conflict may find refuge in
palliatives or appeasement, the blood of our dead, the silent
cry of the kidnapped and the wounds of the injured
demand that we stop this aggression forthwith. The
question is whether the Council is prepared now to help us
repel the aggressor.We hope that all peace-loving people the
world over who respect our territorial integrity and who
would like to seelasting peace in our crisis zone will join us
in condemning Portuguese aggression against Zambia and in

12

rejecting the Portuguese rejection of our complaint with all
the contempt it deserves.
113. The PRESIDENT (translated from French j: I have
no other speakers on my list and if no representative wishes
to speak at the present stage in the debate I propose to
adjourn the meeting. Following consultations with the
members of the Council, it has been agreed that the next
meeting will take place on Friday, 25 July, at 3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 5.25 pm

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your

NATIONS
moy
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
lo: United
Notions,
Soles
Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Ler
publications
des
dCporitaires
du monde
Notions
tJnier,
Section

KAK

COMO

IlOllY~MTb

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Notions
Unies
sent
entier.
Informewour
der ventes,
New York

MBAAHMFl

CONSEGUIR

tar publicocioner
en todor
parles
Ventas,
Nuevo

LES PUELICATIONS

PUBLlCAClONES

DES NATIONS

en vente
dons
ler librairier
et les ogencer
ouprh$
de votre libroirie
ou odrerrer-vow
b:
ou Genbve.

OPTAHM3AZ(YIH

06bEAtlHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES

de los Nocioner
Unidos
ertbn
del mundo.
Consulte
o IU librero
York o Ginebra.

Price:

UNIES

UNIDAS

en vento en librerior
o dirijose
o: Nocioner

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

HAUlMA

in other

Y calor
distribuidoras
Unidor,
Secci6n

currencies)

de

82130-November

1972-2,050
