S/2016/951

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 November 2016
Original: English

Special report of the Secretary-General on the review of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 18 of Security Council
resolution 2304 (2016), in which the Council requested me to present, within
90 days, recommendations on the steps to adapt the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) to the situation on the ground and to increase the efficiency
of the implementation of its mandate, including with respect to strengthening the
safety and security of United Nations personnel and facilities.
2.
For the preparation of the present report, a strategic assessment of the situation
in South Sudan was conducted by the Secretariat, with the close collaboration of
UNMISS and the United Nations country team. The assessment was conducted
through consultations with a wide cross-section of stakeholders, including
government officials at the national and local levels, internally displaced persons,
representatives of the diplomatic community in Juba, the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, donors, UNMISS, States members of the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and officials of the
African Union Commission.

II. Findings resulting from the strategic assessment
Political dynamic
3.
Many stakeholders with whom the strategic assessment team met posed
questions surrounding the continued viability of the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan following the outbreak of violence in
Juba in July 2016 and the subsequent flight of Riek Machar from the country. With
the overhaul of opposition leadership in the Transitional Government of National
Unity by the President, Salva Kiir, including the appointment of Taban Deng Gai in
place of Mr. Machar as First Vice-President, the opposition is now divided and its
leadership and representation in the institutions of transition disputed, thus blurring
the legitimacy of the current governmental formation. The principal challenge is the
lack of inclusivity in the political process, in particular with respect to Mr. Machar,
who retains significant political and military support, and the increasing feelings of

16-19546 (E)

141116

*1619546*

S/2016/951

political marginalization among other ethnic groups, many of which believe that the
Government is pursuing a policy of Dinka domination throughout the country.
4.
Several assessment team interlocutors noted that the joint transitional
institutions, conceived on the basis of the notion of inclusivity, were now only
partially inclusive. To that end, the outcomes of the transitional institutions’
deliberations will not be genuinely representative of the constituencies for which the
departed opposition members, former detainees and other political parties spoke.
Inclusivity therefore needs to be restored as an urgent priority if the transition’s
political credibility is to be maintained and partners are to continue to support it.
5.
The IGAD-Plus formula, which leveraged significant regional and
international pressure that led to the signing of the peace agreement in Aug ust 2015,
has yet to fully remobilize to address the current situation. Some of the guarantors
of the peace agreement have undertaken bilateral contacts with the parties to urge
them in the direction of peace and dialogue. Nevertheless, in contrast with th e days
leading to the signing of the agreement, there have been no organized efforts by the
guarantors to that end. While it was clear from the assessment team’s discussions in
Addis Ababa that the region remained committed to ensuring a successful peace
process, some recognized that there might be a general sense of fatigue with respect
to the conflict and the inability of the country’s leaders to commit to the political
process. In the absence of any concerted or formal efforts to revitalize the political
process since the Second IGAD-Plus Extraordinary Summit on the Situation in the
Republic of South Sudan, held on 5 August 2016, efforts to engage the parties have
been desultory and unsynchronized. IGAD and African Union interlocutors
expressed a desire to enhance collaboration with the United Nations to revitalize the
political process.
6.
Strong expressions of support were voiced for engaging Mr. Machar and other
marginalized leaders of the opposition on the basis of the recognition that failing to
do so could drive him to a military solution to address their grievances. Government
interlocutors in Juba also supported dialogue with him and recommended that the
United Nations seek to engage him to that end, in particular in the light of his recent
call to arms, which they urged the United Nations to condemn. Members of the
diplomatic community in Juba and Addis Ababa stressed that inclusivity did not
mean simply engaging Mr. Machar and his Nuer constituency; other groups that felt
politically marginalized should also be brought into dialogue so that they could
peacefully express their misgivings. Similarly, some interlocutors suggested that
inclusivity did not mean that Mr. Machar had to return as First Vice -President; he
could instead designate his representatives in the transitional institutions. Others
recalled the IGAD-Plus decision of 5 August, which provided for a return to the
status quo ante, and expressed the view that that decision was still valid.
7.
The identification of incentives and disincentives to encourage the parties to
resume the political dialogue and cease hostilities was viewed as critical by the
assessment team’s interlocutors in Juba and Addis Ababa. Many stressed that the
Security Council should not hesitate to make use of all the t ools at its disposal to
address the deteriorating situation, including targeted sanctions and an arms
embargo. Conversely, should the Government take steps to genuinely promote an
inclusive political process, its efforts should be fully supported. The inte rlocutors

2/18

16-19546

S/2016/951

emphasized the need to provide enhanced economic and financial assistance should
progress be made towards transparency and improved governance.
8.
Stakeholders also felt that the establishment of a hybrid court was an initiative
that should continue to move forward with haste. The court would act as a strong
deterrent to those who continue to violate human rights, support the fight against
impunity in South Sudan and serve ultimately as a tool for longer -term
reconciliation.
9.
The assessment team discussed the regional protection force at length with
government interlocutors, in particular those issues concerning troop composition,
tasking and freedom of movement. The team stressed that it was essential that the
Government accept the force and its proposed troop-contributing countries as a
package and extend all cooperation necessary to allow it to deploy and operate
according to the mandate set out in resolution 2304 (2016). Other stakeholders in
Ethiopia and South Sudan expressed their support for the force and their hopes for
its speedy deployment as a way of improving security and creating space for a
meaningful political process. Those issues are reflected in more detail in the 30 -day
report provided to the Council on the matter.
Security dynamic
10. There were serious concerns expressed in the region that the split within the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition (SPLM/A in Opposition),
the general discontent among many Nuer and other communities and the pervasive
resort to military conflict instead of dialogue threatened to worsen the security
outlook. It was recognized that the security environment in the coming months
would also be affected by the manner in which Mr. Machar’s call for an armed
resistance was heeded by his supporters. Should the Nuer and other sympathetic
communities respond to his appeal, many feared that human rights violations
against civilians would increase dramatically, with the risk of widespread mass
atrocities in the context of a full-scale civil war. In such an eventuality, and
notwithstanding renewed efforts to develop robust contingency plans across the
military component, UNMISS would be ill placed to have any material impact on
the situation. It was agreed that pervasive feelings of alienation among other ethnic
groups would likely fuel the conflict and add complexity to the security landscape at
the subnational level.
11. Hostilities between pro-Machar and pro-Deng groups have already taken
place, and even though the full extent of the fragmentation of the opposition
remains to be seen, it is expected to have an extremely negative impact on the
security dynamic in the country. In the greater Upper Nile region, in particular,
where Mr. Machar retains a large base of support, fighting is expected as different
commanders choose their allegiance. There is also the distinct probability of further
operations by the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) to take advantage of the
increasingly fractured opposition throughout that region. In Upper Nile, the
allegiance of General Johnson Olony and the Shilluk population will shape how
future fighting materializes in the area. In Unity, the forces are in close proximity
throughout the area. Fighting must therefore be anticipated between the opposition
loyal to Mr. Machar, estimated to be a majority in the area at present, and those
loyal to Mr. Gai. The security dynamic in Jonglei is currently less volatile, but

16-19546

3/18

S/2016/951

significant clashes must be anticipated if SPLA moves against the wider Nuer
populace. There is a lull in fighting in the immediate area of Wau, Western Bahr
el-Ghazal, but the sides appear to be poised for further confrontation. In the
Equatorias, SPLA is likely to continue with its activities to de feat anti-government
and opposition fighters to ensure that opponents cannot consolid ate and mount a
threat to Juba.
12. Interactions with internally displaced persons in Wau, Malakal and Bentiu
illustrated the extent to which the country is now plagued by a diverse set of locallevel conflicts that relate to the national crisis in different ways and to different
extents. These local conflicts have been exacerbated by the introduction of the
28-state structure, which has served to heighten ethnic tensions, shift political
loyalties and increase competition for power and resources in a deteriorating
economy. Internally displaced persons who expressed scepticism regarding the
possibility of reconciling with neighbours from other ethnic groups provided a
sobering warning of the level to which local conflicts were destined to continue.
The deep divisions already created between communities and the strong desires for
vindication among those who have suffered at the hands of their neighbours will
continue to drive violence at the subnational level in the coming period. Internally
displaced persons who met with the strategic assessment team again expressed their
strong hope to return and urged the international community to deploy the regional
protection force as quickly as possible.
13. The inability to integrate the forces and transform the army into a professional,
unified and ethnically diverse entity, separate from political interests, remains a key
security challenge to the achievement of a sustainable peace fo r South Sudan. Poor
discipline and weak command and control of elements of the national security
forces continue to have a negative impact on the security situation. The
Government’s irregular payment of salaries to security personnel presents an
additional risk, given that unpaid soldiers often use violence to obtain resources
from civilians. Furthermore, the proliferation of armed groups in the country with
distinct agendas has created a very dangerous security dynamic that will likely be
difficult to reverse even if the main parties to the conflict eventually reach a
political settlement. Should the current situation persist, more armed groups with
disparate aims and objectives are likely to enmesh South Sudan in a semi -permanent
state of conflict.
Human rights and the rule of law
14. The heightened violence following July 2016 has had devastating
consequences for civilians. Widespread violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law have been committed, including extrajudicial killings, enforced
disappearances, rape and other acts of sexual violence, arbitrary arrests and
detention, targeted attacks against civilians, violence aimed at spreading terror
among the civilian population and attacks on medical facilities, aid workers,
medical workers and media personnel. All parties to the conflict have continued to
use rape and other forms of sexual violence as a tactic of warfare, targeting, in
particular, women and girls of various ethnic groups. Some violations are taking on
an increasingly ethnic dimension, and hate speech is on the rise throughout the
country. These trends raise reasonable concerns that larger -scale atrocities could
follow, including ethnic cleansing campaigns.

4/18

16-19546

S/2016/951

15. Human rights officers face limited access to affected area s to corroborate
information or interview witnesses and victims for many reasons, including
restrictions imposed by government authorities, security considerations for staff
members and increasing threats of reprisal against witnesses, victims and sources,
which raises the need to ensure their protection.
16. Rule of law institutions are weak owing to politicization and inadequate
human and financial resources. Likewise, medical and psychosocial care for
survivors of sexual violence remains inadequate. The impact of an ineffective police
force, a dysfunctional judiciary and a weakened customary justice system is a
daunting challenge to overcome and risks contributing to a relapse into intense
conflict. Impunity remains entrenched and law and order services h ave not been
restored. Furthermore, civil society and freedom of speech are increasingly under
attack. Government interlocutors denied the existence of such restrictions and said
that they had prosecuted critics only for engaging in hate speech or defamati on. The
authorities said that they had received very few complaints of human rights
violations by South Sudanese citizens but had responded promptly when such
complaints were made. For example, they stated that court s martial were set up to
punish “rogue elements” who had committed crimes during the July clashes,
notwithstanding concerns that such cases should be under the jurisdiction of the
civil courts.
Humanitarian crisis
17. The humanitarian crisis in South Sudan is increasing in scale and depth
following the July 2016 violence, owing to armed conflict in several parts of the
country, worsening food insecurity and the escalating economic crisis. Hundreds of
thousands of people have been forced to flee their homes since the violence. More
than 323,000 people, mostly women and children, have fled to neighbouring
countries, including the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia and Uganda,
bringing the total number of South Sudanese refugees to more than 1 million. Of the
1.6 million internally displaced persons, some 200,000 have sought refuge in United
Nations protection of civilians sites, while the remaining displaced persons are on
the run or seeking shelter beyond the sites.
18. The people of South Sudan are facing alarming levels of food insecurity. An
estimated 4.8 million people are thought to be severely food -insecure. Global acute
malnutrition rates are above the 15 per cent emergency threshold in 7 of 10 states
and approximately double the emergency threshold in Unity (26.2 per cent) and
Northern Bahr el-Ghazal (33.3 per cent). In August, staple food prices were at
record-high levels in Juba, Wau and Aweil, reaching nearly 10 times the five -year
average, further compounding the situation. Diseases endemic to South Sudan
continue to cause death and illness, and the country is suffering a cholera outbreak
for the third year in a row.
19. Humanitarian actors noted the array of challenges that they continue to face,
including attacks, harassment, intimidation, access constraints and bureaucratic
impediments. In the first nine months of 2016, more than 641 humanitarian access
incidents were reported across South Sudan. On average, 70 per cent of these
included violence against aid workers and assets. At least 67 aid workers have been
killed since December 2013, including 13 since the July violence. Humanitarian

16-19546

5/18

S/2016/951

supplies have been looted throughout South Sudan, including from the warehouse in
Juba belonging to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and
the World Food Programme, resulting in losses of more than $28 million.
Underfunding of the humanitarian response remains a challenge, with only 63 per
cent of a highly prioritized appeal received as of October 2016.
20. While the Government assured the strategic assessment team that it had put in
place several measures to ensure free, safe and unhindered access to all people in
need, those assurances have not been translated into a significant improvement in
the overall operating environment for humanitarian actors. The Government h as
established a humanitarian high-level oversight committee, charged with addressing
and resolving issues relating to humanitarian access. Participants in the first meeting
of the committee, held on 26 October, discussed a range of critical issues that
continue to have an impact on the humanitarian response, such as the safety and
security of aid workers, free, safe and unhindered humanitarian access and negative
rhetoric. While welcoming the corrective measures that were agreed upon, the
humanitarian community reiterated that the committee must deliver immediate
results.
Economic stresses
21. There were strong concerns expressed by the diplomatic community in Juba
and by interlocutors in Addis Ababa over the state of the economy of South Sudan.
The overall economic outlook remains dire owing to global oil price volatility, a
sharp reduction in oil production, a lack of fiduciary accountability and the
depletion of the foreign exchange reserves at the Bank of South Sudan. The country
is expected to face a fiscal deficit of approximately 23 per cent during the period
2016-2017 and the South Sudanese pound faces significant downside pressures and
has sharply lost value against the United States dollar. This situation has led to
steeply rising inflation, and the Government is now unable to pay regular salaries to
public servants, including those in the security sector. The annual rate of inflation
stands at an alarming 661.3 per cent and the cost of living has risen exponentially,
with the annual consumer price index increasing by 730 per cent from August 2015
to August 2016, the highest year-on-year inflation rate in the world.

III. Priority objectives for the Mission
22. In the light of the concerns expressed by stakeholders and the likelihood that
the situation will continue to be marked by political volatility, violent conflict,
widespread human rights abuses, the further displacement of civilians, significant
food insecurity and ongoing humanitarian needs in the near to medium term, it is
recommended that the future mandate of UNMISS be based on the priority
objectives set out below. Those objectives take into account the requirement that the
Mission continue to carry out the core pillars of its existing mandate, including
targeted support for institutions of the peace agreement that could have a positive
impact on the people of South Sudan and/or UNMISS operations, and advocate a
genuine and sustainable cessation of hostilities. As a critical part of the efforts
outlined below, the Secretariat would develop a comprehensive political strategy, in
close consultation with the African Union and IGAD, to achieve a cessation of

6/18

16-19546

S/2016/951

hostilities and bring the parties back to an inclusive political process. The creative
and flexible use of the presence of the United Nations in the region, including the
Office of the Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan and the United Nations
Office to the African Union, in support of the efforts by UNMISS and my Special
Representative for South Sudan would be leveraged for t he implementation of such
a comprehensive strategy.

A.

Political support for the implementation of the peace agreement
Provide good offices to reinvigorate momentum towards a sustainable
political process
23. In the current context, the primacy of a political solution should be at the
forefront of the collective efforts of the United Nations, which would require
continuous engagement with IGAD and the African Union to reinvigorate
momentum towards an inclusive political process. In that regard, my Special
Representative for South Sudan would engage with the members of IGAD-Plus, or
any future political formation, and other partners on the peace process in South
Sudan to ensure coordination and promote sustained and unified political
engagement with the parties and to encourage a return to a credible political process
and the establishment of inclusive governance. Such efforts would be carried out
with support from my Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan an d my Special
Representative to the African Union based in Addis Ababa.
24. At the national level, in order to support a political process in which key
constituencies in South Sudan feel that they have credible and empowered
representation, my Special Representative for South Sudan and the Mission would
use their good offices with the parties and other South Sudanese stakeholders, in
close coordination with the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, to facilitate an inclusive dialogue among stakeholders. My Special
Representative would also work with the parties and other key stakeholders to
achieve a lasting cessation of hostilities in order to create an environment in which
the political process can take root. To that end, a close partners hip with the African
Union High Representative for South Sudan, Alpha Oumar Konaré, would be
essential. I would propose that the Mission be empowered to support his
engagement in the country and in the region.
25. At the subnational level, my Special Representative for South Sudan and the
Mission would continue to use their good offices to mitigate intercommunal
violence emanating from the 28-state order or other issues dividing communities
and leading to violence against civilians. They would also continu e to exercise their
good offices to advocate that the government authorities at all levels uphold their
responsibility to protect civilians. In view of the spectre of new mass atrocities in
the coming months, my Special Representative will develop, with th e Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, an action plan to try to prevent and contain
their recurrence.

16-19546

7/18

S/2016/951

B.

Efforts to improve the security situation
Provide advisory support and specialized assistance to the South Sudan
National Police Service
26. The current situation does not allow for the Joint Integrated Police to be
structured along the lines of its original concept, which foresaw an equitable s hare
of police from the Government and the opposition. Accordingly, it is impossible for
the Joint Integrated Police to achieve its original intent, which was to provide the
nucleus of an integrated police service while building confidence among internally
displaced persons in the protection of civilians sites that they had representation in
the security services and could therefore return to their homes. While the Joint
Integrated Police is not a viable mechanism, given the current conditions,
demilitarizing the security sector and moving towards police primacy in Juba and
other urban centres would have a beneficial impact on the citizens of those areas.
Should inclusivity one day be attained, the Joint Integrated Police could also act as
part of the exit strategy for the regional protection force, given that the former could
assume security duties in Juba. In the meantime, it is recommended that the United
Nations work with the South Sudan National Police Service to support its training
and provide specialized assistance in the urban centres (Juba, Bentiu, Malakal and
Bor), in compliance with the human rights due diligence policy, including vetting to
ensure that no support is provided to human rights violators. United Nations support
for the National Police Service would be carried out with the objective of ultimately
creating an integrated, ethnically representative and accountable police force.
Building on existing working relationships, the Mission’s support would focus on
training in professional ethics, basic human rights and community-oriented policing,
in coordination with partners in the United Nations country team. The Mission’s
quick-impact projects will also be strategically allocated to support host
communities and the National Police Service, especially near the UNMISS
protection of civilians sites, with the aim of improving safety and security around
those sites.
Support the Juba Joint Operations Centre
27. Without the representation of a large segment of SPLM/A in Opposition forces
in Juba, the original purpose of the Joint Operations Centre, namely, to deconflict
the movements of government and opposition forces throughout the capital, is no
longer relevant. Nevertheless, planning discussions with the Government have
suggested that the Centre format could act as a vehicle to coordinate the movements
of SPLA, the South Sudan National Police Service and the regional protection force
in Juba to ensure the coordination of the tasks and operations set out in Security
Council resolution 2304 (2016). Such a mechanism in Juba will be critical, given
the weak command and control within SPLA, the presence of security p ersonnel
who are often quick to escalate violence in routine encounters with the Mission, and
the possibility of minor incidents between uniformed personnel degenerating into
large-scale violence against the Mission. It is therefore recommended that the
Centre be supported, bearing in mind that it must not become an instrument for
controlling the movements of the regional protection force. The operational
independence of the force cannot be sacrificed. Accordingly, the terms of reference
and modus operandi of the Centre will have to be revised.

8/18

16-19546

S/2016/951

Support the monitoring, investigation, verification and resolution of violations
of the ceasefire through the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism
28. Under the peace agreement, the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism was designed to include representation of the
signatories so that transparent monitoring of the ceasefire and the implementation of
the security arrangements could take place. Without the representation of a large
segment of SPLM/A in Opposition in the Mechanism, the transparency of that
monitoring no longer exists. Similarly, with the departure of Mr. Machar and the
ongoing hostilities between SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition and between the
Deng and Machar factions of the SPLM/A in Opposition, it is clear that the ceasefire
is no longer in effect. The security arrangements in Juba, which were designed to
accommodate forces of the Government and those of a unified opposition, are no
longer relevant, nor does the possibility of credibly monitoring the implementation
of those arrangements currently exist.
29. Notwithstanding the above-mentioned challenges and the Government’s lack
of willingness to cooperate with the Mechanism, the Mission should continue to
support the Mechanism. Continued monitoring of the situation on the ground,
however restricted, can act as a deterrent to hostilities by identifying those parties
that have acted in breach of their obligations and could be subject to pun itive
measures. Furthermore, the Mechanism maintains contact with a number of
SPLM/A in Opposition representatives on the ground. Retaining open lines of
communication with the parties to the conflict is essential and aids in allowing for a
greater situational awareness with respect to hostilities on the ground and how they
might be mitigated.
30. Should the parties agree to a cessation of hostilities and return to the political
dialogue, it will be important that they recommit themselves to the cantonment of
forces and implement any future security arrangements so as to provide political
space for the establishment of inclusive governance. Continued Mission support for
the Mechanism will enable it to immediately begin monitoring the parties’ actions in
respect of their commitments should the ceasefire take hold and will prevent any
operational interruptions that could challenge the resumption of its work.

C.

Protection of civilians
Protect and deter violence against civilians, including in areas of origin and
of displacement
31. Given the current environment in which the Government and other parties
continue to attack civilians, the existing rhetoric against the United Nations and the
protection of civilians sites, the challenges facing the Miss ion in terms of accessing
vulnerable civilians outside the sites and the lack, at times, of a consistent, proactive
and outward-facing posture to protect civilians, the Mission’s limitations with
respect to the implementation of its protection of civilians mandate must be
recognized. In addition to the above challenges, more than 200,000 civilians are
currently housed in the seven protection of civilians and adjacent sites throughout
the country, a caseload that places significant demands on nearly every as pect of the

16-19546

9/18

S/2016/951

Mission’s capabilities. Should increased fighting lead to further displacement and an
increased influx of civilians into the protection of civilians sites, the Mission’s
capacity to defend and maintain order within the sites will likely be over whelmed,
further reducing its ability to influence events outside the sites. In carrying out its
protection of civilians mandate in the current setting, the Mission will have to
continue to carefully weigh its ability to extend protection into areas of ori gin and
displacement against its responsibilities vis-à-vis the protection of civilians sites
and staff security. Nevertheless, protection of civilians will continue to be given
priority in decisions on the use of available capacity and resources.
32. The impact of the regional protection force in Juba and the reorganization of
Mission capabilities will need to be evaluated once the force is deployed. Doing so
will help to inform the requirement for any additional capabilities needed to project
troops outside United Nations bases for the protection of civilians.
Recommendations to that end would be made to the Security Council on the basis of
a subsequent review and military capability study.
Strengthen mechanisms for conflict management, peaceful coexistence,
reconciliation and social cohesion, in particular at the community level
33. While the space for political engagement at the national level continues to be
restricted, there appears to be more room to engage with communities and
authorities at the local level. Mobilizing local populations towards peace and
reconciliation is a vital part of the effort to repair the country’s social fabric and
reverse the ethnicization that characterizes the current national crisis. Efforts to
create a culture of peace throughout South Sudan will create a more substantial base
for any political process at the national level, while also helping to prevent and
mitigate intercommunal violence at the local level. Such direct engagement with
communities has positive societal implications, provides strong protection of
civilians input and will help to lay the groundwork for the eventual return and
reintegration of internally displaced persons and vulnerable populations.
34. Creating and supporting peace efforts at the subnational level creates
opportunities for the Mission, in collaboration with the United Nations country
team, to engage a broad range of relevant stakeholders, including churches, civil
society, traditional bodies and influential figures in the community conte xt. Doing
so can produce tangible results at the intercommunal level and serves to manage
their expectations and raise their understanding of the roles and responsibilities of
government.
35. Local engagements, in collaboration with the United Nations country team, to
reconcile communities in conflict include a range of activities, such as enhancing
the capacity of the Council of Traditional Authority Leaders to put into operation
local traditional mechanisms for dialogue and reconciliation. Additional activities
will include helping government and local stakeholders to manage resource -based
cross-border intercommunal conflict and providing support to survivors of trauma
and sexual and gender-based violence in the community.
36. The Mission’s increased focus on strengthening mechanisms for peaceful
coexistence at the community level should be understood as a front -line protection
intervention and part of an overarching political strategy. Such e fforts should also

10/18

16-19546

S/2016/951

help to improve the public perception of UNMISS and of the United Nations as a
whole.
Maintain public safety and security within protection of civilians sites
37. The Mission is proposing to increase and improve its patrolling in t he areas
immediately surrounding the protection of civilians sites, where sexual violence and
other threats to civilians have proliferated. To that end, the Mission will implement
integrated patrols that include military, police and civilian staff members, in
particular human rights officers and women’s protection advisers. Dismounted
patrols by the military and police components in those areas will also be conducted
throughout the night, when violence against civilians is pervasive. The newly
established weapon-free zone around the sites in Juba has already helped to increase
visibility in those areas and will be replicated in the other sites.
38. Given the current security environment, the United Nations presence in South
Sudan must accept that civilians will continue to seek refuge in the protection of
civilians sites until there is a significant improvement in the situation and should
therefore turn its energies to improving its holistic approach to the management of
the sites. Utilizing their comparative advantages, UNMISS and humanitarian actors
should seek to improve their collaboration, better delineate roles and
responsibilities, attempt to identify joint solutions to problems and plan for
medium- and long-term programme engagement in the sites.
39. Accordingly, it is recommended that UNMISS be responsible for ensuring the
external security of the sites and their immediate surroundings, while strengthening
its engagement with internally displaced persons and local communities to ensure
the civilian character of and safety and security within and around the protection of
civilians sites. Humanitarian actors should be responsible for the management of the
sites and the provision of services therein. UNMISS and humanitarian actors that
have experience with the identification of combatants in camps for internally
displaced persons and refugees would implement screening measures to better
protect the civilians in the sites and ensure that they are not used as a refuge for
those involved in hostilities. To be effective, such measures must be supplemented
by improved perimeter protection in order to keep out combatants who might seek
to circumvent screening.
40. An additional 196 individual police officers are also recommended to enhance
internal security measures. This will include quick-reaction responses to security
incidents and public order situations, early warning through the collection, analysis
and reporting of security information, support for humanitarian agencies during
food distribution and registration processes, the management of holding facilities,
support for community policing concepts under the Global Focal Point on Police,
Justice and Corrections Areas in the Rule of Law in Post-conflict and other Crisis
Situations arrangement, and the implementation and monitoring of and reporting on
human rights violations, including sexual and gender-based violence, violations
against children and arbitrary or prolonged detentions.
Conflict-related sexual violence
41. The level of conflict-related sexual violence remains an increasing source of
concern, as is the threat of further violence, in particular against women and girls.

16-19546

11/18

S/2016/951

Accordingly, UNMISS will strengthen its work towards the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013) by monitoring, analysing
and reporting on patterns and trends in conflict-related sexual violence and
strengthening internal capacity in that regard through training; prevention, including
through the use of early warning indicators on conflict -related sexual violence; and
efforts to address accountability. From an operational standpoint, the Mission will
increase high-visibility foot patrols outside the protection of civilians sites, with a
particular focus on the newly established weapon-free zone surrounding the sites in
Juba, and at key crossing points where sexual violence crimes have been
concentrated. The Mission will also explore the use of unarmed civilian protection
techniques to enhance its ability to protect civilians, in particular those threatened
with sexual violence. UNMISS and United Nations agencies will undertake
activities relating to advocacy, mainstreaming, training and capacity -building and
raising awareness inside and outside the Mission on conflict -related sexual violence
concerns to enhance prevention and better respond to survivors’ needs. The Mission
will also continue to coordinate the conflict-related sexual violence mandate,
provide senior-level engagement with and technical support for the parties and
advocate the integration of prevention and accountability with regard to such
violations within any future efforts relating to transitional justice, security sector
reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
Child protection
42. Grave and widespread violations against children continue to be committed by
all parties to the conflict in South Sudan, with a significant spike noted during the
second half of 2016 in reports of the recruitment and use of children, the killing and
maiming of children and sexual violence against children. UNMISS should continue
to work with partners on the monitoring, verification and reporting of the six grave
violations against children, in line with the Security Council’s mandate on children
in armed conflict, and to support the parties to conflict in the implementation of
their respective action plans signed with the United Nations in -country to halt and
prevent grave violations against children.
43. The Mission should continue to advocate that children be immediately and
unconditionally released by the parties and that the Government act upon its
repeated commitment since 2012 to take measures to halt and prevent grave
violations against children committed by SPLA. UNMISS should also follow up
with SPLM/A in Opposition on its commitment made in late 2015 to release all
children from their ranks without further delay. UNMISS should work closely with
the United Nations country team to regain unimpeded access to affected
communities to ensure timely humanitarian assistance and support for child victims
and their families and to verify reports of grave violations against children.

D.

Human rights
Monitor, investigate, verify and report on violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law
44. The deterioration of the human rights situation requires the continued active
engagement of UNMISS in the monitoring, investigation, verification and regular

12/18

16-19546

S/2016/951

public reporting of violations of human rights and international humanitarian law,
with a particular focus on gross violations, violations against children and conflict related sexual violence, as well as the ethnic dimensions of such violatio ns.
45. Accurate and timely human rights monitoring and public reporting are needed
to inform international and regional responses to mass atrocities and efforts to hold
perpetrators to account, including by pinpointing individual responsibilities. Of
particular importance is the work of UNMISS in monitoring situations of rising
intolerance, hate speech and emerging patterns of violations affecting specific
groups. The identification of early warning signals is key to ensuring a timely
response, holding those responsible to account for what could happen and
mobilizing key stakeholders to prevent further escalation.
46. Given the increasingly hostile environment for human rights work in the
country, UNMISS should prioritize capacity-building and support for defenders and
strengthen its efforts to protect those who suffer reprisals for engaging with the
United Nations. Advocacy on the importance of respecting freedom of expression
and the need to preserve democratic space in the country should increase.
47. In the area of transitional justice, the United Nations should focus its efforts
on the need to develop a more enabling and safe environment for transitional
justice. To that end, UNMISS and the United Nations country team should continue
to work to raise human rights awareness and capacity within key State institutions.
The development of specific programmes and strategies aimed at empowering
victims must accompany such efforts. Of critical importance for enhancing
accountability is the establishment of the hybrid court, which the United Nations
must encourage through its advocacy and expertise in the area.
48. Human rights monitoring should also continue to focus on justice, law
enforcement and security sector institutions to assess their compliance with h uman
rights standards and the rule of law. The Mission’s mandate explicitly provides for
unconditional access to all detention centres and other holding facilities in South
Sudan for the purpose of the comprehensive monitoring and assessment of
prolonged and arbitrary arrests and detention.
49. The Mission should continue to advocate the ratification of the remaining core
human rights treaties and the harmonization of national legislation. Equally
important is advocacy with the Government to fulfil its repo rting obligations under
the international and regional human rights treaties to which it has acceded, as well
as to continue its cooperation with the Human Rights Council and regional
mechanisms.
Human rights due diligence policy
50. Support for several security structures provided for in the peace agreement,
including the South Sudan National Police Service and the Joint Operations Centre,
will require that the Mission have strengthened capacity to adequately implement
the human rights due diligence policy.

16-19546

13/18

S/2016/951

E.

Creation of conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance
Contribute to the creation of security conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
51. As the humanitarian crisis continues to deepen and spread, the operating
environment is likely to become increasingly complex and dangerous. Active
conflict, restrictions on freedom of movement, and unexploded ordnance are likely
to limit the ability of both humanitarian actors and UNMISS to reach people in
need. Humanitarian organizations continue to strengthen their own ability to
undertake discrete access negotiations in order to be able to move freely and safely
throughout the country. There are times, however, when UNMISS can make
valuable contributions to humanitarian action by providing specific capabilities and
capacities in order to support the delivery of humanitarian assistance as a measure
of last resort.
52. In close coordination with humanitarian actors, UNMISS should continue to
contribute to the creation of security conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance so as to enable, in accordance with humanitarian principles,
the rapid, safe and unhindered access of relief personnel and assets to all those in
need.

F.

Rule of law and security institutions
53. While the peace agreement calls for broad reforms in the area of security and
justice sectors, the Government has made little genuine progress on those fronts.
With respect to the Mission’s undertaking in this area, it is belie ved that it would be
ill timed to engage in security sector reform or disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration efforts in the absence of an inclusive political process and in support
of a national security architecture that does not currently include a large segment of
the fighting forces in the country. It is recommended, therefore, that any future
support for security sector reform or disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
be predicated on the re-establishment of representative and inclusive bodies,
including the Strategic Defence and Security Review Board. In the meantime, I
recommend that the Mission’s rule of law and security institutions efforts during the
coming mandate period focus on supporting the South Sudan National Police
Service as described above and on monitoring the implementation of the transitional
security arrangements and the transitional justice aspects of the peace agreement. In
addition, the Mission’s provision of advice to the United Nations system in South
Sudan on those issues, with a view to developing a strategy for support for
prioritized reforms in the rule of law sector during the transitional period, will be
important in view of the need to demilitarize the security sector.
54. Improving the management of the holding facilities in the protection of
civilians sites is also a priority. As with those sites, UNMISS will need to maintain
the holding facilities for the foreseeable future. While there have been significant
improvements in the holding facilities in Juba, Bentiu and Malakal, continued
adjustment to the management of and the security, infrastructure and conditions in
the facilities is required. Additional efforts are also needed to find a way, consistent
with international humanitarian and human rights law, to hand over to the South

14/18

16-19546

S/2016/951

Sudanese authorities those detainees suspected of having committed serious crimes.
To that end, it will be necessary to develop a strategy to strengthen the management
of the facilities and formulate a process for the handover of det ainees.

G.

Continual development and strengthening of the security risk
management strategy and process to ensure the safety and security
of United Nations personnel, United Nations mandate
implementation and programme delivery
55. The measures set out below have been identified in line with paragraphs 6 and
18 of Security Council resolution 2304 (2016), in which the Council requested that I
provide recommendations for enhancing the safety and securi ty of United Nations
personnel.
56. The United Nations security management system in South Sudan relies on the
host Government for the provision of adequate security and other relevant
cooperation, as outlined in the status-of-forces agreement. Nevertheless, in the
current volatile political environment, the Government’s cooperation with the
United Nations has been minimal and status-of-forces agreement violations are
widespread. In that regard, robust political engagement is paramount to ensure that
the host Government assumes its responsibility to protect United Nations personnel
and assets and that there is more effective liaison and improved coordination with
its security agencies.
57. Top priority will be given to strengthening and improving perimeter defence
arrangements, ensuring round-the-clock medical care and evacuation arrangements,
the hardening of office and accommodation walls and the construction of sufficient
indirect fire shelters.
58. It is believed that United Nations personnel should reside only in United
Nations compounds or safe zones in which they can be safely relocated or extracted
in case of a crisis situation. With regard to Juba, Zone 1 in Tomping, in close
proximity to Juba International Airport, has been identified as a safe zone.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that the established Emergency Response Teams
tasked with assisting United Nations personnel in cases of emergency have no
extraction capability in non-permissive settings; hence the need for dedicated
military support to respond to United Nations personnel safety and security issues
during crises.
59. Given that national staff members rarely carry radios owing to associated
security concerns, a procedure will be developed to improve their ability to receive
timely security information. In that regard, a functional warden system with reliable
communications and structure that allows easy accounting for national staff should
be developed. Arrangements will need to be put in place to relocate staff from high risk duty stations to safer United Nations facilities.

16-19546

15/18

S/2016/951

IV. Mission support considerations
60. UNMISS has completed the post-December 2013 crisis uplift authorized under
Security Council resolution 2155 (2014), which took the Mission from 7,000 to
12,500 troops and up to 1,343 police personnel. Nevertheless, the additional troop
and police increases authorized under Security Council resolution 2252 (2015) are
facing delays owing to force generation issues and the inherent physical and
political challenges of operating in South Sudan. The deployment and sequential
absorption of a further 4,000 regional protection force troops will necessitate the
realignment of Mission resources. Support for the induction and accommodation of
the regional protection force will need to be coordinated closely and pursued in a
phased manner to ensure that contingent-owned equipment, accommodation and
support requirements are in place.
61. Currently, all major UNMISS locations are at capacity or overstretched in
terms of staff, contingents and formed police units, while engineering resources are
allocated to priority enhancements to improve the safety and security of United
Nations staff. The presence of more than 200,000 internally displaced persons,
spread across key UNMISS locations, further exacerbates the operating
environment. Road networks are few and in extremely poor condition, and many
roads are simply impassable during the rainy season. Barge convoys are routinely
delayed for many weeks. Material supplies are backlogged and compete with vital
fuel and food supplies for cargo space on finite air assets. Cumulatively, this
situation underscores the fact that the Mission has limited absorption capacity and
must have clear priorities and compatible resource reallocation.

V. Observations
62. Immediate steps must be taken to reassert the primacy of the political pro cess.
The first steps in that regard must be to seek an immediate cessation of hostilities
and a commitment to dialogue. As efforts are undertaken to reinvigorate dialogue
between the parties, it will be essential to formulate a clear political strategy th at
leverages the strengths of the region and the international community. Such a
strategy must include meaningful incentives and disincentives for those in a position
to fuel the current instability or contribute to the future peace of South Sudan. It
must be developed quickly, in close consultation with IGAD, the African Union, the
Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and other stakeholders.
The Government must be continually reminded that it has the primary responsibility
to protect its own citizens and that it must provide such protection regardless of
ethnic or political affiliation.
63. There is a very real risk of mass atrocities being committed in South Sudan, in
particular following the sharp rise in hate speech and ethnic incitement in recent
weeks. It will be important that we define clearly what the United Nations system
can and cannot do should mass atrocities occur in South Sudan. While the
Secretariat will continue to make every effort to implement the mandated task of
protecting civilians through the use of “all necessary means”, it must be clearly
understood that United Nations peacekeeping operations do not have the appropriate
reach, manpower or capabilities to stop mass atrocities. The limits on the Mission’s

16/18

16-19546

S/2016/951

ability to protect civilians in the current environment have already been
demonstrated clearly. In the course of the strategic assessment, the African Union
Commission proposed a separate discussion with the United Nations on the issue
with the aim of identifying how the two organizations could respond to such an
eventuality, including the possible establishment of an over -the-horizon force, in
follow-up to the IGAD communiqué of 5 August. I intend to send a delegation to
Addis Ababa in response to the Commission’s proposal as soon as possible, bearing
in mind that such a force would also be an important measure to enhance staff safety
and security.
64. I have carefully studied the findings of the Independent Special Investigation
into the violence that occurred in Juba between 8 and 25 July. The present report has
taken into account the recommendations made by the Independent Special
Investigation, which will be taken forward by the Secretariat and the Mission and
monitored by a Headquarters-led task force.
65. As I have recommended repeatedly, the Security Council should impose an
arms embargo on South Sudan and targeted sanctions on those who seek to obstruct
the peace process. South Sudan is inundated with weaponry, which is often turned
on defenceless civilians. Under the present circumstances, stopping the flow of
additional arms into the country is critical for the protection of civilians. In
addition, those with influence in South Sudan who continue to block progress
towards a political settlement and prolong human suffering must understand that
they will face consequences.
66. The barrage of restrictions that the Government imposes on the freedom of
movement and access of UNMISS and humanitarian actors are steadily leading to
Mission paralysis and undermining humanitarian operations. UNMISS is routinely
unable to patrol in areas in which civilians require protection, and humanitarian
colleagues are often unable to access populations in need of urgent relief. The
Security Council must hold the Government to account for these obstructions. If
not, UNMISS will soon be reduced to inaction. I intend to actively engage the
members of IGAD-Plus on status-of-forces agreement violations in order to
facilitate their advocacy with the Government to that end.
67. If allowed to deploy and operate in line with its mandate, the regional
protection force will be an important instrument for helping to bring stability to
Juba and create the political space necessary to facilitate inclusive governance. At
the same time, the force should be seen as an additional tool for achieving a
political solution to the conflict. The Government should urgently extend its full
cooperation to facilitate the early deployment of the force and the full
implementation of its mandate.
68. Efforts to implement chapter V of the peace agreement, including the
establishment of the hybrid court, should continue. I welcome the intention of the
African Union to do so with haste. The lack of accountability for serious violations
of human rights in South Sudan perpetuates the conflict. I reiterate the Secretariat’s
firm commitment to supporting the African Union in putting into operation this
important mechanism.
69. Inclusive governance is a sine qua non for peace in South Sudan. Failure to
ensure that the voices of South Sudanese are heard and taken into account will only

16-19546

17/18

S/2016/951

prolong the conflict and increase feelings of marginalization. The country’s political
leaders cannot afford to ignore communities with legitimate grievances or those
who justifiably want to participate in a free and pluralistic South Sudan. To that end,
President Kiir and his Government must make the strategic decision to govern for
all people of South Sudan and embrace those voices of dissent that are expressed
peacefully. Those who want to participate in the political process must renounce
violence, commit to the path of dialogue, embrace transparency and accountability
and encourage their followers to do the same.
70. I recommend that the mandate of UNMISS be renewed for one year, along the
lines set out in the present report, with a midterm evaluation of progress made by
the parties in ceasing hostilities, returning to the path of dialogue and achieving
inclusiveness within the Government. Such an evaluation would include a frank
assessment of the parties’ willingness to work with UNMISS in carrying out its
mandated tasks and facilitate the deployment and operations of the regional
protection force so that the Security Council can consider what other measures
would be required to address the situation.
71. I would like to express my gratitude to UNMISS and the United Nations
country team for their support for and participation in the strategic assessment. I
would also like to thank the African Union, IGAD, the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, the diplomatic community in Juba and Addis Ababa and
internally displaced persons in the protection of civilians sites and adjacent areas
who provided their frank views and constructive opinions to the members of the
assessment team.

18/18

16-19546
