United Nations

A/RES/60/47

General Assembly

Distr.: General
6 January 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 88

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 8 December 2005
[on the report of the First Committee (A/60/454)]

60/47.

Question of Antarctica

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/51 of 22 November 2002, in which it requested the
Secretary-General to submit a report consisting of the information provided by the
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties on their consultative meetings, on their
activities in Antarctica and on developments in relation to Antarctica,
Taking into account the debates on the question of Antarctica held since its
thirty-eighth session,
Conscious of the particular significance of Antarctica to the international
community, including for international peace and security, the global and regional
environment, its effects on global and regional climate conditions, and scientific
research,
Reaffirming that the management and use of Antarctica should be conducted in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and in the interest of maintaining international peace and security and of promoting
international cooperation for the benefit of mankind as a whole,
Recognizing that the Antarctic Treaty, 1 which provides, inter alia, for the
demilitarization of the continent, the prohibition of nuclear explosions and the
disposal of nuclear wastes, the freedom of scientific research and the free exchange
of scientific information, is in furtherance of the purposes and principles of the
Charter,
Noting with satisfaction the entry into force of the Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 2 on 14 January 1998, under which Antarctica has
been designated as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and science, and the
provisions contained in the Protocol regarding the protection of the Antarctic
environment and dependent and associated ecosystems, including the need for
environmental impact assessment in the planning and conduct of all relevant
activities in Antarctica,

_______________
1
2

05-49042

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 402, No. 5778.
International Legal Materials, vol. XXX, No. 6, p. 1461.

A/RES/60/47

Welcoming the continuing cooperation among countries undertaking scientific
research activities in Antarctica, which may help to minimize human impact on the
Antarctic environment,
Welcoming also the increasing awareness of and interest in Antarctica shown
by the international community, and convinced of the advantages to the whole of
mankind of a better knowledge of Antarctica,
Welcoming further the secretariat of the Antarctic Treaty, established in
Buenos Aires, which became operational as of 1 September 2004,
Reaffirming its conviction that, in the interest of all mankind, Antarctica
should continue forever to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and that it
should not become the scene or object of international discord,
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the question of
1.
Antarctica 3 and the role accorded by the Secretary-General to the United Nations
Environment Programme in preparing his report, and also of the Twenty-sixth
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, held in Madrid from 9 to 20 June 2003, the
Twenty-seventh Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, held in Cape Town, South
Africa, from 24 May to 4 June 2004, and the Twenty-eighth Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Meeting, held in Stockholm from 6 to 17 June 2005;
Recalls the statement under chapter 17 of Agenda 21, 4 adopted by the
2.
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, that States carrying
out research activities in Antarctica should, as provided for in article III of the
Antarctic Treaty, continue:
(a) To ensure that data and information resulting from such research are
freely available to the international community;
(b) To enhance the access of the international scientific community and the
specialized agencies of the United Nations system to such data and information,
including the encouragement of periodic seminars and symposiums;
Welcomes the invitations to the Executive Director of the United Nations
3.
Environment Programme to attend Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings in order
to assist such meetings in their substantive work, and urges the parties to continue to
do so for future consultative meetings;
Welcomes also the practice whereby the Antarctic Treaty Consultative
4.
Parties regularly provide the Secretary-General with information on their
consultative meetings and on their activities in Antarctica, and encourages the
parties to continue to provide the Secretary-General and interested States with
information on those meetings, activities and developments in relation to Antarctica;
5.

Decides to remain seized of the matter.
61st plenary meeting
8 December 2005

_______________
3

A/60/222.
See Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–
14 June 1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted
by the Conference, resolution 1, annex II, chap. 17, para. 17.104.

4

2
