S/PV.9085

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9085th meeting

Thursday, 30 June 2022, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Arya
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward/Mr. Eckersely
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Letter dated 10 June 2022 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2022/482)
Thirteenth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2022/490)
Letter dated 23 June 2022 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2022/510)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506 (verbatimrecords@
un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of
the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-40676 (E)
*2240676*

Non-proliferation

S/PV.9085

Geraldine Byrne Nason, Permanent Representative of
Ireland, in her capacity as Security Council Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.

The agenda was adopted.

Ms. DiCarlo: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the invitation to brief the Security Council on the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and
resolution 2231 (2015).

Non-proliferation
Letter dated 10 June 2022 from the
Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2022/482)

Diplomatic engagements in and around the Joint
Commission to restore the Plan resumed in November
2021. But despite their determination to resolve political
and technical differences, the participants and the
United States have yet to return to the full and effective
implementation of the Plan and resolution 2231 (2015).

Thirteenth report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2022/490)
Letter dated 23 June 2022 from the
Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2022/510)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the representatives of Germany and the Islamic
Republic of Iran to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; and His Excellency Mr. Olof
Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
the following documents: S/2022/482, which contains
the text of a letter dated 10 June 2022 from the Security
Council Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/2022/490, which contains the thirteenth
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015); and
S/2022/510, which contains the text of a letter dated
23 June 2022 from the Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. DiCarlo, Mr. Skoog and Ambassador
2/23

30/06/2022

Achieving the landmark JCPOA took determined
diplomacy; restoring it will require additional effort
and patience. Together with the Secretary-General,
I therefore urge the Islamic Republic of Iran and the
United States to quickly mobilize in that same spirit
and commitment to resume their cooperation under
the JCPOA.
In that regard, we welcome the step taken by the
United States in February 2022 to reinstate waivers
on nuclear non-proliferation projects. We again appeal
to the United States to lift or waive its sanctions as
outlined in the Plan and to extend the waivers regarding
the trade in oil with Iran. We also call on the Islamic
Republic of Iran to reverse the steps it has taken that
are not consistent with its nuclear-related commitments
under the Plan.
While the International Atomic Energy Agency has
not been able to verify the stockpile of enriched uranium
in Iran, it estimates a total enriched uranium stockpile
of more than 15 times the allowable amount under the
JCPOA. That includes amounts of uranium enriched
to 20 per cent and 60 per cent, which is extremely
worrisome. Moreover, on 8 and 20 June, the Agency
reported that Iran had started to install additional
advanced centrifuges at the fuel enrichment plant at
Natanz and had begun to feed uranium into advanced
centrifuges at the fuel enrichment plant at Fordow.
The Agency has also once again reported that
its verification and monitoring activities have been
seriously affected as a result of Iran’s decision to stop
the implementation of its nuclear-related commitments
under the JCPOA, including the Additional Protocol. In
his most recent report, the Agency’s Director General
22-40676

30/06/2022

Non-proliferation

S/PV.9085

informed the Security Council that the decision of
Iran to remove cameras at various locations and to
place them and the data collected from them under
Agency seals could have detrimental implications. The
Agency’s ability to verify Iran’s nuclear activities and
to confirm their peaceful nature are key to the full and
effective implementation of the JCPOA.

pertains to the supply, sale or transfer to or from
the Islamic Republic of Iran of all items, materials,
equipment, goods and technology, as set out in Council
document S/2015/546. That document includes ballistic
missiles, cruise missiles and other unmanned aerial
vehicle systems (UAVs) with a range of 300 kilometres
or more.

The Plan and resolution 2231 (2015) support our
common objectives of nuclear non-proliferation and
regional security. In that regard, the bilateral and
regional initiatives to improve relationships with
Iran remain key and should be encouraged and built
upon. We also continue to encourage Member States
and the private sector to engage in trade with Iran
using available trade instruments to address ongoing
challenges. In addition to the issues with regard to the
implementation of its JCPOA commitments, it is also
important for Iran to address the concerns raised by
participants in the Plan and by other Member States in
relation to annex B to resolution 2231 (2015).

During the reporting period, we conducted a followup visit to Riyadh, as well as to Abu Dhabi, upon the
invitation of their respective authorities. We examined
the debris of nine ballistic missiles, six cruise missiles
and several UAVs used in various attacks by the Houthis
against the territories of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates since 2020 and which were alleged to
have been transferred in a manner inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015). We observed that the debris of
the nine ballistic missiles and six cruise missiles had
similar design characteristics and parts consistent with
those of missiles examined previously and assessed to
be of Iranian origin. We also assessed those missiles or
parts thereof to be of Iranian origin. However, we have
not been able to determine when the ballistic missiles
or parts thereof may have been transferred from Iran,
in particular whether such transfers occurred after
16 January 2016, the date on which the restrictive
measures set out in annex B to resolution 2231 (2015)
came into force.

I now turn to the measures set out in annex B to
the resolution, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s
thirteenth report on the implementation of resolution
2231 (S/2022/490).
First, on nuclear-related provisions, no new
proposals were submitted to the procurement channel
in the past six months. The Council, however, received
five notifications, submitted pursuant to paragraph 2 of
annex B, for certain nuclear-related activities consistent
with the Plan.
Secondly, with regard to the ballistic missile-related
provisions, France, Germany, Iran, Israel, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom and the United States
provided information to the Secretary-General and the
Security Council concerning ballistic missile launches
and the presentation of a new Iranian medium-range
ballistic missile between November 2021 and February
2022. We also received information from those same
States about two space-launch vehicle tests and two
static-engine tests conducted by Iran between December
2021 and March of this year. The information provided
reflects divergent views among those Member States
as to whether those launches and other activities are
inconsistent with the resolution.
Thirdly, we reported on our analysis and
examination of information received from Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates related to paragraph 4
of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015). That paragraph

Finally, on the assets freeze provisions, we did not
receive any information alleging actions inconsistent
with those provisions of resolution 2231 (2015).
The JCPOA was a triumph for non-proliferation
and multilateralism. After several years of uncertainty,
the Plan is now at a critical juncture. We hope that the
Islamic Republic of Iran and the United States will
continue to build on the momentum of the past few days
of talks, facilitated by the European Union, to resolve
the remaining issues.
Will we realize the promise of multilateralism and
diplomacy by reaching a compromise on the remaining
issues? Or will we simply let the painstaking efforts of
many years slip between our fingers? The SecretaryGeneral is convinced there is only one path to lasting
peace and security for all Member States, and that is
one based on dialogue and cooperation. We hope that
diplomacy will prevail.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015),
Her Excellency Ms. Geraldine Byrne Nason, for

22-406763/23

S/PV.9085

Non-proliferation

her leadership throughout her tenure, as well as the
Coordinator of the Procurement Working Group of the
Joint Commission for our continued cooperation.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: It is again an honour to have an
opportunity to address the Security Council in this
meeting on behalf of the High Representative of the
European Union (EU) for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, in his capacity
as Coordinator of the Joint Commission of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
I would like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and their team in the
Secretariat for their dedication and perseverance in
their work related to the implementation of resolution
2231(2015), in particular the report on that subject
(S/2022/490) for today’s discussion. I would also like to
express our gratitude to Her Excellency Ms. Geraldine
Byrne Nason in her role as the Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and for her
work to keep members informed of the current state
of play.
Since the previous report (S/2021/995) on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) in December,
all JCPOA participants and the United States have
continued their intense negotiations in Vienna to restore
the JCPOA. Those negotiations started more than a
year ago, in April 2021. They have been challenging,
not only in terms of defining the steps needed to restore
the JCPOA but also in overcoming the trust deficit
following the decision of the previous United States
Administration to withdraw from the JCPOA in 2018
and to reimpose sanctions, as well as subsequent Iranian
nuclear steps inconsistent with JCPOA commitments.
By March, we had produced a text containing
difficult, hard-won compromises, with only a very few
issues remaining open. The text describes in detail the
necessary steps for the United States to return to the
JCPOA and the resumption of the full implementation
of all JCPOA commitments by the United States and
Iran. The negotiations were paused on 11 March due to
external factors and to allow Iran and the United States
to address final outstanding bilateral issues. To that
end, the EU’s efforts to broker an agreement and restore
the JCPOA continued.
4/23

30/06/2022

During the pause, the EU High Representative, as
JCPOA Coordinator and facilitator between Iran and
the United States, continued to be in regular contact
with all JCPOA participants and the United States. On
25 June, the EU High Representative visited Tehran at
the invitation of Iran’s Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Amir-Abdollahian, in an attempt to break the
recent dynamic of escalation and end the stalemate in
the negotiations. Following discussions with relevant
counterparts in Tehran, the High Representative
announced another effort by the EU to help bridge the
remaining gaps between Iran and the United States
through proximity talks, before the agreement was
to be finalized by all JCPOA participants and the
United States.
The EU remains committed to restoring the
JCPOA. However, it is vital that, after more than one
year of negotiations, and in view of Iran’s worrisome
nuclear trajectory and the continued and new United
States sanctions, we conclude this agreement as soon
as possible and proceed with the full implementation
of the JCPOA. That is important not only for Europe,
Iran and the region but also for the world as a whole,
which — now more than ever — needs more security
and stability.
From the Coordinator’s perspective, after more
than one year of intense multilateral negotiations, we
believe we have a good deal on the table to restore the
JCPOA. This is not a bilateral deal between Iran and
the United States. Very tough political choices had
to be made by all JCPOA participants and the United
States to reach the current delicate balance in the text.
The deal is now almost finalized. The space for further
significant changes has been exhausted.
On the EU side, we are concerned that we might
not make it over the finishing line. Our message is this:
seize this opportunity to conclude the deal based on the
text that is on the table. The time to overcome the last
outstanding issues, conclude the deal and fully restore
the JCPOA is now.
As stated time and again, the EU remains
committed to the full and effective implementation
of the agreement, and we are determined to continue
working with the international community for this
purpose. We greatly appreciate the efforts of the
Council and its partners in supporting the restoration of
the JCPOA. At the same time, we remain cognizant of
the fact that there is an overwhelming sense of urgency
22-40676

30/06/2022

Non-proliferation

to conclude the talks. That is shared by a great part
of the international community, as seen in the recent
discussion at the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) Board of Governors meeting held in Vienna
in June.
Iran’s nuclear developments remain a grave source
of concern, particularly with regard to its continued
accumulation of enriched uranium at 20 per cent and
60 per cent and the installation of more and more
advanced centrifuges. Significant work on uranium
metal was conducted over the past year and produced
knowledge gains that remain of concern. Iran’s nuclear
activities are not only inconsistent with the nuclear
provisions of the Plan of Action but also raise serious
non-proliferation concerns.
We also deeply regret Iran’s recent decision to
remove IAEA cameras from key nuclear facilities,
in response to the resolution in the IAEA Board of
Governors. Those cameras are important to ensure the
continuity of knowledge on Iran’s nuclear programme
for the time when the JCPOA is restored. We reiterate
that Iran’s decision to suspend the implementation
of the Additional Protocol and JCPOA transparency
provisions on 23 February 2021 has substantially
decreased the IAEA’s access to relevant information on
Iran’s nuclear programme; it is important not to take
steps, in particular with regard to IAEA monitoring,
that could jeopardize the restoration of the JCPOA.
We fully recognize that Iran has faced, and continues
to face, very serious negative economic consequences
following the withdrawal of the United States from the
JCPOA and the reimposition of previously lifted United
States unilateral sanctions, which we deeply regret.
The restoration of the JCPOA is the only way for Iran
to reap the full benefits and reach its full economic
potential, as it will result in a comprehensive sanctions
lifting that will encourage greater cooperation by the
entire international community with Iran. It is therefore
important to show the necessary political will and
pragmatism to restore the JCPOA on the basis of the
text that is on the table. While acknowledging the strong
sense of urgency, it is important to avoid escalatory
steps and preserve sufficient space for diplomatic
efforts to succeed.
Let me also recall the importance of the procurement
channel, which continues to be fully functional. As
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General, it
remains a vital transparency and confidence-building

S/PV.9085

mechanism. It gives assurances to Member States and
the private sector that transfers of nuclear and dual-use
goods and services are fully in line with resolution
2231 (2015) and the JCPOA.
We furthermore urge all Members of the
Organization to refrain from actions and statements
that increase regional and international tensions and
thereby escalate a military build-up in the region and
beyond. The EU has repeatedly urged Iran to desist
from activities that could deepen mistrust and that are
inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015).
We remain fully committed to multilateral
diplomacy, which has been successful for several
decades. It is the only way forward. Let us not forget
that the origins of the JCPOA are an exemplary outcome
of effective multilateral diplomacy. We have a common
interest in making the JCPOA work, in particular in
the current international environment. Let us do this
together, and let us do it swiftly.
The President: I thank Mr. Skoog for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Byrne Nason.
Ms. Byrne Nason: The thirteenth six-month
report (see S/2022/510) of the Facilitator on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 2231
(2015) was approved by Council members on 23 June.
I would like to thank all Council members for their
constructive engagement in that process and for the
spirit of compromise and flexibility.
The report provides a factual account of the activities
that took place in the 2231 format of the Security
Council, covering the period from 8 December 2021 to
23 June 2022. It includes relevant communications,
summarized in my report, as well as key aspects of the
workings of the procurement channel. Council members
may refer to the report for details, but I wish to mention
three points in particular.
First, I would like to report that one meeting
of the Council in the 2231 format was held during
this reporting period, on 23 June 2022, at which
representatives of the Security Council discussed
the findings and recommendations contained in the
thirteenth report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/490)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), prior
to its public release. Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
already referred to some of those points in her briefing.

22-406765/23

S/PV.9085

Non-proliferation

The 2231 format also had a discussion on the ongoing
diplomatic efforts to restore the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, on ballistic missile and space vehicle
launches by the Islamic Republic of Iran, and on issues
related to implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Secondly, a total of 13 notes were circulated
within the 2231 format during the reporting period.
In addition, I sent seven official communications to
Member States and the Coordinator of the Procurement
Working Group of the Joint Commission. I received a
total of 11 communications from Member States and
the Coordinator. Among the communications circulated
were the two regular quarterly reports issued by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), in March
and May 2021, as well as eight updates.

30/06/2022

Finally, over the course of my time as Facilitator, I
have done my utmost to support the implementation of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action in an impartial
and transparent manner, working closely with all
Council members to meet our shared responsibility
to ensure the full and effective implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA, which it
underpins. I would like to take this opportunity to thank
the staff of the Secretariat for their invaluable advice
and strong support over this period. It has been a great
honour to work with everyone on this important file.
The President: I thank Ambassador Byrne Nason
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

I would like to stress the importance of the IAEA’s
role in conducting verification and monitoring activities
in the Islamic Republic of Iran, as requested under
resolution 2231 (2015). The IAEA’s work is essential
to provide confidence for the international community
that the nuclear programme of the Islamic Republic of
Iran is for exclusively peaceful purposes. The reports
of the Director General play a key role in that regard.

Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for the Secretariat’s
work on the report (S/2022/490) of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) and her briefing to the Security
Council. I would also like to thank my colleagues
Ambassador Skoog and Ambassador Byrne Nason for
their briefings as well.

Thirdly, no new proposals were submitted to the
Security Council through the procurement channel
during the reporting period. The procurement channel
represents a key transparency and confidence-building
mechanism under the JCPOA. It remains operational
and stands ready to review proposals. I join the
Secretary-General in encouraging all participants to
the JCPOA, Member States and the private sector to
fully support and utilize the channel.

The United States remains committed to a
mutual return to the full implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We have been
prepared for months to conclude a deal based on the
understandings negotiated in Vienna. Such a deal has
been available since March, but we can conclude a
deal and implement it only if Iran drops its additional
demands that are outside the scope of the JCPOA.

The JCPOA is a major achievement in nuclear
non-proliferation, an example of how we can work
together to resolve protracted and difficult issues
through dialogue and diplomacy. I note that discussions
among the parties are ongoing. I join the other briefers
here today in hoping that all sides can move to accept
the agreement on the table and ensure that the JCPOA
can achieve its goals for the benefit of all.
It is important that all parties to the agreement
uphold it in both spirit and letter, avoid actions that
undermine the implementation of commitments,
and ensure its full and effective implementation. In
turn, we in New York must continue to play our part
in demonstrating that resolution 2231 (2015), which
endorses the JCPOA, is working as it should.
6/23

In that regard, we would like to thank the European
External Action Service and High Representative
Borrell Fontelles for going, quite literally, the extra
miles in support of concluding an understanding on
mutual return to the full implementation of the JCPOA.
In the light of those efforts, we were all the more
disappointed that, during High Representative Borrell
Fontelles’s visit to Tehran on Saturday and the indirect
discussions conducted by the European External
Action Service in Doha this week, Iran continued to
make demands that go well beyond the JCPOA. Iran has
yet to demonstrate any real urgency to conclude a deal,
end the current nuclear crisis and achieve important
sanctions lifting.
We remain concerned by the steps Iran has taken
recently that undermine the verification and monitoring
22-40676

30/06/2022

Non-proliferation

by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of
JCPOA commitments, including the removal of JCPOArelated cameras and monitoring equipment. Such steps
make a mutual return to the full implementation of the
JCPOA more difficult.
The IAEA has our full support in carrying out its
critical verification and monitoring responsibilities
in Iran for both safeguards and JCPOA purposes.
On 8 June, the IAEA Board of Governors expressed
profound concern that safeguards issues in Iran remain
outstanding due to insufficient cooperation from Iran.
The Board called on Iran to act on an urgent basis to
fulfil its safeguards obligations. Iran must provide the
required cooperation necessary to resolve the IAEA’s
concerns without further delay.
It is also important that Member States continue
to fully implement the relevant measures in annex B
to resolution 2231 (2015). For instance, restrictions
remain in place on transfers to and from Iran of
certain ballistic missile- and nuclear-related items and
technology, and individuals and entities on the list
established pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015) remain
subject to an assets freeze.
We appreciate the Secretariat’s continued reporting
on the implementation of those measures. The report’s
findings that ballistic missiles and cruise missiles
launched into Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates, or their component parts, are of Iranian origin
underscores the destabilizing nature of Iran’s continued
development and proliferation of missile technology.
Furthermore, the Secretary-General’s report finds
that unmanned aerial vehicles used in attacks on
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates contained
components that the Secretariat had previously assessed
to be of Iranian origin.
The United States strongly condemns those attacks
on Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. Iran’s
continued proliferation of weapons to its proxies and
partners in the region must stop. Iran also continues to
carry out activity related to ballistic missiles designed
to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons, in defiance
of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015). Launches of space
launch vehicles on 30 December 2021 and 8 March
2022 relied on technology virtually identical to, and
interchangeable with, those used in ballistic missiles
designed to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons.
Iran’s determination to continue to engage in such
activities is evident in its announcement on 26 June that

S/PV.9085

it had conducted a launch of its Zuljanah space launch
vehicle. Launches using such technology are the exact
type of activity that the Security Council clearly called
upon Iran not to undertake in annex B to resolution 2231
(2015). The Security Council must be clear and united
in condemning that activity. When Iran defies the
Security Council repeatedly without consequences, it
undermines the fundamental credibility of the Council.
In the meantime, the United States remains ready
for a mutual return to the full implementation of the
JCPOA, which we are confident would significantly
advance international security. The ball is in Iran’s
court, and the choice to move back towards the full
implementation of the JCPOA rests with Iran.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
and Ambassador Skoog for their briefings, and
Ambassador Byrne Nason for the thirteenth report (see
S/2022/510) of the Facilitator on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). I welcome the presence of the
representatives of Iran and Germany.
Since its adoption, Mexico has supported the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which is a
successful example of multilateral diplomacy and a key
component of the global non-proliferation architecture.
The agreement represented a major shift in the approach
of the Security Council to addressing Iran’s nuclear
programme, which moved away from a sanctions
regime and confrontation and opted instead for a
collaborative approach.
As we look forward to the participants’ full return
to the JCPOA, we are concerned about the activities
referred to in the respective reports of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/490) and the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), in
particular the enrichment of uranium-235 up to 60 per
cent, as well as research into more advanced activities,
such as metal production and centrifuge modernization,
beyond the limits agreed in the JCPOA.
Transparency and cooperation are key elements
of a properly functioning JCPOA. It is important to
remove any doubts about possible actions by Iran
that have gone beyond the agreements reached in the
JCPOA. To that end, it is necessary to restore access to
the IAEA so that it can evaluate and verify the status
of Iran’s nuclear programme. At the same time, we
urge the United States to lift its unilateral sanctions
against Iran, especially those imposed extraterritorially

22-406767/23

S/PV.9085

Non-proliferation

or on third States. If that could be achieved, it would
represent significant progress.
We understand the position of those who consider
it a priority to address the broader security dynamics
in the region, including with regard to missiles and
the transfer of weapons and components. We believe
that it would be better to opt for separate agreements
that do not limit the full implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) or the prospect of a return to the JCPOA.
Beyond the reciprocal claims about missile and space
technologies, the fact is that the launches and the
responses to which they give rise move us further and
further away from the atmosphere and the trust that are
needed at this time.
We welcome the indirect negotiations that are
under way in Doha. We appreciate the efforts of Qatar
and the European Union to find common ground
between the United States and Iran. Mexico believes
that the Council should support that dialogue with a
view to concluding the negotiations in Vienna. The
return to full compliance with resolution 2231 (2015) is
in the interests of the entire international community,
as it is essential to ensuring the peaceful nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme and promoting stability
in the Middle East. We therefore call for differences
to be settled in a way that enables a prompt return to
compliance with the JCPOA, without preconditions.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Mexico’s
commitment to achieving and sustaining a nuclearweapon-free world through compliance with the
commitments and obligations of the various legal
instruments at our disposal, including the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.
In its aim to strengthen and preserve the
non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament regime
established by the NPT, my country is a consistent
defender of the right of all countries to benefit from
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. But let me be
clear — that right carries with it the obligation to comply
with the commitments and obligations set forth in the
NPT, which include full cooperation with the IAEA.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary Di Carlo as well as Mr. Olof
Skoog, Ambassador and Head of the Delegation of the
European Union, for their briefings. I also welcome
the participation of the Ambassador of Iran in this
8/23

30/06/2022

meeting. My country appreciates and commends
Ms. Geraldine Byrne Nason’s work as Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), in which
the Security Council endorsed the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) on the Iranian nuclear
issue. We also take note of the Secretary-General’s
thirteenth report (S/2022/490) on the implementation
of that resolution.
The adoption of the agreement on 14 July 2015
marked a decisive step in the fight against nuclear
non-proliferation and showed the world what the
international community is capable of when it is united,
committed and determined. Such determination is
necessary for overcoming the differences and tensions
among the parties in order to restart the negotiations
with a view to fully implementing the JCPOA. In that
regard, my country welcomes the efforts made by a
number of countries in recent months to renew dialogue
and revive the agreement, which is both a symbol of and
a benchmark for regional and international security. We
believe that all initiatives that aim achieve that objective
should be encouraged.
It is essential that we regain the positive momentum
in terms of the implementation of the agreement
that existed prior to May 2018. We urge all parties
to take proactive efforts in that regard and to restore
the agreement, whose establishment, it should be
recalled, was the result of a long and arduous process.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has
a vital role to play as a verification entity. We note
Iran’s continued great interest in cooperating with the
IAEA, as well as its active engagement in seeking to
conclude and extend a bilateral interim agreement. We
encourage that initiative and hope that an agreement
will be reached to enable the Agency to conduct its
verification activities at all nuclear sites.
It goes without saying that compliance with
confidence-building measures is critical to the
implementation of the agreement. It is important to
assure all parties and the international community that
the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015), in particular
those set out in annex B thereto, are being complied with.
Furthermore, it is urgent that the unilateral coercive
measures imposed on Iran be reconsidered. They have
a negative impact on the country’s economy, lead to
negative humanitarian consequences and contribute
to tensions in the internal political climate, increasing
security risks. They are clearly counterproductive and
22-40676

30/06/2022

Non-proliferation

at odds with multilateral efforts to resolve the Iranian
nuclear issue through political dialogue.
I would like to conclude by underscoring how
crucial the Plan of Action is for ensuring security and
stability, both internationally and in the Middle East.
As a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, my country believes that achieving
objectives relative to the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons is an important part of building international
peace and stability. The Plan of Action is the ideal
framework for resolving that issue in an equitable and
definitive manner. It is also an excellent reflection of
our collective will to give priority to diplomatic and
political channels in the settlement of disputes.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I join
others in thanking Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s thirteenth report on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2022/490) and thank the
Secretariat for its continued professionalism and
support. I would also like to thank Ambassador Byrne
Nason and His Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog for their
briefings. And let me once again thank Ambassador
Byrne Nason and her team for her work as Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
It is important that we be clear: Iran’s nuclear
programme has never been more advanced than it
is today, and Iran’s nuclear escalation is a threat to
international peace and security. Iran has continued
to improve its enrichment capabilities by developing,
installing and using new advanced centrifuges; it has
continued its rapid accumulation of uranium enriched
up to 20 per cent, and highly enriched uranium up to
60 per cent; and it has continued to curtail International
Atomic Energy Agency monitoring, the most recent
example of which was its decision to switch off 27
monitoring cameras as of 8 June.
Iran has also been producing uranium metal, which
provides weapons-applicable knowledge. At the current
enrichment rate, by the end of this year Iran is likely
to have enough enriched material to rapidly produce
highly enriched uranium at 90 per cent enrichment
for several nuclear devices. Iran also continues to
develop ballistic missiles in a way that is inconsistent
with annex B to resolution 2231 (2015). Iran’s nuclear
escalation is undermining international peace and
security and the global non-proliferation system, and is
in clear violation of resolution 2231 (2015).

S/PV.9085

There has been a deal on the table since March,
following a year of intensive negotiations. At that
point, there was a viable deal, which would return Iran
to compliance with its commitments and the United
States to the deal, reversing Iran’s nuclear escalation
and lifting United States sanctions related to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). However,
Iran is refusing to take that opportunity, while making
demands beyond the scope of the JCPOA. Iran should
urgently take this deal. There will not be a better one
and, if a deal is not struck, then Iran’s nuclear escalation
will cause the JCPOA to collapse. In that scenario,
it will be incumbent on the Security Council to take
decisive steps to ensure that Iran does not develop a
nuclear weapon.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo;
Ambassador Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union; and Ambassador Byrne Nason,
Permanent Representative of Ireland, for their briefings.
We also welcome the presence of the representatives of
Iran and Germany in today’s meeting.
As the product of 10 years of work, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) was a major
win for multilateral diplomacy that was endorsed by a
number of Security Council resolutions. It is a key pillar
of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime,
a buttress for peace and stability in the Middle East
and a model success story for the resolution of regional
hotspot issues through dialogue and negotiation.
Since last year, positive progress has been made in the
negotiations to resume compliance with the JCPOA.
Those negotiations are now in their final stages.
We welcome the resumption in Doha of indirect
talks between the United States and Iran. We also hope
that all the parties concerned, driven by a greater sense
of urgency, will resolve the remaining outstanding
issues without delay in order to remove any obstacles
that stand in the way of restoring the agreement’s
integrity and ensuring its effective implementation.
The future of the Iranian nuclear issue is critical to the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime, regional
stability and international peace and security. China
wishes to underscore the following points with a view to
keeping the resumed Iranian nuclear talks on the right
track and ensuring their early and positive outcome.
First, we need to commit to the overarching goal of
reaching a political solution. Upholding and effectively

22-406769/23

S/PV.9085

Non-proliferation

implementing the agreement is about maintaining
multilateralism and the authority of the Security
Council while safeguarding the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime. As Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo rightly mentioned, the JCPOA represents the
triumph of non-proliferation and multilateralism. There
is no better alternative to the Plan of Action, because
engaging in dialogue and consultations is the only right
way forward for resolving the Iranian nuclear crisis.
All the parties concerned should move in the
same direction, stay the course towards a political and
diplomatic solution, work together to encourage and
facilitate peace talks, show diplomatic wisdom and
political resolve and seek consensus on outstanding
issues. China welcomes and supports all efforts
conducive to the peaceful resolution of the crisis and
appreciates the recent good-offices efforts of the
European Union. We hope that the European Union,
in its capacity as JCPOA coordinator, will continue
to play its unique role and work harder to encourage
greater flexibility from the parties.
Secondly, we need to follow the correct logic to
distinguish right from wrong. The previous United
States Administration, while disregarding the
objections of the international community, unilaterally
withdrew from the JCPOA and launched a maximum
pressure campaign against Iran. That is undoubtedly
the root cause of the current Iranian nuclear crisis. As
the party responsible for the Iranian nuclear crisis in
the first place, the United States should face up to its
responsibility, correct that mistake definitively, make a
political decision as soon as possible and take concrete
measures to respond positively to the reasonable
demands of Iran.
While repeatedly stating its readiness to seek a
return to compliance, the United States is nevertheless
escalating the sanctions against Iran and third parties
even during the process of resumed talks, which is
obviously detrimental to any positive progress in the
talks. The United States should live up to its words
and lift all relevant unilateral sanctions and long-arm
jurisdiction measures against Iran so that Iran can fully
benefit from the economic dividends of the JCPOA.
Thirdly, we need to eliminate interference in
the negotiation process. All parties have invested
a tremendous amount of energy and effort in the
negotiations on the return to compliance. There is
only one last mile to go before the negotiations are
10/23

30/06/2022

concluded. In the words of Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo, we must not “simply let the painstaking
efforts of many years slip between our fingers”. As we
approach the final hurdle, it is critical for all parties
to reinforce confidence, reject any and all interference
and preserve the hard-won results achieved to date in
the negotiations. In that context, all parties should be
guided by reason, exercise restraint and refrain from
taking unconstructive steps that would cause tensions
to escalate.
China objects to the politicization of the mandate
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
which was apparent in the IAEA Board of Governors
resolution on Iran, whose adoption was recently forced
through by a number of countries. We support settling
outstanding issues through dialogue and cooperation
between the Agency and Iran.
As a member of the international community, Iran
has every right to benefit from the peaceful uses of
outer space. We all have different interpretations of
the nature of Iran’s missile and space programmes.
We hope that the parties concerned will accurately
interpret the provisions of Council resolutions on the
issue of Iran’s missile launch and avoid undermining
the bigger picture of the implementation of the JCPOA.
Fourthly, we need to abandon double standards.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) is the cornerstone of the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime and plays a vital role
in preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and
all parties must strictly abide by it. The cooperation
between the United States, the United Kingdom and
Australia on nuclear submarines marks the first time
since the NPT was concluded that a nuclear-weapon
State has openly transferred nuclear-weapon materials
to a non-nuclear-weapon State. Regardless of how those
three countries may choose to name their nuclearsubmarine cooperation, they cannot conceal the essence
of their nuclear-proliferation behaviour. Its negative
impact on the political and diplomatic settlement of
the Iranian nuclear issue cannot be undone, and the
risk it poses to regional peace, security and stability
is a reality that cannot be changed. The practice of
applying double standards to the detriment of the NPT’s
objectives and purposes must be done away with if we
are to maintain the authority and effectiveness of the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime.
22-40676

30/06/2022

Non-proliferation

In his report (S/2022/490), the Secretary-General
recommends that Member States fully support and
apply the Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges
and the procurement channels described in resolution
2231 (2015), among others, in order to engage in trade
with Iran so as to assist its response to coronavirus
disease-related challenges and enable its people to enjoy
tangible economic dividends. China subscribes to that,
and we hope that the countries concerned will heed and
respond positively to the Secretary-General’s appeal.
At the same time, we also hope that the legitimate
concerns that Iran has expressed will be taken seriously
and properly addressed.
As a permanent member of the Security Council
and participant in the JCPOA, China has been
consistently committed to promoting a political and
diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. Since
the start of this year, China’s State Councillor and
Foreign Minister Wang Yi has engaged repeatedly with
the parties concerned on the Iranian nuclear issue and
stayed in close communication and coordination with
them. China will continue to maintain an impartial and
objective position, firmly safeguard the authority and
effectiveness of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015)
and constructively participate in the negotiations on
Iran’s return to compliance in order to facilitate the
restoration of the agreement to the right track as soon
as possible. At the same time, China also considers the
legitimate security concerns of the countries of the
region to be important. In that regard, Mr. Wang Yi has
put forward an initiative aimed at building a multilateral
dialogue platform in the Gulf region, supporting all
the parties in continuing to build mutual trust through
dialogue and consultation and ultimately finding a
solution for ensuring lasting peace in the region.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General, the
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) and the Head of Delegation of the European
Union for their briefings.
Together with its British and German partners,
France remains committed to enabling a return to
the full implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) and resolution 2231 (2015)
as quickly as possible. We support the efforts of the
JCPOA Coordinator in that regard. It is more urgent
than ever to conclude the agreement while it is still
possible, because the window of opportunity is closing
and because Iran has ramped up its violations of the

S/PV.9085

nuclear provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). As a result
of Iran’s violations of the JCPOA for more than three
years, including in the course of the discussions in
Vienna on its most problematic activities, its nuclear
programme is now further advanced than it has ever
been. Tehran has accelerated its development of those
activities without any credible justification that they are
for civilian use, including its accelerated accumulation
of uranium enriched up to 20 per cent and 60 per cent.
Last year Iran began uranium metal activities. That
is not only prohibited by the JCPOA but also highly
troubling from a nuclear-proliferation perspective,
because the knowledge and know-how that it enables Iran
to acquire can be useful for nuclear-weapon production.
In the past few days Iran has begun installing new,
advanced, higher-performance centrifuge cascades.
The more knowledge gains that Iran accumulates, with
irreversible consequences, the more difficult it will be
to return to the JCPOA, which was designed according
to different technical parameters that corresponded to
the level of Iran’s knowledge in 2015. We call on Iran
to stop that spiral, which could prevent the agreement
from being concluded at all.
At the same time, Iran’s lack of cooperation with
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is
becoming ever more serious and worrying. The Agency
is making it clear that it will very soon be unable to
restore the continuity of its knowledge of Iran’s nuclear
programme, and that is irreversible. It is deeply
concerning that Iran’s decisions are blocking the IAEA
from fully exercising the mandate given to it by the
Security Council through resolution 2231 (2015). That
is indeed a matter for the Council’s consideration.
The situation is equally worrisome with regard
to Iran’s other activities falling within the scope of
resolution 2231 (2015). Iran continues to pursue its
ballistic-missile activities in a major way. We reiterate
our full support for the Secretary-General’s efforts
to investigate possible transfers of that technology in
the region. Those activities put Iran in a position to
threaten international security, and the Council has
all the more reason to closely monitor them because
they are occurring in a context where the IAEA, owing
to Iran’s activities, is no longer able to assure the
international community that Iran’s nuclear programme
is exclusively peaceful.
The solution requires respect for international law,
dialogue and de-escalation. We continue to hope that

22-4067611/23

S/PV.9085

Non-proliferation

Iran will engage in such a process. However, we are
becoming increasingly concerned because Iran has not
managed to seize the opportunity presented to it during
Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles’s visit to Tehran and the
indirect talks with the United States that ended yesterday
in Doha. What we see is that Iran has not only failed to
take advantage of the offer on the table but has brought
in new issues outside the scope of the JCPOA with its
maximalist and unrealistic demands. We continue to
believe that an effective return to full implementation
of the JCPOA has the potential to contribute positively
to regional prosperity and security, and we will spare
no effort to achieve that. But we will not succeed if Iran
continues to reject that path.
The agreement we negotiated in Vienna continues
to provide non-proliferation benefits to the international
community. It is also in Iran’s interest, as it offers
significant sanctions relief that can benefit both its
economy and people. But the window of opportunity is
closing. We call on Iran to stop its nuclear escalation,
restore its full cooperation with the Agency and seize
the current opportunity to lift all the United States
sanctions against it in contravention of the JCPOA.
France reaffirms its commitment to concluding the
agreement as soon as possible, while there is still time.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, the Head of
Delegation of the European Union and Ambassador
Byrne Nason for their updates.
Let me start by reaffirming Norway’s continued
support for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) and resolution 2231 (2015). We appreciate all
actions aimed at reviving the Plan through substantive
talks, including proximity talks facilitated by the
European Union. An effective and fully implemented
JCPOA strengthens global nuclear non-proliferation
and is important for regional and international stability
and security. It is the best available opportunity to
help build international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme.
Norway commends the efforts of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to maintain the
possibility of a credible continuation of its verification
and monitoring activities in Iran. We deeply regret Iran’s
recent decision to remove the Agency’s equipment. We
note that the Director General is gravely concerned
about the consequences of that action, including for the
Agency’s ability to provide assurance of the peaceful
12/23

30/06/2022

nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. Transparency
measures are a vital component of the JCPOA. We
call on the Islamic Republic of Iran to implement its
nuclear-related commitments under the agreement,
including the Additional Protocol.
It is clear from the reports submitted by the Director
General of the IAEA to the Security Council that Iran
continues to advance its nuclear programme. We are
deeply concerned about Iran’s deliberate steps to reduce
its nuclear-related commitments. Its non-observance
of limitations set by the JCPOA, continued work on
enrichment capacity, stockpiling of highly enriched
uranium and irreversible enrichment research and
development are very worrying. Some of those pursuits
have no credible civilian purpose. We urge Iran to return
to full compliance with the JCPOA and to resume full
cooperation with the IAEA without delay.
On the issue of provisions related to ballistic
missiles, we should recall that in paragraph 3 of annex
B to resolution 2231 (2015), the Council called on
Iran not to undertake any activity related to ballistic
missiles designed to be capable of delivering nuclear
weapons, including launches using such ballisticmissile technology. Norway shares the concerns that
have been raised about the matter and encourages Iran
to address them.
The situation surrounding the JCPOA continues
to be tense and unpredictable. Norway remains a
steadfast supporter of multilateralism and constructive
diplomatic dialogue to decrease tensions and increase
trust and cooperation. We repeat our call on all
stakeholders to show restraint and to avoid actions
that might contribute to escalation. Norway shares the
ambition of an efficient return to the full and effective
implementation of the JCPOA, restoring and delivering
the benefits of the agreement for all. We urge that
the necessary decisions be made to put the Plan back
on track.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): At the outset, let
me thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
presentation of the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2022/490) on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). We also thank Ambassador Olof Skoog of the
European Union and Ambassador Geraldine Byrne
Nason for their remarks.
Ghana believes that the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA) represents the best opportunity and
pragmatic path for addressing the Iranian nuclear issue.
22-40676

30/06/2022

Non-proliferation

It is for that reason that we have followed and supported
all the diplomatic efforts that are being undertaken in
Vienna to resolve all outstanding issues required to
reactivate the commitments of the parties under the
Plan of Action and regarding the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). We believe that the JCPOA lays
out a pragmatic balance between Iran’s ability to use
nuclear energy for peaceful development purposes and
the imperatives of non-proliferation and even regional
security. Ghana therefore advocates for ensuring that the
efforts to reactivate the Plan of Action are not stalled by
preconditions or a maximalist approach. That implies
that the unilateral sanctions imposed on Iran should be
lifted and that it should assume its commitments.
We welcome the continuing efforts of the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
to maintain the Agency’s monitoring and verification
activities of Iran’s nuclear programme. We also
emphasize the need for Iran to abide by its obligations
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and its safeguards agreement, as well as other
nuclear-related commitments, including the Additional
Protocol. In that regard, we urge for ensuring that
the Agency has unimpeded access in conducting its
verification and monitoring activities.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for a
diplomatic solution for the reactivation of the JCPOA,
and we call for all outstanding issues to be resolved
expeditiously. We urge the parties to work constructively
towards a full return to the terms of the deal. Today the
question of non-proliferation is much more critical to
international peace and security, and all parties must
work constructively to ensure the safeguards.
Mr. Arya (India): I too would like to thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her presentation of the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2022/490) on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I also express
my appreciation to Ambassador Byrne Nason and her
team for their efforts in finalizing the consensus report
of the Facilitator (S/2022/510), and I thank Ambassador
Olof Skoog, Head of Delegation of the European Union,
for his briefing.
India supports the full and effective implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) and the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA). We have always maintained
that all JCPOA-related issues should be resolved
peacefully through dialogue and diplomacy. We hope

S/PV.9085

that the diplomatic efforts under the JCPOA will reach
a satisfactory solution.
We value the efforts of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and its Director General to
implement the Agency’s verification and monitoring
mandate. India also attaches importance to the Agency’s
ability to provide assurance of the exclusively peaceful
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. We take note of the
Agency’s recent reports, which were also considered
at the recent IAEA Board of Governors meeting. We
urge Iran to cooperate constructively with the IAEA
towards addressing all safeguards issues and enabling
it to perform its verification and monitoring activities.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo, as well as Ambassadors
Skoog and Byrne Nason, for their briefings. I also
welcome the participation of the representatives
of the Islamic Republic of Iran and Germany in
today’s meeting.
It was our expectation and hope that today’s
meeting would be held within the context of a restored
Iran nuclear agreement. While recognizing the recent
efforts aimed at resuming talks to revive the 2015 Iran
deal, my delegation joins the Secretary-General’s call
for the Islamic Republic of Iran and the United States
to demonstrate the flexibility required to reach a
compromise on the last remaining issues and to return
to the full implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) and resolution 2231 (2015).
We also urge all participants in the negotiations to
continue engaging in a spirit of purpose to bring the
agreement back to full operationalization and in a way
that upholds the principles of disarmament, strengthens
regional security and addresses other issues of mutual
concern among the parties.
Kenya reaffirms that global nuclear disarmament
and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons constitute
the core guarantee against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons. We see the JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015) as critical multilateral achievements and
mechanisms in the area of nuclear non-proliferation
and disarmament. Despite the recent setbacks, we
therefore anticipate an outcome that will further
enhance non-proliferation efforts and cooperation on
disarmament issues. It should, first, provide a clear and
practical road map aimed at returning to full compliance
with and implementation of the JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015) and rebuilding trust among the relevant

22-4067613/23

S/PV.9085

Non-proliferation

parties. Secondly, it should ensure that all the parties
adhere to their commitments under the 2015 Iran nuclear
deal, including the lifting of additional sanctions and all
retaliatory measures, which violate the principles and
procedures laid out in the JCPOA. Thirdly, it should
safeguard the equipment and important verification and
monitoring work of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and ensure that its work continues
unhampered on the ground.
We encourage the Islamic Republic of Iran to
implement its safeguards agreement and voluntary
transparency and implementation measures with
the IAEA, as agreed in the Plan. That includes Iran
taking ownership of the Plan and strengthening its
commitments to the JCPOA provisions. My delegation
reaffirms its appreciation of the critical role that the
IAEA plays in global nuclear safety and in supporting
member States in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
in the areas of science, technology and attainment of
the Sustainable Development Goals, including tackling
climate and environmental challenges. My own country
can attest to that. In that regard, and as we look forward
to the upcoming 2022 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, we also note that among other things, the
political and diplomatic efforts that went into the
establishment of the JCPOA were geared to ensuring
the economic and technological development of Iran in
the area of peaceful nuclear activities.
We therefore urge that the Council’s engagement
with the non-proliferation agenda go hand in hand
with encouraging efforts to strengthen the peaceful
application of nuclear technology in industrial
development projects for tangible benefits to the Iranian
people and holistic political and economic stability in the
subregion. We also note the significant role of the Joint
Commission in ensuring that political and technical
differences are addressed, including guaranteeing
that the principles of integrity, transparency and
confidence-building are upheld in matters pertaining
to resolution 2231 (2015), including the continuation
of trade with the Islamic Republic of Iran and relevant
transfers within the JCPOA framework.
In conclusion, I would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your team on a successful conclusion to your
June presidency.
14/23

30/06/2022

Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): We thank
the briefers for their comprehensive briefings and for their
commendable work in supporting the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). The United Arab Emirates
reiterates its unwavering commitment to nuclear
non-proliferation and its support to all constructive
efforts aimed at realizing non-proliferation objectives
in our region and globally. We welcome the verification
and monitoring undertaken by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) to ensure the implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
and we value the Agency’s contributions to regional
and international peace and security.
We remain deeply concerned about Iran’s
decision to stop the implementation of its nuclearrelated commitments under the JCPOA, including
the Additional Protocol. The continued expansion of
enrichment activities in Iranian facilities, including
uranium enriched to 20 per cent and 60 per cent levels,
and the accelerated development and deployment of
advanced centrifuges are also very worrying. We
are also concerned about Iran’s decision to stop the
implementation of necessary transparency measures,
including the recent removal of IAEA surveillance
cameras. We hope that Iran will enhance its engagement
and cooperation with the Agency to clarify and resolve
all outstanding safeguards issues. We reaffirm that
the right to develop nuclear technology for peaceful
purposes requires full adherence to safeguards
obligations, compliance with the relevant IAEA and
Security Council resolutions and full cooperation
with the IAEA. We call on Iran to take steps to build
confidence in its nuclear activities and to return to full
compliance with the verification measures and limits
established by the JCPOA, including the implementation
of the Additional Protocol.
We thank the Secretariat for its visit to the United
Arab Emirates and note the findings in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2022/490) regarding ballistic
missiles, cruise missiles and unmanned aerial vehicles
used by the Houthi terrorist group in terrorist attacks
on Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.
Those abhorrent terrorist attacks have been widely
condemned, including by the Council. We reiterate
our call for de-escalation and for taking steps to build
confidence and ease regional tension. More generally,
it remains critical that we unite our efforts to counter
the increasing availability of advanced technology
and weapons to non-State actors, which represents a
22-40676

30/06/2022

Non-proliferation

growing threat to international peace and security and
destabilizes our region.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates will
continue to support diplomacy and dialogue to find
common pathways towards achieving a peaceful and
prosperous future for our region. We hope that the talks
can continue and be built on.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): Ireland welcomes
the reports of the Secretary-General (S/2022/490), the
Facilitator on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) (see S/2022/510) and the Joint Commission (see
S/2022/482) and has taken note of their findings. I would
also like to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
and Ambassador Skoog for their briefings today.
Ireland remains strongly committed to preserving
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and
to the full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Despite the progress made in the Vienna talks, we are
concerned about the fact that a full restoration of the
JCPOA, including a return by the United States and a
return to compliance by Iran, has not yet taken place.
That is despite the fact that extensive negotiations
have taken place since spring 2021, with a viable deal
now on the table. We urge all sides to move without
further delay to agree on it and move forward with
its implementation. We fully support the work of
European Union High Representative Borrell Fontelles
to facilitate efforts to that end. We welcome the start
of talks in Doha this week and urge all parties to
work urgently towards concluding an agreement. It is
important that all sides return to full compliance with
their commitments under the JCPOA.
We are deeply concerned about Iran’s actions
regarding its nuclear-related commitments under the
JCPOA, in particular its accumulation of considerable
stocks of 20 per cent and 60 per cent enriched uranium,
its experiments in uranium metal production, its
development and increasing use of new and advanced
centrifuges and the associated irreversible knowledge
gains. Those activities have increased as Iran has
suspended the implementation of transparency
measures under the JCPOA.
Ireland shares the grave concern expressed by the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) in a number of reports regarding those
actions, particularly about the consequences of the
decision to remove IAEA cameras and other equipment
from various sites around Iran. In resolution 2231 (2015),

S/PV.9085

the Council has asked the IAEA Director General to
report at any time if he has reasonable grounds to believe
that there is an issue of concern directly affecting the
fulfilment of JCPOA commitments. It is therefore
important for the Council to pay attention when the
Director General expresses such concerns. I would
stress that it is only through the IAEA’s verification
and monitoring, including under the JCPOA, that
the international community can have confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme. It is essential that Iran cooperate fully and
without prevarication with the IAEA in all aspects of
its safeguards obligations and commitments, including
the provisional application of the Additional Protocol.
We share the concerns expressed by others
regarding Iran’s ongoing ballistic-missile and space
launch activity. We urge Iran to reconsider actions that
undermine trust, which is essential to the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015).
We note that during the reporting period the United
States reinstated waivers on civilian nuclear projects,
which will facilitate the implementation of those
activities. At the same time, we call on the United States
to meet its commitments on the lifting of sanctions,
refrain from imposing new sanctions and take all
necessary steps to facilitate the full implementation of
the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). It is important
that the Iranian people see tangible benefits from the
full implementation of the JCPOA.
Finally, the JCPOA is a major achievement in
nuclear non-proliferation and an example of how we
can work together to resolve protracted and difficult
issues through dialogue and diplomacy. It is essential
that all of us work to restore and rebuild confidence in
the agreement and ensure that it can achieve its goals
for the benefit of all.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ambassador Byrne Nason for her
briefing, her report (S/2022/510) and her tireless work
as Facilitator on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). The work of the Facilitator is a central element
in the process of monitoring the implementation of the
resolution, alongside the Secretary-General’s reporting
mechanism. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo and Ambassador Olof Skoog
for their briefings. Brazil welcomes the reports both of
the Facilitator and the Secretary-General (S/2022/490)
and takes note of their findings.

22-4067615/23

S/PV.9085

Non-proliferation

Brazil reiterates its belief that the Iranian nuclear
issue can be resolved only by peaceful and diplomatic
means, in accordance with international law. In the
context of renewed tensions and risks in the Middle
East, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
provides a suitable framework for dialogue among the
parties concerned. Brazil is counting on the collective
commitment of the JCPOA’s original participants
to immediately resume full compliance with their
respective obligations under the agreement and
resolution 2231 (2015). We are hopeful that dialogue
and mutual understanding will prevail and that all the
parties involved will demonstrate the flexibility and
the constructive approach necessary to achieve that
goal. Pending the conclusion of ongoing negotiations,
we call on all the parties to refrain from any further
actions that may jeopardize a possible and necessary
agreement on the issue.
Brazil defends the central role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as the internationally
recognized authority responsible for monitoring
and verifying compliance with the non-proliferation
obligations of States parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. In that regard,
we regret that the Agency’s verification and monitoring
activities of nuclear-related commitments under the
JCPOA have been seriously affected since 23 February
2021. Brazil welcomes the efforts of the Director General
of the IAEA to preserve the Agency’s ability to fulfil its
independent and technical role in the implementation
of safeguards in Iran. We hope that it will be able to
monitor full compliance with the JCPOA.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union Ambassador Skoog and the Facilitator on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and Permanent
Representative of Ireland Ambassador Byrne Nason for
their briefings.
We note Ireland’s efforts in ensuring the successful
coordination of the resolution 2231 (2015) format and
the Irish team’s high level of professionalism, confirmed
by the adoption by consensus of the six-month report
of the Facilitator (see S/2022/510). However, we should
point out that unlike the report, today’s briefing by
the Facilitator was not agreed by consensus, in line
with the resolution 2231 (2015) format. We have
questions on some of its points. Regrettably, that has
somewhat affected the overall positive impression of
16/23

30/06/2022

Ireland’s work as Facilitator. We hope that in future
the facilitators of the resolution 2231 (2015) format
will return to the practice of having their statements
adopted by consensus by all Council members.
In the past, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) was endorsed thanks to professional
diplomacy, which among other things envisages a
willingness to take into account the interests of others
and demonstrate reasonable flexibility in order to reach
a compromise. It marked a key achievement in modern
multilateral diplomacy. The importance of the deal
for the region and the world as a whole can hardly be
overestimated. It signified that despite fundamental
differences in positions, the sides were still able to
reach an agreement.
Regrettably, that crucial balance was disrupted in
2018 following the United States’ unilateral withdrawal
and subsequent multiple steps that not only shattered
the JCPOA but also prevented the other parties to it
from properly fulfilling it. Those steps include above
all the illegitimate unilateral sanctions, both direct and
indirect, imposed by the United States. I would like to
underscore that the policy of maximum pressure on
Iran, which the United States continues to embrace
to this day, is the root cause of all the issues currently
plaguing the JCPOA. All of Iran’s subsequent steps
have been a reaction to the United States’ destructive
position rather than Tehran’s arbitrary deviation from its
obligations. It is therefore completely logical to assume
that any steps taken by the United States to resume
full compliance with the relevant JCPOA obligations
could encourage Iran to move forward with some of the
obligations that were previously put on hold. We regret
that the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/490) fails to
clearly articulate that cause-and-effect nexus, and not
for the first time. Furthermore, the report gives equal
weight to calls for the United States to lift restrictions
to take a decision on exemptions. When the revival
of the JCPOA is in question, what is important is not
exemptions but the full, consistent and verifiable lifting
of the illegitimate discriminatory measures that the
United States imposed on Iran in violation of resolution
2231 (2015).
We welcome the fact that the Secretary-General’s
report confirms the role of the JCPOA as the most
effective tool for strengthening the non-proliferation
regime and regional security, and we fully agree that the
path to lasting peace and security is through diplomacy.
The report states that during the Vienna talks, the United
22-40676

30/06/2022

Non-proliferation

States and the current parties to the JCPOA, including
Iran, demonstrated their collective commitment to
resolving all political and technical differences. We trust
that that trend will continue. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s call to all sides to remain flexible in the
interests of reaching a compromise. At the same time,
we should point out that the report fails to mention the
important role of the Joint Commission of the JCPOA,
whose decisions are designed not only to ensure the
implementation of negotiated measures but to monitor
that implementation. We also need clarification of the
Secretary-General’s assertion that a lack of progress
in relaunching the JCPOA will undermine confidence
in ability in the Plan’s ability to ensure the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme.
I would like to recall that the key role in this
context is played by Iran’s implementation of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and its comprehensive safeguards agreement with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The
JCPOA has ensured notable transparency vis-à-vis
Iran’s nuclear activity.
The Russian Federation, like a number of other
countries, voted against the Board of Governors
resolution that was initiated by a group of Western States
in early June. We believe that that initiative is highly
inopportune, blatantly politicized and at variance with
the efforts being made on the negotiations track to restore
the JCPOA. The issues addressed are retrospective in
nature and pose no proliferation-related risks.
Let us recall that, since 2015, Iran has been the
State that has been most frequently verified among
IAEA parties. We continue to be very much troubled by
the illegitimate practice of the Secretariat in carrying
out certain investigations under resolution 2231 (2015).
We categorically object to that kind of activity by the
Secretariat. Its mandate in the context of resolution
2231 (2015) is exclusively administrative and technical
in nature, as set out in the note dated 16 January 2016
from the President of the Security Council contained in
document S/2016/44.
The authority to send any requests to Member States
to provide information or to react to such requests, not
to mention any inspections on the ground, is not vested
in the Secretariat. The 2231 cell is not a sanctions
committee; it does not have the relevant expertise. We
do not believe that a report of the Secretary-General
should contain any conclusions based on conjectures

S/PV.9085

of Secretariat staff or information from unidentified or
uncorroborated sources.
We have repeatedly noted that Iran has been
scrupulously complying with the missile-related
provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). The Council has
not received any compelling evidence to the contrary.
We deplore the fact that a number of States continue
to make unjustified allegations vis-à-vis Tehran’s
nuclear programme, using the same logic that we have
repeatedly repudiated.
To conclude, I wish to stress that there is still no
alternative to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
Our duty is to safeguard and revive it. The Russian
Federation wholeheartedly supports negotiations to
resume implementation of the JCPOA through the
initially agreed-upon frameworks.
From the very beginning, we said that the path
back to the JCPOA would not be easy. It is always much
easier to destroy something than it is to rebuild it. But
we are heartened by the fact that work on a recovery
package is already at an advanced stage.
We see no insurmountable issues in the way of
reviving the JCPOA, but now we are at an exceedingly
important, delicate and crucial stage. Attempts to
step up pressure on Iran and through an unwarranted
fuelling of tensions around the JCPOA could fully
invalidate prospects for reviving the deal.
We would urge the parties to demonstrate strategic
restraint, adopt a pragmatic posture and focus on
compromise. We are confident that in this case solutions
acceptable to all will be found.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her valuable insights. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Skoog for the
updated information he provided in his capacity as
the Representative of the Coordinator of the Joint
Commission established by the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA). We also thank Ambassador
Byrne Nason for her work as facilitator for resolution
2231 (2015) and commend her stewardship and efforts
in supporting the implementation of the resolution.
Albania has a profound belief in multilateral
diplomacy and solutions. For multilateralism to
succeed, we need to engage in good faith, have and

22-4067617/23

S/PV.9085

Non-proliferation

show trust, and seek realistic and lasting solutions.
That is the essence of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA).
I would like to make the following brief points.
First, we regret the fact that recent days’ talks
in Doha were inconclusive. Since March, what looks
like a possible, good and fair agreement has been
waiting for Iran’s approval. We see it as an excellent
opportunity for Iran to embrace a solution that would
benefit regional and world security as well as peace and
stability and that would best serve the interests of the
Iranian people themselves. The sooner they respond to
this opportunity, the better. Requests that go outside
the perimeter of the core issue of the agreement do not
contribute to the process.
Secondly, we are deeply worried about the second
test launch of a domestic satellite vehicle on 26 June.
We are extremely worried about the findings contained
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/490), which
clearly address the inconsistent activities undertaken
by Iran that are in clear violation of paragraph 3 of
annex B to resolution 2231 (2015).
Thirdly, we welcome the visit of the Secretariat to
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates in response
to invitations from their respective authorities. The
materials examined show that Iran has conducted
the transfer of unmanned aerial vehicle systems and
capabilities to non-State actors. We urge Iran to stop
transferring and delivering those technologies to
regional non-State actors and to fully comply with
paragraph 4 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015).
Furthermore, we expect the Secretariat to report to the
Security Council on its further findings in due course.
Fourthly, Albania welcomes the adoption with
overwhelming support of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) Board of Governors resolution
early this month upholding the IAEA’s core mission
of safeguarding nuclear material to prevent nuclear
proliferation. We deeply regret the recent decision of
the Iranian authorities to shut down the IAEA cameras
and the Online Enrichment Monitor. Iran must fully
cooperate with the IAEA and not undermine its work.
Providing technically credible information in response
to the IAEA’s questions is the only way to remove
those safeguards issues from the Board’s agenda and
to show commitment to the JCPOA. We call on Iran to
fully comply with the resolution and its annexes and all
other obligations.
18/23

30/06/2022

I began my remarks by mentioning good faith and
trust. Escalatory steps and provocations go against
that spirit. They will not help Iran; they will not help
negotiators; they will not contribute to the process.
We hope that the frank engagement of the
international community, especially the tireless efforts
of the European Union, will encourage the Iranian
authorities to seize the momentum, stop the threats and
provocations and work with full transparency with those
who have put on the table a comprehensive, meaningful,
forward-looking and far-reaching agreement.
I conclude by reiterating our firm belief that the
JCPOA, a landmark success of diplomacy, remains the
only tool that can reassure the international community
in a verifiable way that Iran’s nuclear programme is and
remains solely dedicated to peaceful purposes.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of Ireland has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I am surprised by the
comments from my Russian colleagues on my earlier
statement as Facilitator. My statement was circulated
yesterday as a courtesy for the information of all
Council members, as I explained at the format meeting
on resolution 2231 (2015) last week. The statement
reflects my views on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) over the past six months.
This is not a negotiated text, nor has it ever been.
The 2231 format is expressly not a sanctions body
and has its own particular established modalities. The
established practice is that the Facilitator’s statement
has not been negotiated but is circulated as a courtesy,
and we have worked to maintain an inclusive overall
approach. I think that practice best suits the role and the
responsibilities of the Facilitator.
The President: The representative of the
United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): Just very
quickly on this, we would like to agree with Ireland
as Facilitator. Facilitators’ reports have always been
agreed by consensus, as it was this time, but, as the
Ambassador said, that has never been the case with
Facilitators’ statements for these meetings, and we do
not see a need to change the established process. We
22-40676

30/06/2022

Non-proliferation

therefore reiterate our appreciation for Ireland’s work
as Facilitator on this file.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am somewhat surprised at the discussion that
has unfolded. It seems to me that if one of us Security
Council members were to speak before the Council
with the authority to perform certain Council actions,
then those statements should, at the very least, not run
counter to the understanding of other Council members
or raise questions for them. Furthermore, Ireland is not
the first State to be carrying out the facilitator role,
and, to my memory, its predecessors approached this
matter with greater care and attention.
So, with respect to the statement of the representative
of the United Kingdom, as we have noted the trend of
a new generation of British diplomats to revise the
gentlemen’s agreements that exist in the Council, we
are not surprised. At the same time, it does not make
those revisions pertinent for us.
Overall, we positively assess the work of the Irish
team, which is something that we have already stated.
We regret the fact that at the last juncture there were
certain misunderstandings. Had everything been done
correctly, perhaps Ms. Byrne Nason would not have had
to justify the way her report was prepared. I do hope
that things will go more smoothly in future. I thank her
again for her delegation’s work.
The President: The representative of the United
States of America has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I do not
want to extend this any longer. I fully concur with the
remarks of my colleague from the United Kingdom, and
I want to reassure the Irish delegation that everything
was done correctly. Our understanding is that the norm
has for many years been that the facilitator’s statements
are circulated as a courtesy, which is all that is required.
We see no reason to change that process and believe
that the Irish delegation has followed all norms and
requirements for its role. We thank the delegation of
Ireland for its work.
The President: I now give the floor to representative
of Germany.

S/PV.9085

Mr. Zahneisen (Germany): I thank the President
for giving us the opportunity to speak under rule 37 of
the Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
Let me join others in thanking the three
briefers
—
Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo,
Ambassador Skoog and Ambassador Byrne Nason — for
their excellent briefings, but also for their continued
and unstinting support for the restoration of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
We also welcome the support expressed by the
Secretary-General for the JCPOA. We share his
assessment that the JCPOA is still the best possible
instrument for ensuring the peaceful nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme and that its restoration
would therefore contribute immensely to peace and
stability in the region and far beyond.
We also concur with Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo’s analysis that we are now at a critical juncture.
Despite our strong belief that restoring the JCPOA is
both urgently required and possible, the prospects
unfortunately have become very tenuous at this point.
This is all the more regrettable since a viable deal
to restore the JCPOA has been on the table since the
beginning of March. It is the result of months of intense
negotiations and would return Iran to compliance
with its JCPOA commitments and the United States to
the deal.
We have been ready to conclude the Vienna
agreement since the beginning of March, and we still
are. It is a fair and comprehensive package. Since the
time for it to be concluded is rapidly diminishing, we
greatly welcome the recent good offices of the European
Union High Representative.
The proximity talks between the United States
and Iran in Doha in recent days would have provided
yet another chance for Iran to agree to the deal.
Unfortunately, also in Doha, Iran has not seized the
occasion, but has insisted once again on demands that
go well beyond the scope of the JCPOA.
At the same time, and also since our last meeting
here six months ago (see S/PV.8930), Iran has
continued its nuclear escalation unabatedly and taken
even more far-reaching steps that are incompatible
with its commitments under the JCPOA. Iran’s
worrisome nuclear escalation includes the extensive
use of advanced centrifuges for industrial purposes
for nuclear enrichment way beyond JCPOA limits. We

22-4067619/23

S/PV.9085

Non-proliferation

are equally gravely concerned that Iran has continued
to curtail the verification and monitoring activities of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
the country.
We urge Iran to fully cooperate with the IAEA
and restore all JCPOA surveillance and monitoring
measures in full. This also extends to the clarification
of open safeguard issues. The resolution that was
adopted overwhelmingly by the IAEA Board of
Governors in June clearly demonstrates that our grave
concern is shared by the vast majority of the Governors
of the Agency.
On Annex B of the resolution 2231 (2015), let
me reiterate our well-known position. We continue
to consider Iran’s development of ballistic missiles
designed to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons,
including launches using such ballistic-missile
technology, as inconsistent with paragraph 3 of Annex
B to the resolution. There is also a need to ensure better
compliance with the prohibition of transfers of so-called
Missile Technology Control Regime-listed items to and
from Iran, which is covered in Annex B, paragraph 4.
The delivery of missile technology or related services
or know-how to armed groups by Iran is destabilizing
the region and must end immediately.
In closing, let me repeat that we are ready to
conclude the deal that has been negotiated in Vienna.
We urge Iran to seize the diplomatic opportunity to
restore the JCPOA while it is still possible.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I would like to begin by thanking Under-SecurityGeneral DiCarlo, Ambassador Byrne Nason of Ireland
and Ambassador Skoog of the European Union for
their briefings.
Today, almost seven years after the conclusion
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
and the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), Council
members once again reaffirm their support for the
registration and full implementation of the JCPOA.
We believe that the Comprehensive Plan of Action is
a hard-won, multilateral diplomatic achievement that
remains the best option and has no alternatives.
I feel compelled to refresh Council members’
memories about the reasons why we are in the current
situation. Unfortunately, certain Council members
20/23

30/06/2022

who have disregarded their own obligations in relation
to the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015) continue to
ignore the underlying causes of the current situation
and present a spurious narrative as to why we are in
the Chamber today, attributing certain falsehoods and
fabrications to my country.
The commitments under the deal, which were
carefully worded and explained in the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015), are explicit and unambiguous.
While Iran’s nuclear commitments were connected to
the effective lifting of all sanctions and normalization
of Iran’s trade and economic relations, the sheer fact is
that sanctions are still in place, and Iran is not enjoying
the economic dividends as promised by the deal.
In accordance with the JCPOA, other parties are
committed to ensuring
“Iran’s access in areas of trade, technology, finance
and energy” (resolution 2231 (2015), para. 33)
Specifically, the United States, in addition to its
obligation to lift sanctions against Iran, is explicitly
committed to
“mak[ing] best efforts in good faith to sustain
this JCPOA and to prevent interference with
the realization of the full benefit by Iran of the
sanctions lifting” (ibid., para. 26).
Despite these explicit commitments, Iran has been
denied its rights and benefits for the past four years.
Let us remind ourselves that, in defiance of resolution
2231 (2015), and in flagrant violation of international
law and the United Nations Charter, the United States
withdrew from the agreement on 8 May 2018 and
reimposed unilateral sanctions that had previously been
lifted, putting unparalleled pressure on other countries
to either disregard their obligations under resolution
2231 (2015) or face punishment. This is unprecedented
in the history of the Security Council.
Despite the enormous difficulties that we faced
as a result of the sanctions, Iran decided to continue
honouring its commitments, which was validated by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 15 times,
after being promised and assured by the European
participants in the JCPOA — France, Germany and the
United Kingdom (E3) — that they would compensate
Iran for the losses suffered after the United States
withdrew from the Comprehensive Plan of Action.
Unfortunately, the E3 disregarded their obligations
and promises, leaving Iran with no choice but to utilize
22-40676

30/06/2022

Non-proliferation

S/PV.9085

its rights under paragraphs 26 and 36 of the JCPOA to
partially suspend its commitments, on 8 May 2019. In
that context, Iran has taken certain remedial measures,
in accordance with the JCPOA, to re-establish some
balance in the reciprocal commitments and benefits
under the accord. However, those particular States
refer to Iran’s remedial measures, with much fanfare,
in a manner that suggests that it was Iran that withdrew
from the JCPOA and reimposed or reintroduced
countless inhumane sanctions with the publicly
declared objective of starving an entire nation. While
the former United States’ Administration recklessly
sacrificed a well-established tenet of international law,
withdrew from the deal and reimposed sanctions, the
current Administration is following in its predecessor’s
footsteps as it continues to adopt its notorious policy
of maximum pressure and impose sanctions on Iran.
There is no doubt that those policies are intended to
create leverage in negotiations.

completely irreversible. Our patients, particularly those
with rare diseases, have been suffering from inhumane
sanctions, including on medicine and medical
equipment. How can the death and suffering of those
innocent patients be reversed? That injustice cannot be
erased from the memory of the Iranian people.

Against that backdrop, I would like to address a few
points that clarify our position on the current situation
and the ongoing talks. Iran is committed to multilateral
diplomacy, whose outcome should assure the effective
and verifiable lifting of all unlawful sanctions. Iran has
demanded verifiable and objective guarantees from the
United States that the JCPOA will not be torpedoed
again, that the United States will not violate its
obligations again, that sanctions will not be reimposed
under other pretexts or designations, as occurred
during the previous United States’ Administration, and
that JCPOA mechanisms will not be abused. Those are
the minimum requirements for determining the deal’s
long-term viability. In the course of the Vienna talks,
we exercised maximum flexibility and showed good
faith in order to reach an agreement that was acceptable
to all and even introduced innovative solutions to the
remaining issues in the hope of breaking the impasse.
However, the United States’ unrealistic and rigid
approach has led to the current stalemate.

Our peaceful nuclear programme has been under
the most robust and intrusive nuclear verification,
monitoring and transparency measures ever conducted
in a country in the history of non-proliferation. Iran
has also provided the Agency with the necessary
information concerning the alleged locations on
20 March, in compliance with the joint statement agreed
to on 5 March and within the timetable established.
Despite our unprecedented, strong and proactive
cooperation with the Agency, the Agency’s response
was neither appropriate nor productive. We were
surprised by the Agency’s most recent report on the
issue, because we had gone to great lengths to explain
and clarify the remaining questions. We responded to
all of the Agency’s questions thoroughly, constructively
and cooperatively. We believe that the Agency’s recent
claims are based solely on erroneous and fabricated
information provided by the Israeli regime, which has
done everything it can to kill the JCPOA.

We are continuing our remedial measures because
the non-fulfilment of their commitments by other
parties continues. The sanctions remain in full force,
the maximum-pressure policy is still being pursued
and our people’s suffering continues. Nonetheless, as
soon as all of the obligations of the other parties are
fulfilled in a complete, effective and verifiable manner,
Iran will immediately reverse all of its steps. However,
the suffering of our people, as a result of the failure of
other parties to carry out their commitments, is almost

With regard to our cooperation with the
International Atomic Energy Agency, as well as our
peaceful nuclear activities, I would like to stress that all
of our peaceful nuclear activities are entirely consistent
with our rights and obligations under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
as well as the Agency’s safeguards agreement. As a
responsible member of the NPT, the Islamic Republic
of Iran is committed to the principle of collaboration
with the Agency and has fulfilled all of its obligations
under the NPT and its comprehensive safeguards
agreement, as the Agency continues its activities in
Iran without hindrance.

Despite Iran’s constructive cooperation with the
Agency, the United States and its E3 partners, France,
Germany and the United Kingdom, pushed for the
adoption of a resolution at the recent IAEA Board of
Governors’ meeting, their only motive being to build
up their negotiated position in the current talks. We
believe that the IAEA’s resolution is politically driven
and that it will have negative effects on the ongoing
talks, whose consequences will be the responsibility of
the resolution’s authors. That childish game must end.
As a result, in line with our Parliament’s resolution,

22-4067621/23

S/PV.9085

Non-proliferation

we have decided to suspend certain measures that
were not covered under the safeguards agreement.
However, Iran is willing to continue engaging with the
IAEA to address concerns and misunderstandings as
long as the issues are technical and non-political. The
Agency should respect the principles of independence,
impartiality and professionalism in its work.
During our intensive consultations in Tehran
last week with Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Iran once again emphasized
its willingness to provide creative solutions to the
remaining issues in the hope of ending the deadlock.
We agreed to hold indirect talks with the United States,
through the EU, in order to overcome the last hurdles in
the talks. We were sincere in the Doha talks, which were
serious and positive. As in the past, we will be in touch
with the EU Coordinator for the next stage of the talks.
Our negotiating team is ready to engage constructively
again to conclude and reach a deal. The ball is in the
United States’ court, and if it acts realistically and
shows its serious intention to implement its obligations,
the agreement is not out of reach.
Finally, with regard to the Secretary-General’s
report on resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2022/490), our
observations are contained in my letter to the SecretaryGeneral dated 27 June (S/2022/518), covering our
views on issues that I did not address in my remarks
today. However, we believe that the report should
have addressed the root causes of the current situation
surrounding the JCPOA and focused on the United States’
violations of resolution 2231 (2015), which includes
sanctions-lifting commitments. According to some
paragraphs of the report, the Secretariat has continued
to engage in unauthorized travel and verification visits,
as well as taking measures to examine allegations
regarding the implementation of the resolution’s annex
B. The note by the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/44) has elaborated on the Secretariat’s mandate
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), which
is confined to administrative support for the Security
Council. Such ultra vires activities by the Secretariat
are therefore unacceptable and should be avoided.
Similarly, any possible findings or assessments made
by the Secretariat are rendered null and void. In that
regard, any allegation that may be attributed to the
Islamic Republic of Iran is hereby rejected.
In conclusion, I would like to say a few words about
the region.
22/23

30/06/2022

First, we categorically reject the baseless
accusations and unfounded allegations made about
my country in today’s meeting. As a responsible State,
Iran is committed to its international obligations and
has never engaged in any activity that breaches its
obligations, including under resolution 2231 (2015).
Our space and missile programmes fall outside the
purview of resolution 2231 (2015) and its annexes and
are not subject to negotiations.
Iran’s foreign policy is based on full respect
for international law, mutual respect, good
neighbourliness, cooperation and dialogue, as well as
maintaining regional peace and security, through the
active participation of all the States of the region. We
are determined to pursue that policy in good faith. Our
constructive engagement and efforts with the United
Nations to assist and support the truce and its extension
in Yemen are based on our firm belief that the countries
of the region should work together for the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
The massive United States’ military build-up and
export of sophisticated weaponry, as well as certain
European countries’ supply of lethal weapons to
countries of the region, have transformed the region
into the world’s largest concentration of foreign military
installations, making it a ticking time bomb. Another
key source of regional insecurity is the Israeli regime’s
destabilizing, malicious and terrorist activities in the
region, which have always been accompanied by the
persistent support of the United States. The Israeli
regime has taken every opportunity to threaten and
destroy the JCPOA, as well as to undermine Member
States’ implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). It
has carried out covert operations and subversive and
disruptive measures against Iran’s peaceful nuclear
programme, as well as the cowardly and abhorrent
assassination of innocent Iranian scientists in its efforts
to further its sinister objectives in the region.
It is regrettable that some Council members
continue to modernize their nuclear arsenals, as recently
reflected and acknowledged in a new report published by
the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute.
Instead of making unwarranted comments about our
current peaceful nuclear activities, they should adhere
to their NPT commitments, particularly those under
article VI. Those States are also deafeningly silent
about the Israeli regime’s nuclear weapons, as well as
its repeated terrorist and disruptive activities against
22-40676

30/06/2022

Non-proliferation

our peaceful nuclear facilities. It is high time that we
dispensed with double standards.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of June,
I would like to express the sincere appreciation of the
delegation of Albania to the members of the Council
and the secretariat of the Council for the support they
have provided to us. It has indeed been a busy month,
and one in which we rallied to consensus on several

S/PV.9085

important issues within our purview. We could not
have done it alone or without the hard work, support
and positive contributions of every delegation and
the representatives of the Secretariat, including the
conference services officers, interpreters, verbatim
reporters and security staff.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council in wishing the delegation of Brazil good
luck in the month of July.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

22-4067623/23
