United Nations

S/PV.6114

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6114

th meeting
Wednesday, 29 April 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Cantellano/Mr. Heller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Churkin
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Mugoya
Sir John Sawers
Ms. Rice
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2009/158)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-31649 (E)

*0931649*

S/PV.6114

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2009/158)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, the Czech Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Finland, Germany, Ghana, Guatemala,
Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, the
Netherlands, Peru, the Philippines, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, Rwanda, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand
and Uruguay, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to take this opportunity to welcome the fact that there
is some much interest in participating in the debate on
this issue, which is of particular importance for the
international community.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend invitations under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Ann Veneman,

2

Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/158, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.
In my capacity as President, I should like to say
how very honoured I am to be here today. My presence
is an indication of the importance that Mexico attaches
to the work of the Security Council and to its
presidency. It also provides me an opportunity to thank
all members for the support they have provided to
Mexico’s presidency throughout this month.
I would also like to point out that, as everyone is
aware, Mexico is currently experiencing a very
complex situation as a result of the emergence of swine
flu, which has now begun to spread to other parts of
the world. I would like to take this opportunity to
emphasize that the Mexican Government has acted
with complete transparency and a sense of
responsibility — not just towards Mexican citizens but
also towards all of the world’s inhabitants. In that
regard, I should like to reassure everyone that Mexico
will continue to act in that same spirit of responsibility
and transparency in the face of a situation that poses a
challenge not only for Mexico but for humankind as a
whole. We will do so in order to build the necessary
bridges and establish cooperation with each and every
member of the international community to confront
that challenge.
I also wish to point to the manner in which we
have been working with the World Health
Organization. That once again illustrates the
importance of international multilateral institutions in
ensuring well-being, peace and security throughout the
world.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our gratitude for the many and varied
expressions of solidarity and support from many
friendly countries. I should like to assure them that the
Government and people of Mexico are deeply
appreciative. We shall utilize that assistance in a
responsible and efficient manner to benefit not only

09-31649

S/PV.6114

Mexico but also, as I said earlier, the entire
international community.
I am particularly pleased at the presence at this
meeting of His Excellency Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, on whom I now call.
The Secretary-General: I should like to thank
you, Madam President, for your participation in, and
organization of, today’s important debate. You have
shown great commitment to this issue, including as
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict.
Before I proceed with my remarks, I should like
to say how relieved and encouraged I am by what you
have just said with regard to the spread of swine flu. As
this swine flu has spread to many parts of the world,
including the United States, it has become another
global challenge, which requires global coordination
and support.
As the Secretary-General of the United Nations, I
wish to inform all of you that all United Nations
agencies are now mobilizing their resources to play a
leading role, led by Dr. Margaret Chan of the World
Health Organization (WHO). I have also expressed my
position as the Secretary-General. We are now meeting
with core groups under the leadership of the Deputy
Secretary-General in close coordination with the World
Health Organization.
Member States have the full support and full
commitment of the United Nations and I sincerely hope
that with full global participation and support we will
be able to overcome and combat the swine flu, which is
now a very important challenge for us. In addition to
the global financial crisis, climate change, the energy
crisis and the food crisis; we are now experiencing this
very serious pandemic. It requires the cooperation of
the entire international community and I count on the
leadership and commitment of not only Council
member States, but the whole international community.
Let me return to today’s topic.
It is said that truth is the first casualty of war.
When it comes to the youngest victims, what they lose
first is their childhood. Fighting shatters more than
infrastructure; it destroys the precious principles
enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
As bombs devastate schools, hospitals and families,
children lose their right to education, health care and
love. Far too many even lose their right to life.

09-31649

I have witnessed scenes of unbearable suffering.
Never have I been so outraged as when I recently
spoke with girls who had been sexually victimized
during the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Painful as it is to describe those atrocities,
silence serves only to shield the perpetrators and
perpetuate their crimes. The testimony of the
victims — their dignity even after such appalling
violations — made me more determined than ever to
raise my voice to decry their suffering and to demand
action.
Today’s meeting again affirms that the plight of
children caught in conflict zones is a threat to
international peace and security. Since 1998, the
Council has adopted six resolutions aimed at stopping
the recruitment of child soldiers, the killing, maiming
and rape of children, abductions, attacks on schools
and hospitals and obstacles to humanitarian access.
The Council has done more than adopt
resolutions. It has established a working group on the
topic, as well as a monitoring mechanism that reports
to that group on grave violations against children in
situations of concern. For my part, I have asked my
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict to take those efforts even further.
Later in this meeting, you will hear from Grace
Akallo, a former child soldier. If, after all she has
endured, she can come before this Council as an
advocate for peace, Council members must respond to
her courage and resilience with action. With that in
mind, I want to focus the rest of my remarks on what I
believe the Council should do next. My appeal is also
directed at parties to conflicts and the broader
international community. My latest report on the
question of children and armed conflict is now before
you (S/2009/158). Its annexes name 56 parties,
including States and non-State actors, which recruit
child soldiers and commit other grave violations. Of
these, 19 are persistent violators, who have been listed
for more than four years.
I urge the Council to consider action to strike a
blow against impunity and to stop those violators from
continuing to victimize children. The protection
framework needs to be strengthened. I recommend that
the Council, at a minimum, expand the criteria for the
annexes of my report to include parties that commit
rape and other grave sexual violence against children
in armed conflict.

3

S/PV.6114

Last year, the Council adopted a milestone
resolution, Security Council resolution 1820 (2008),
which focused specifically on sexual and gender-based
violence. That was a crucial step. But it will have true
meaning only when its provisions are translated into
action. I urge the Council to expand the trigger of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism to include sexual
violence and, if possible, intentional killing and
maiming of children. That is a crucial first step towards
accountability for those terrible crimes.
We must also do everything possible to ensure
that no matter how severely conflicts may rage, schools
are always protected. We must support the efforts of
our humanitarian partners to keep schools running in
times of crisis and to safeguard the right to education. I
call on all parties to conflicts to keep schools as safe
zones for both boys and girls.
All countries and all groups must put the
protection of children in situations of armed conflict
above politics. I urge Member States to allow contact
between the United Nations and non-State actors with a
view to ensuring the protection of vulnerable children.
We need to work with such parties in order to prepare
action plans to halt the recruitment and use of children.
We need to engage them so that they undertake specific
commitments to address all grave violations committed
against children.
I also urge all States that have not ratified the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child to do so without delay. We have an
impressive 193 parties to the Convention, but only 127
of them have ratified the Protocol. That instrument
should be universal.
Donors also have a special role to play. The Paris
Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups advocate a
comprehensive approach to reintegrating children into
their communities. Donor contributions can make this
happen.
I appeal strongly to parties to conflict to comply
with international humanitarian law for the protection
of children and all civilians. And finally, I stress the
role of the Council in holding violators accountable.
We must send a strong signal to the world that those
committing appalling crimes against children in
conflict situations will be brought to justice.

4

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement. I now give the
floor to Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.
Ms. Coomaraswamy: I thank the Council for
convening this open debate of the Security Council on
children and armed conflict. Madam President, your
presence here today testifies to the commitment of the
Council to this issue and the crucial leadership of
Mexico as the new chair of the Security Council
Working Group, following the exemplary leadership of
France.
Before the Council is the eighth report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2009/158). I am glad to convey to Council members
today that progress has been made, especially in
addressing the recruitment and use of child soldiers,
and I would like to start here with these positive and
encouraging developments. Thanks to the continuing
efforts of the Security Council and its Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, five action plans have
been secured to date, in Côte d’Ivoire, Sri Lanka, the
Sudan and Uganda, and four others are in the process
of being finalized in the Philippines, the Central
African Republic and Burundi. As a result, six parties
have already been removed from the “list of shame”.
These developments demonstrate the power of the
Council’s
focused
attention
and
continuing
engagement, and serves as a testament that it should
continue to maintain pressure on violators to enter into
a protection dialogue with the United Nations.
I am also encouraged that some Governments,
including that of Myanmar, have recently approached
my Office and their respective United Nations country
teams to deepen their engagement with the
recommendations of the Security Council Working
Group. In Nepal, discussions are continuing and
planning is under way for the release of 3,000 minors
in Maoist cantonments. However, the recent crisis
between the Maoists and the Nepalese Army may
impede the progress hoped for. I strongly urge that the
Government release the children as a matter of
urgency. Just this morning, I was informed that the
Justice and Equality Movement in the Sudan is in final
discussions with the United Nations country team on
finalizing an action plan.

09-31649

S/PV.6114

This hope must be tempered, however, as the
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2009/158) continues to present a disturbing
picture of grave violations committed against children
around the globe. This year, the report identifies 20
situations of concern, where children remain
vulnerable to abuse. The report chronicles 56 parties
that continue to recruit and use children as child
soldiers. A number of these groups simply refuse to
enter into dialogue on action plans, while others,
though willing to enter into dialogue, are prevented
from doing so because the Member State concerned has
prevented the United Nations from approaching
non-State actors to devise action plans.
In this report, the Secretary-General has named
19 persistent violators who have been listed in the
annexes for four years or more. The Council must now
ensure that its words are not empty threats. Much
depends on the Council taking measures against those
who have repeatedly flouted its resolutions and who
continue to recruit and use children. It is now crucial
for the Council to move forward by beginning a
discussion about the process by which targeted
measures might be applied against repeat offenders.
In situations where sanctions committees already
exist it is easier to envision such action. More
systematic communications between the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict and the
relevant sanctions committees and expert groups is
critical in this regard. In other cases where sanctions
infrastructure does not exist, innovative solutions are
necessary to ensure that violators are held accountable.
This open debate on children and armed conflict
must be an occasion for the Council to reinforce its
commitment to children and advance its protection
agenda even further. The Council has already created
powerful and unprecedented tools for enhancing the
capabilities of child-protection actors on the ground,
particularly as they deal with the issue of child
soldiers. The decision of the Council to demand that
annexes of the report of the Secretary-General contain
lists of parties to conflict that recruit and use children
and to consider possible targeted measures against
them has led to thousands of children being identified
and released. Armed actor after armed actor has told
me that they are determined to be removed from the
Secretary-General’s annexes. This list of shame has
been a rallying point for all those who want to increase
the protection of children in conflict areas. In this

09-31649

sense, the power of the Council can make and has
made a tangible difference in protecting children from
being recruited and used by armed forces and groups.
However, these successes have also created an
imbalance in the focus of the Council, especially with
regard to all other grave violations. The moment is now
ripe for the Council to extend its focus beyond child
soldiers to deal more effectively with other violations.
Not to do so threatens to silence the suffering of
thousands of children who are subjected to
unspeakable crimes. Ideally, the list of the SecretaryGeneral should include all grave violations against
children to ensure that the framework for protecting
children in situations of armed conflict is
comprehensive. However, since expectations do not
always match realities, the United Nations and its
partners have chosen to call upon the Council to take a
gradualist path towards the expansion of the protection
framework for children.
That is why the child-protection community is
unanimously calling on the Council to begin, at a
minimum, with expanding the listing criteria to include
those who commit rape and other grave sexual violence
against children, as a first step in this incremental
approach. The inclusion of intentional killing and
maiming of children in line with international
humanitarian law would also be an important
contribution to protecting children. That would be a
critical step forward, recognizing that sexual violence
and intentional killing and maiming are heinous crimes
on a par with the recruitment and use of children.
In my travels to conflict affected areas around the
globe I have had the chance to meet dozens of
courageous and talented people who are working for
the protection of conflict-affected children. These staff
members come from funds, programmes and agencies
like UNICEF, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner
for
Refugees
(UNHCR),
the
International Labour Organization (ILO), Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), UNIFEM
and our non-governmental organization partners,
reflecting the ever more mainstreamed nature of child
protection throughout the United Nations system, as
called for by the Security Council and our SecretaryGeneral himself. I would like to thank UNICEF in
particular for assisting me in my field visits.

5

S/PV.6114

I am pleased to see that the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has just
finalized its child protection policy, which I fully
endorse and which, I am sure, my colleague
Mr. Le Roy will elaborate upon. I cannot stress enough
the centrality of United Nations peacekeeping and
child-protection advisers to the monitoring and
reporting mechanism that is called for in resolution
1612 (2005). That is why it is also critical for the
Security Council to ensure that its investment in
protecting children is more systematically reflected in
country-specific resolutions, with the inclusion on a
more consistent basis of child-protection provisions,
including child-protection advisers, in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations and political missions.
The Security Council and the General Assembly
have repeatedly urged me to undertake field missions
in order to monitor country situations, to be an
independent moral voice for the sake of children and to
advocate for their needs. My most recent trips have
been to Gaza and southern Israel and to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In Dungu, in the northeast of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where I
recently visited, 990 people have been killed and 300
children abducted by the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) since September 2008, and people are now just
hiding in the bush to escape. In North Kivu, the rapid
integration of Congrès national pour la défense du
peuple (CNDP) and other armed groups into the
Congolese Armed Forces has resulted in children being
incorporated into the ranks of the national army.
Although 1,300 have been released to child-protection
partners, many more remain as child soldiers.
In South Kivu, impending Operation Kimia II, a
joint military operation by the Forces Armées de la
République Démocratique du Congo (FARDC) and the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) against
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR), raises serious concerns about large-scale
displacement, the use of children as soldiers and the
possibility of exactions committed by uncontrolled
armed units against civilian populations. With the
United Nations taking part in offensive military
operations, it is crucial that the Council follow those
developments carefully in order to ensure that children
are protected to the maximum extent possible.

fighting had ended, the children, their teachers and
parents in Gaza were still in a state of shock and they
had horror in their eyes. The children demand
accountability, and the international community must
respond. The crossings must be opened, and
reconstruction must begin in haste. Everyone hopes for
peace, and in southern Israel, where children also live
in fear, girls and boys speak freely of reaching out to
their Palestinian brothers and sisters.
In Sri Lanka, the situation remains deplorable for
children in the north and the east. In the near future, I
intend to send a special envoy to begin consultations
with the Government. The Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam continue to recruit children to fight on the front
lines, and they use force to keep many of the civilians,
including children, in harm’s way. The United Nations
has urged the Government to practice military
forbearance and to maintain a prolonged pause in the
fighting, so that humanitarian workers can help
negotiate safe passage for the remaining civilians. It is
incumbent upon the Government to protect its citizens
to the maximum extent possible and to refrain from
using heavy artillery.
Humanitarian actors have urged that the
internally displaced person camps set up by the
Government meet international standards. We hope
short-term military gain will not blind the authorities to
the long-term demands of reconciliation. People
stripped of their dignity are unlikely to forget,
especially the children.
My field visits and the information contained in
this report must be supplemented by the harrowing
experience of children on the ground. Later this
morning, you will hear from Grace, a former girl
soldier, who will describe to the Council what she went
through and what she and other children like her hope
to receive from this body. While visiting North Kivu
province of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I
met a 12-year-old girl named Adila. She told me that
she had joined the Mai Mai militia because her parents
could no longer pay for school and because she thought
carrying a gun would protect her from being raped.
However, like thousands of other children in the Congo
and despite her gun, Adila was sexually violated and
abused by her commanders. In the camp she was
always near starvation but had to fetch water, cook and
clean in addition to her combatant activities.

In February, I visited Gaza and southern Israel
after weeks of war. As it was just days after the

6

09-31649

S/PV.6114

Recently, Mai Mai groups have entered into the
peace process, and Adila was identified and released by
MONUC child protection. She is now in a nongovernmental organization transit centre supported by
UNICEF and has just gone back to school. Her eyes lit
up when she told me that she plans to be a school
teacher.
What am I to say to Adila, Grace and the
hundreds of other girl and boy victims of sexual
violence whom I meet on my missions to conflictaffected countries? Is it fair to say that those children
suffer second-class violation and that the Council does
not wish to apply the same focus and engagement to
them? In my heart of hearts, I believe that that is not
the intention of the international community and that
this day will mark a new age in what my predecessor
called the era of application.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Coomaraswamy for her briefing and for the work
that she is carrying out on this very sensitive issue.
I now give the floor to Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Allow me at the
outset to say to all present what an honour it is that
they are participating with us in this important Security
Council debate on our commitment to the vital topic of
children in armed conflict.
In adopting resolution 1261 (1999), the Security
Council formally recognized that the protection of
children in armed conflict was crucial to peace and
security. The Security Council thus included specific
and very precise provisions on the protection of
children in several mandates of peacekeeping
operations and has consistently demanded that the
protection of the rights and well-being of children
affected by armed conflict be taken into account in all
peace processes and peace agreements as well as in
post-conflict and reconstruction phases.
For the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), the protection of children affected by armed
conflict is therefore a fundamental element both of our
strategy and of our daily commitment. For that reason,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has
already put a large number of measures in place.

(spoke in English)
As a first step, DPKO established in-house
capacity for child protection in the form of child
protection advisers in 2001. The Council’s sustained
support for the role of child protection advisers in
relevant peacekeeping operations has enabled us to
deploy advisers to the eight most significant
peacekeeping operations to date, with the most recent
deployment, at the beginning of 2009, to the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
mission and to the United Nations Mission of
Assistance in Afghanistan. We have also built up a
supporting capacity of child-protection expertise
composed of both international and national staff. The
latter, comprising over 40 per cent of the total staffing
for child protection, serve as a key resource for our
work due to their knowledge of local norms and
communities. They also remain as an important
national capacity when the United Nations and the
peacekeeping operation ultimately wind up. This
investment has yielded concrete outcomes and
enhanced the mainstreaming of concern for children
affected by conflict in our operation.
First, child protection advisers support heads of
mission in integrating key child protection concerns
into all stages of the peace process and the overall
strategy of the peacekeeping operation, including, of
course, negotiation with Governments, armed groups
and parties to a conflict. In Burundi, for example, the
release of former child combatants associated with the
Parti pour la libération du peuple hutu-Forces
nationales de libération was placed at the heart of the
negotiation as a priority item on the agenda of the Joint
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, resulting in
the release of 340 such combatants in Burundi this
month alone.
Verification efforts to identify children in
assembly areas are ongoing. The significant
developments are the result of concerted and sustained
advocacy and the engagement of the facilitator, the
Political Directorate and the United Nations system,
including, of course, the United Nations Mission in
Burundi and UNICEF, with the support of the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.
Secondly, peacekeeping operations are now
increasingly able to leverage their political resources
and offer means to promote the protection of children

09-31649

7

S/PV.6114

in armed conflict and to address violations of
children’s rights. Regarding the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, I have just clearly heard the legitimate
concern expressed by the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, but I can also say that significant
progress on the release of children in North Kivu was
registered after a lengthy peace process following an
extensive and high-level sensitization campaign that
targeted local communities, armed forces and armed
groups on national and international standards
prohibiting the use of children by armed groups and
armed forces, implemented by MONUC jointly with
UNICEF in June 2008. At the first point of contact
with armed groups in the field, MONUC military units
and military observers, deployed in remote and
otherwise inaccessible areas, have contributed to the
release of children by signalling the presence of
children in armed groups and by providing
information, security and critical logistic support for
their release.
While there was a significant setback during the
crisis in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and increased reports of re-recruitment of children
during this period, MONUC and UNICEF have
continued to tap into military resources in their work to
secure the release of children from armed forces and
from armed groups. Child protection focal points have
been established in military contingents across various
missions in places such as the Sudan, Haiti and Côte
d’Ivoire. Mainstreaming child protection concerns in
the activities of peacekeeping operations has been
further enhanced through close cooperation between
child protection staff and other mission components,
particularly those concerned with human rights,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the rule
of law and justice, security sector reform, gender,
conduct and discipline — all the different units within
our peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, and most important, our peacekeeping
operations have increasingly engaged in the
implementation of important child protection priorities
spelled out in the relevant Security Council resolutions.
These include training all peacekeeping personnel on
child protection and child rights, dialogue with parties
to end the recruitment and use of children by armed
forces and armed groups and the implementation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanisms established
under resolution 1612 (2005).

8

The training of peacekeeping personnel in child
protection and child rights is a continuing priority for
us and is now included as an integral part of the
pre-deployment curriculum for civilians. Training
material on child protection and child rights have been
developed in various missions and have been used in
induction training for all incoming force contingents
and civilian components. The training is aimed at
creating awareness of course, on the impact of armed
conflict on children and knowledge of the international
legal norms and standards that govern the protection
and promotion of children’s rights.
In Côte d’Ivoire, the Mission has partnered with
Save the Children to implement a training-of-trainers
programme for United Nations military and police
representatives. That training equips them with
information and tools to deliver training on child
protection within their teams, thereby widening our
reach through the military. The impact of in-mission
training on the work of missions is bearing fruit and
has promoted a child-conscious approach in the work
of United Nations police and military. For example, in
the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Haiti, training in child rights and child protection has
now been fully integrated into the capacity-building
activities provided by the United Nations police for
national police units.
The monitoring and reporting mechanism is an
important tool for holding perpetrators of violations of
child rights accountable, in order to prevent further
violation and to enhance the protection of children
affected by armed conflict. As the Council knows,
DPKO co-chairs the United Nations country task force
on monitoring and reporting, along with UNICEF, in
seven peacekeeping operations in the Sudan, Chad,
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Côte d’Ivoire.
Within the area of a mission, our child protection
teams conduct systematic monitoring and reporting and
support the preparation of specific reports in
collaboration with UNICEF, United Nations country
task forces and other units of the mission, especially
those concerned with human rights.
Integrated with the implementation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism is systematic
follow-up to the conclusions and recommendations of
the Security Council. In Côte d’Ivoire, following the
de-listing of parties to conflict from the annexes to the

09-31649

S/PV.6114

Secretary-General’s reports, the mission has turned its
attention to its tasks. In January this year, the mission
received a programme of action from the Forces de
défense et de sécurité des Forces nouvelles undertaking
to combat sexual violence, as requested by the Security
Council Working Group in its recent conclusions on
Côte d’Ivoire.
(spoke in French)
In order to consolidate and further institutionalize
our commitment to children in armed conflict within
the framework of our missions, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has established a programme
in all departments to make protecting children in armed
conflicts a benchmark for all our operations. That
policy has been formulated on the basis of broad
consultations among our missions in the field;
Headquarters, of course, here in New York; UNICEF;
and the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, as
well as many other key actors. We are also working to
harmonize all elements of our protection activities,
particularly within the framework of resolution 1612
(2005) on children and armed conflict; resolution 1820
(2008) on sexual violence against women; and
resolution 1674 (2006).
Finally, I should like to assure members of the
tireless commitment of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to supporting this issue in all
our activities. My Department has committed itself to
ensuring very close follow-up to the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council so that we can
continue to help to ensure that children have prospects
for tangible and lasting peace. To that end, we are
obviously continuing our close collaboration and full
cooperation with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, UNICEF and the United Nations
country teams. Of course, we are, as always, counting
on the support of the Security Council to back us in
this essential task.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Le Roy for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to Ms. Ann M.
Veneman, Executive Director of the United Nations
Children’s Fund.
Ms. Veneman: I thank members for the
opportunity to join them today as the Security Council

09-31649

discusses the situation of children affected by armed
conflict. UNICEF appreciates the engagement and
dedication of the Council to the matter of children
affected by armed conflict and thanks the SecretaryGeneral for his continuous and personal interest and
commitment
to
this
issue.
Ms.
Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
has been unrelenting and very effective in her work on
behalf of children affected by armed conflict.
I should also like to express special appreciation
for the leadership of the Government of Mexico on this
issue. This collective engagement at the highest
possible level is making a real difference in the lives of
children by serving as a strong platform for advocacy
and responses for boys and girls in conflict situations.
Millions of children around the world continue to
be impacted by armed conflict. In fact, for many,
conflict is all they know. Too often, children see their
childhoods drift into turmoil, their family and friends
killed and their lives, health and well-being put at risk.
Sadly, that is the situation today for many children in
Sri Lanka.
It comes as no surprise that under-five mortality
rates are among the highest in conflict-affected
countries. Children are not only the unintended victims
of war; in some cases, they are directly targeted. The
Secretary-General’s
reports
produced
by
the
monitoring and reporting mechanism established by the
Security Council bear witness to that. Each of the
incidents reported represents a personal tragedy. I have
met boys and girls who have been brutally raped by
soldiers and scarred for life — some having contracted
HIV — and children who were recruited by armed
groups and used as soldiers or sex slaves.
In places such as Afghanistan, schools have been
attacked and teachers, and particularly girl students,
have been targeted by horrendous acts. When I visited
Gaza earlier this year, I saw schools damaged or
destroyed and children suffering from the trauma of
violence and the loss of loved ones. Sadly, as the report
illustrates, disrespect for the sanctity of schools
continues to be the situation in far too many countries.
Children remain the victims of the wars of adults,
but there are also some glimmers of hope. Just a few
weeks ago, 342 children in Burundi were released after
a year of joint advocacy by child protection partners.
Since January 2009, around 1,200 children in North

9

S/PV.6114

Kivu, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, have
been released by armed groups and forces.
Dialogue on children’s issues with parties to
conflict is an important element and has resulted in
concrete commitments and action plans to prevent and
end grave violations against children. The monitoring
and reporting mechanism has become a key component
of UNICEF’s overall child protection strategy of
enhancing the protective environment for children in
situations of armed conflict. Monitoring and reporting
are also important tools in triggering effective
responses and prevention activities.
UNICEF’s responses to children who are victims
of grave violations include support for national child
protection systems and survivors of sexual violence,
along with rights training for armed forces personnel
and the reintegration of children used by armed forces.
This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the
Geneva Conventions and the twentieth anniversary of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Just last
December, UNICEF welcomed the adoption of the
Convention on Cluster Munitions. Around 40 per cent
of all civilians killed or injured by cluster munitions
are children. Next year will mark the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, and this
year marks the tenth anniversary of the first Security
Council resolution on children and armed conflict,
namely, resolution 1261 (1999).
Those milestones have contributed to a stronger
protection framework for children in armed conflict,
and we must build on that momentum to do even more.
UNICEF welcomes the eighth report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2009/158),
and we support its recommendations.
I note in particular the recommendation to expand
the triggers to be listed in the annexes of the report to
parties who commit rape and other forms of sexual
violence against children and, if possible, other grave
violations, such as intentional killing and maiming.
Such a development would be an important step
forward, particularly to address sexual violence. It
would also send a strong signal from the international
community that perpetrators of grave violations, such
as rape and sexual violence, must be held accountable
for their crimes against children.

10

Although challenges lie ahead, progress has been
made. UNICEF remains committed to working with
and for children in armed conflict, including through
continued efforts to monitor, report and respond to
grave
violations.
Adherence
to
international
humanitarian law and respect for children’s rights must
be strengthened, and those who commit violations
against children must be held accountable.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Veneman for her statement.
I shall now give the floor to Ms. Grace Akallo, a
former child soldier of Uganda.
Ms. Akallo: I thank the Council for inviting me
to give a small voice to the many voiceless children in
war. My name is Grace Akallo. I am from Uganda, and
I was born in northern Uganda. I am here to talk not
only about my own story but on behalf of all the
children in armed conflict, who have to face and
survive the atrocities of war, who suffer through the
abuses of being used as child soldiers and through rape
and sexual abuse. I am thankful that representatives are
here at the highest level, and, to me, it means that you
care, and that you are decision makers who want to
show their commitment to stopping the suffering of
children in wars.
Allow me to tell you my story. After elementary
school, my parents sent me to St. Mary’s College
Aboke, a high school for girls in northern Uganda. I
stayed in a dormitory with dozens of girls from far
away. I was excited because only a few girls from my
village went to high school. I had learned the
advantages of education. I was determined to be the
first person to go to university in my village.
Sadly, my dream of a great future was cut short
when, in October 1996, the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) stormed into my dorm and abducted 139 girls,
including me. I was among the first five who were tied
and pushed to move out. We were forced by the LRA
soldiers to form four straight lines and were marched
out into the woods. I knew at that moment that there
was no surviving. My spirit died. My body was
constantly wet with urine.
Sister Rachele, the Deputy Headmistress at the
school, followed the rebels. She had no power. The
rebels threatened to kill or rape her in front of us. She
was asked to leave, but she refused to leave without her
children. She stood her ground and, in the end, she was

09-31649

S/PV.6114

released with 109 girls. I was not one of the lucky ones
though, as I was among the 30 that were forced to
remain.
After a month of wandering in the northern
Uganda forest, we were divided into two groups to
make it easier to control our march to southern Sudan.
On the way, many children who could not walk were
killed and their bodies abandoned in the forest. The
rebels would use sticks, axes, bayonets or machetes.
When we arrived in Sudan, I and my friends were
given AK-47s. We were taught to dismantle, clean and
assemble the gun. My group was not taught to shoot or
to fight. We were told hunger would actually teach us,
and indeed it did. My friends and I were sent to battle
against the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA)
several times. Hunger and thirst were the order of the
day. During the long march back from battle against
the SPLA, I fainted from thirst and hunger, and the
LRA actually buried me in a shallow grave, thinking
that I was dead.
In addition to being forced to fight, my friends
and I were distributed to rebel commanders. We were
forced to kill those girls who tried to escape or refused
their husbands. I was repeatedly raped by the LRA
commander on countless occasions. I was an innocent
young girl. I had never known a man in my life until
that day. I felt like a rock was being thrust into my
skin. Yet I had to survive.
In April 1997, after seven months in captivity, I
finally got a chance to escape from the rebels. The
LRA was attacked by the rebels from southern Sudan,
giving me the chance to run away. I walked for two
weeks without food, surviving only on wild leaves, soil
and dew in the morning. I was rescued by villagers
from southern Sudan and handed back to the Ugandan
Government soldiers, who then handed me over to
Sister Rachele. I was happy to be back, but my heart
was saddened by the ongoing torture my friends were
still going through. I left too many of them behind.
After a month at home, I went back to St. Mary’s
College Aboke and later graduated. I was lucky to
reach the university level. But many of the girls who
manage to escape are not able to return to school or
have their dreams for the future because they are not
helped to deal with their horrible experiences, or
because they now have babies born during their
captivity.

09-31649

I have told my story, but the stories you have not
heard are thousand-fold. There are dozens of armies
and rebel groups that continue to recruit children in the
same way around the world. I am here to remind you of
the very real suffering of these children, who are
hoping for you to act.
When I read the report in front of us
(S/2009/158), I was amazed with the progress made in
stopping girls and boys from being forcibly taken from
their homes, beaten and forced to kill. Although child
soldiers are still around, many have already been
released. However, when I read further in the report, I
saw little on a subject that means so much to me. What
has been done for those boys and girls who are victims
of rape? Sexual violence is a terrible crime and
perpetrators must be punished. It must stop. I am
saying this out of experience.
I was lucky enough to be able to escape and to be
supported by people who cared for me, like Sister
Rachele. But so many girls are still waiting for their
chance to be rescued, and I think of them every day of
my life.
I heard the Special Representative when she
asked what she should say to victims of sexual
violence like Adila and me. My answer is very simple:
there is hope. There is hope because I too believe that
this Council will act and succeed, as it has for child
soldiers, for those thousands of children out there who
are still waiting. I say this myself, because I am still
waiting for some of my friends to return, and I hope
that everyone here will be committed to bringing
people like my friends back home.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
thank Grace Akallo for her presence here today and her
courage in coming to share her painful experience with
us. I also wish to congratulate her for her strength and
her will to move forward. I have no doubt that
Ms. Akallo’s testimony should demonstrate to us the
urgency with which the international community
should continue to act on this issue. Thank you very
much, Grace. We all wish you the very best in the
future.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to

11

S/PV.6114

deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

prejudice to the possibility of further expanding the
criteria in the future to include other violations.

Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Before beginning my
presentation I too would like personally to thank Grace
Akallo for being with us today and sharing her
touching story. I assure her that her moving words and
her personal history will further guide us in our
deliberations.

An atmosphere of impunity and lack of
accountability will allow perpetrators to continue
hurting children in various ways. Without any real
repercussions or the threat of targeted measures from
the Security Council, perpetrators have no reason to
stop their acts.

At the outset, allow me to thank the Security
Council presidency, the delegation of Mexico, for
organizing this open debate. Croatia welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/158) and
commends the important work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and
of the many non-governmental organizations working
in the field. Their contribution is of tremendous
importance, since it gives voice to the individual
children who are or will become victims of these grave
violations.

Croatia understands that all grave violations need
equal attention in the Council. We would, however,
like to emphasize that children in situations of armed
conflict are particularly vulnerable, and that intentional
acts of rape and sexual violence carry with them longterm repercussions both for the individual children and
for the societies they live in. Croatia is appalled by the
fact that children represent one third of those
brutalized by rape. Croatia is also deeply concerned
about UNESCO’s finding that the number of attacks on
schools, students and teachers increased sixfold
between 2003 and 2006. These deliberate acts, together
with many reported incidents involving the throwing of
acid on girl’s faces, aim to strip children of their
education, leaving them even more vulnerable to future
violations.

As a member of the Security Council and its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
Croatia has had the opportunity to witness the
importance of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. The mechanism requires the Council to
react to situations where recruitment and use of
children take place. By listing in the annexes of his
reports parties to armed conflict that recruit and use
children, the Secretary-General gives the Security
Council and its Working Group an opportunity to use a
variety of tools in response to those violations.
However, this mechanism is triggered only if the
recruitment and use of child soldiers occurs. In other
words, if parties to a conflict commit one of the five
grave violations against children other than the
recruitment or use of children, they will not be listed in
the report and the Security Council will not have the
opportunity to act. In practice, that means that the
Security Council will not request anything from those
parties in a conflict area where children are being
raped, where schools and hospitals are being attacked,
where children are being deliberately killed or maimed
and where the abduction of children is ongoing.
Croatia therefore welcomes the recommendation
of the Secretary-General that the Security Council
expand the criteria for the annexes of his reports to
include parties that commit rape and other grave sexual
violence against children in armed conflict, without

12

We are alarmed about the numerous incidents
where humanitarian workers have been killed,
abducted, beaten or threatened. Such acts, as well as
the looting of aid convoys, deny children life-saving
humanitarian assistance and must be stopped.
In order to ensure the protection of children in
armed conflict, the Security Council can show its
commitment through the possible adoption of a new
resolution on children and armed conflict. This new
resolution could give the Council an opportunity to
expand the trigger of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism to include rape and other grave sexual
violence against children. It could also authorize
relevant United Nations personnel to enter into a
dialogue with armed forces and groups in order to
verify the implementation of time-bound action plans
and could request the Secretary-General to include
information on the implementation of all requests made
in the conclusions of the Security Council Working
Group.
Moreover, Croatia believes that the Security
Council should consider referring individual cases of
grave violations against children in armed conflict to

09-31649

S/PV.6114

the International Criminal Court, especially where
national systems fail to address these cases.
Finally, allow me to express our gratitude to all
stakeholders who have been working on the protection
of children. Only by combining our efforts can we
hope to reach the common goal of a world where
children are neither victims nor targets in armed
conflict.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the initiative of our Mexican
colleagues to convene today’s meeting of the Security
Council on this very important item. We are also
grateful to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/158).
We
wish
too
to
thank
Ms. Coomaraswamy, Mr. Le Roy and Ms. Veneman for
the timely information they provided. We listened with
close attention to the heart-rending statement made by
Ms. Grace Akallo.
Russia endorses the Secretary-General’s appeal to
that proper attention be accorded to all grave violations
of the rights of children in conflict. Crimes against
children should not go unpunished. Here, we welcome
the Secretary-General’s recommendation that the
criteria for the inclusion of parties to armed conflict in
the annexes of his reports be expanded to include the
killing or maiming of children.
We resolutely condemn intentional attacks on
civilians, including children, and the deadly,
indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force. One
example of action of that kind was the August 2008
attack by the Georgian military against South Ossetia.
The killing of civilians, including children, and the
destruction of schools and hospitals have been
recorded in reports of the Secretary-General.
Nor can we pass over in silence the grave
violations of international humanitarian law during the
military operations that Israel carried out in Gaza in
January; these claimed the lives of hundreds of
children and reduced schools — including a school
operated by the United Nations — to rubble.
Once again, we call upon parties to conflict to
abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian law and to refrain from the use of force
against the civilian population.
Children continue to fall victim to the conflicts in
Iraq and Afghanistan, where armed groups attack the
peaceful population and engage in terrorist acts. It is

09-31649

important that Al-Qaida in Iraq has finally been
included, alongside the Taliban, among the violators
listed in annex I of the current report of the SecretaryGeneral. Regrettably, children in those countries also
lose their lives as a result of the actions of foreign
forces, whose mission is to protect them. The United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
has provided telling statistics in that regard. Despite
repeated assurances about additional measures
continuing to be taken to prevent such incidents, these
occur with tragic regularity. This threatens the peace
processes in those countries.
We consider that attempts to refer to civilian
deaths as “collateral damage” are unacceptable and
inconsistent with, inter alia, the provisions of the
Geneva Conventions. We advocate the thorough
investigation of such incidents and the punishment of
those responsible.
We are pleased that monitoring and reporting
mechanisms have been set up in all situations within
the purview of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. It is now necessary to
ensure that those mechanisms submit timely, objective,
accurate and reliable information, pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1612 (2005). We also favour the
inclusion in peacekeeping operations of child
protection advisers.
We take note of the work by United Nations
country teams in urging parties to conflict to adopt
plans of action to demobilize child soldiers and to end
their recruitment. In that connection, we stress that
contacts between the United Nations mechanism and
non-State armed groups can be established only with
the consent of the Governments of affected States.
Moreover, although they are an important instrument
for the protection of children, plans of action should
not be ends in themselves. The genuine improvement
of the situation of children on the ground is far more
important to the assessment of progress than promises
that are made on paper but often not fulfilled.
The Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, chaired by France and then by Mexico, has
done a great deal to elaborate recommendations on
specific situations. The effective implementation of
those recommendations will require the development
of constructive cooperation with interested States.
The rehabilitation of child victims and their
reintegration into society require concrete, long-term

13

S/PV.6114

steps, including the establishment of conditions to
ensure their access to full education and health care.
There is also a need to take steps to prevent crimes
against minors. In that respect, in many conflict and
post-conflict situations the decisive factor can be
effective international support for national efforts to
protect children’s’ rights.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): France
fully endorses the statement to be made later today by
the representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of
the European Union.
At the outset, allow me to thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mexico for her initiative to bring us
together here today to address the issue of children and
armed conflict. I also wish to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, the Executive Director
of the United Nations Children’s Fund and the
Secretary-General for their statements. I further thank
Ms. Grace Akallo for her particularly moving
testimony, which reminds us of the gravity of the
crimes that we must end.
I also wish to pay tribute to the commitment of
Mr. Claude Heller, Permanent Representative of
Mexico, in assuming the duties of Chairman of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict with
conviction and resolve.
Over the past four years ago, the Working Group
has focused on the recruitment and use of child soldiers
and has contributed to the release of tens of thousands
of children. That was made possible by the unflagging
efforts of all the members of the Security Council; the
Secretary-General’s
Special
Representative,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy; UNICEF at the highest
levels; and other actors in the field, particularly the
non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
Much remains to be done, however, as we are
reminded each day by the tragic situation of children
affected by conflicts in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Somalia, the Sudan and Sri Lanka. We must
respond. If the parties to a conflict do not implement
action plans to free children despite repeated calls from
the Security Council, we must not hesitate to impose
tough, targeted sanctions. There is, unfortunately, no
effective prevention or deterrent without sanctions. In
this regard, I particularly welcome the actions taken by
the International Criminal Court and the international
criminal justice system, which have proven their ability

14

to prosecute those who are guilty of the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflicts. Now more than
ever, the fight against impunity must be a priority.
We do not put legitimate Governments and armed
groups on the same footing, but they have the same
responsibilities with respect to the Paris Principles.
Children — all children — must be freed from the
scourge of war. It is not just the protection and
sometimes even the survival of children that are at
stake, but the credibility of the Security Council and its
resolutions.
France is convinced of the need for substantial
progress with regard to the other five grave violations
of children’s rights that have been referred to the
Security Council. We fully agree with the analysis and
recommendations presented by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2009/158). The widespread nature of
sexual crimes against children and the massive,
systematic and planned nature of these crimes in
certain situations call for decisive reaction. Children
are too often killed or maimed during deliberate
attacks, including terrorist attacks aimed at
schoolchildren. We must do everything we can to halt
these vile acts and to ensure that their perpetrators are
held accountable before the courts. I welcome the
adoption later today of a presidential statement that
sends a strong signal to the parties in that regard.
As Bernard Kouchner said here last year,
“the time has come to reflect together on the
possibility of permitting the Working Group to
deal with the tragedy of sexual violence,
independently of whether or not there are child
soldiers in the country concerned” (S/PV.5834,
p. 23).
Expanding the criteria for adding parties to the “list of
infamies” to include sexual violence and intentional
killing and maiming would represent an important first
step. The Security Council will today commit itself to
act within three months. We must ensure that this
decision is followed up in deed, which would require,
in particular, triggering the establishment of a reporting
and monitoring mechanism.
Given France’s experience at the head of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, I
would like to share three proposals that we believe
would make the Working Group more proactive, more
transparent and more effective.

09-31649

S/PV.6114

The Working Group’s conclusions should be
followed up more effectively, first, by the Working
Group itself, which should make greater use of the
information regularly provided to it by the Secretariat
and by NGOs; then by the Security Council and its
sanctions committees when examining situations on
their agenda; and finally, in partnership with the donors
to ensure in particular that the children released by
armed groups and all other child victims of abuse
receive appropriate care and are placed in reintegration
programmes. Informal donor meetings could be
organized to that end.
The Paris Conference review forum, “Free
Children from War,” inaugurated last September by the
French Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and
Human Rights, could provide a framework for these
meetings. The Mine Action Support Group’s
experience could provide a frame of reference in terms
of methodology. France decided last year, at the first
meeting of the forum, to make a special contribution of
more than €1 million to UNICEF’s reintegration and
social rehabilitation programmes. We hope that other
countries will be able to do the same, for instance at
the next high-level meeting of the follow-up forum on
the Paris Commitments that we will organize in the fall
in the context of the coming session of the General
Assembly here in New York.
The responsiveness of the Working Group could
be improved. The Working Group has demonstrated its
ability to adopt conclusions on all the reports that have
been submitted to it. However, to date it has been
unable able to find the resources to react formally to
the sometimes troubling information that it may
receive from the field between the submission of the
Secretary-General’s reports. We feel it to be crucial for
the Working Group to react more quickly to
emergencies, for instance by allowing the Chairman to
react publicly on behalf of the Working Group.
The Working Group’s work must be more
transparent. The Group’s formal meetings, based on the
Council’s formal meetings, would benefit from being
held in public so that the many States concerned by the
issue of children in armed conflict can be better
informed and thereby in a position to participate in the
international community’s critical exertion of pressure
on recalcitrant countries and groups. Using new
information
technologies,
such
as
Internet
broadcasting, could also be tried so that stakeholders in

09-31649

the field can also benefit from, contribute to and even
participate in our debates.
If it is to implement these measures and achieve
these objectives, the Secretariat must provide better
support. The burden for this is currently falling solely
on the Working Group’s Chairman. We believe that
increasing the Group’s workload must lead to an
allocation of sufficient resources.
At a time when there are believed to be 200,000
child soldiers in the world, the international
community cannot turn its attention from this tragedy
or waver in its efforts to demobilize and reintegrate
them into society.
In this regard, the guidelines of
French policy remain unchanged. They are set out in
the full text of my remarks, which will be distributed.
We are translating those principles into action, as
attested by the creation of two attaché positions
specializing in the issue of children in armed conflict at
our diplomatic missions in the Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, each with its own
budget and regional jurisdiction and working closely
with the authorities of the countries concerned, United
Nations
partners,
local
and
international
non-governmental organizations and other donors.
Consequently we were able to respond swiftly, in
partnership with UNICEF, when about one hundred
children were released in Burundi a few weeks ago. We
are also able to implement programmes in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo that fully integrate
best practices defined by the Paris Principles.
In conclusion, I wish to assure the Council of
France’s determined support for Mexico’s efforts as
chair of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. Despite the complex
procedure, despite the long period of development, we
must remain animated by a sense of urgency. The fate
of tens of thousands of children depends on that. They
are counting on us to make concrete gestures. Grace
Akallo has just told us of her hope and her confidence
in us, in our ability to act. I am certain that we will
hear her call and that we will all assume our full
responsibilities.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, and Foreign Minister
Espinosa for your leadership in hosting today’s very
important debate. I want to begin by also thanking the
Foreign Minister for her very timely comments on
Mexico’s handling of the swine flu crisis. Here in the

15

S/PV.6114

United States our hearts are with the people of Mexico
in this time of trial, and we very much applaud
Mexico’s efforts to confront and contain the crisis. My
Government stands hand in hand with our friend and
neighbour, Mexico, as we work together to deal with
what is a shared challenge, one that is affecting both
our countries and, indeed, many other parts of the
world.
I also wish to welcome Mexico as the new chair
of the Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and to thank France for its
leadership as chair of that group over the last several
years.
I also wish to thank Special Representative
Coomaraswamy for her briefing and for her steadfast
advocacy on behalf of the world’s children. She
continues to have our fullest support. I wish to say also
how moved I know we all were by the testimony of
young Grace Akallo, whose story and experience
remind us of our obligations and of the importance of
what we are discussing here today.
The United States is deeply committed to the
welfare of children, and that includes protecting
children from the scourge of war. Every day hundreds
of thousands of children find themselves caught in the
clutches of armed conflict, unprotected, exploited,
abused, raped and terribly vulnerable. The Security
Council and its Working Group have telegraphed
strong political will to help those children and have
helped shine the international spotlight on their
suffering. Therefore the United States welcomes the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/158). It includes
valuable monitoring and reporting information that
highlights both real progress and ongoing tragedies. It
outlines thoughtful recommendations for future action.
Before turning to the rest of the report, allow me
to comment on a few specific situations.
There is good news from Uganda. As the report
notes, we have no evidence at present that the Uganda
People’s Defence Force has recruited child soldiers
since August 2007. Uganda’s strictly enforced laws and
regulations now prevent the recruitment and use of
child soldiers. We commend the Government of
Uganda for its efforts and for signing an action plan
last December. We urge other Governments and nonState actors to follow Uganda’s example by
developing, signing and implementing action plans of
their own.

16

However, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the situation remains dire. During the reporting
period, the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
documented 554 new cases of children recruited by
armed groups, 26 of them girls. We are also deeply
troubled by what the Secretary-General’s report calls
“widespread sexual violence” by armed groups in that
country. In particular, two foreign armed groups
operating in the Democratic Republic — the
Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda and
the Lord’s Resistance Army — continue to abduct
children to serve as soldiers, porters and sex slaves,
and some of those innocents have been murdered in
cold blood.
We are also deeply concerned by the situation in
Sri Lanka, where fighting between Government forces
and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) has
led to a growing, and grave, humanitarian crisis.
Unconfirmed reports that the Government continues
heavy shelling in the conflict zone, causing large
numbers of civilian casualties, are alarming indeed.
The LTTE has reportedly increased its forcible
recruitment of children, and the Tigers are said to
threaten families who seek to disclose information
about their children to the United Nations. The LTTE
also uses civilians as human shields, putting children at
even greater risk.
Both the Government of Sri Lanka and the LTTE
must abide by their commitments to prevent further
loss of civilian life. We remain frustrated and
concerned that the Government of Sri Lanka has not
yet allowed a United Nations humanitarian team into
the conflict zone to facilitate relief operations and the
safe evacuation of civilians, including children.
We also continue to be deeply troubled by events
in the Sudan, where close to five hundred children,
some as young as 12, have been recruited since
February 2008 by a range of armed groups, including
Government forces. Moreover, attacks and restrictions
on humanitarian workers have hindered the delivery of
humanitarian aid to children. The recent expulsion by
the Government of the Sudan of 13 international
humanitarian non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
has put the children of Darfur and the three areas at ever
more grave risk. My Government is also extremely
concerned by the 53 verified cases of child rape by
armed Government elements in Darfur — something
that I hope we can all agree is utterly unacceptable.

09-31649

S/PV.6114

The situations in the Sudan, Sri Lanka, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and elsewhere
remind us how much more remains to be done. One
worthwhile step would be to expand the list of triggers
for the monitoring and reporting mechanism authorized
by Council resolution 1612 (2005) to include rape and
sexual violence against children, as well as killing and
maiming. As the Secretary-General’s report shows, the
rate of such crimes against children in combat zones
has increased alarmingly. The United States fully
supports such an expansion of these triggers. We
applaud the Security Council for its coming
endorsement of today’s presidential statement pointing
towards the same goal, and we look forward to the
Council’s further action on this matter.
Finally, the Secretary-General’s report reminds us
that some Governments and militias are repeat
offenders — entities that persist in illegally recruiting
and using child soldiers in defiance of the will of the
international community. Where armies and militias
that depend on children to fill their ranks do not change
their ways, this Council has the authority and the
responsibility to consider taking appropriate measures.
The United States is determined to do its part. Our
support for international organizations such as the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), UNICEF and the International
Committee of the Red Cross helps meet the needs of
refugees, children and others whose lives have been
uprooted by conflict, including the youngest victims of
war. We are also working with our NGO partners to
provide education and other programmes to meet the
needs of children and adolescents in conflict zones and
to give them hope for a better future.
The Security Council and the international
community have made noteworthy progress together,
but we must not stop now. We share the responsibility
to protect all of the world’s children and to provide
them with a future of promise and opportunity, not one
of war and abuse. We have heard the moving stories of
such former child soldiers as young Grace, who was
here today, Ishmael Beah and Emmanuel Jal. Let their
escapes from terror and despair become the rule for
children in armed conflict, not remarkable exceptions.
Let their survival and success motivate us all and spur
us to do more.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
thank the Ambassador of the United States for her
words on the issue of the swine flu epidemic. I would

09-31649

also like to express my gratitude for her Government’s
cooperation, very open approach, close cooperation
and support in jointly facing that common challenge.
Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to welcome you to New York,
Madam President, to preside over this open debate on
the issue of children and armed conflict. I would also
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Deputy
Secretary-General Migiro, Special Representative
Coomaraswamy, Under-Secretary-General Le Roy and
Executive Director Veneman of UNICEF for their
briefings. I should also like to thank former victim and
child soldier Grace Akallo for her moving statement.
The Security Council has defined six grave
violations against children by parties to armed conflict:
the recruitment and use of children in violation of
international law, the killing and maiming of children,
rape and other grave sexual violence, abductions,
attacks on schools and hospitals, and the denial of
humanitarian access to children. All six violations
against children should be accorded equal attention by
the Security Council. We support the various
endeavours of the United Nations, including the
Security Council, to promote the protection of children
in armed conflict. In that regard, I would like to stress
the following points.
First, it is the common task of all the relevant
organs of the United Nations to protect children in
armed conflict and to ensure that they return to normal
lives in the aftermath of conflict. Therefore, an
integrated approach and a joint response are needed
from the Security Council, the General Assembly, the
Human Rights Council, the Economic and Social
Council and other relevant entities. As far as the
Security Council is concerned, it should work from the
perspective of conflict settlement to protect children
from the harm of armed conflict by focusing on
conflict prevention and the elimination of the root
causes of armed conflict. In recent years, the escalation
of tension in some conflict areas has subjected local
children to severe hardship, whereas positive progress
in peace processes in other areas has brought hope for
the future of local children. That shows that the
Security Council should concentrate more on conflicts
themselves and focus its efforts on conflict prevention.
Secondly, in protecting children in armed
conflict, it is necessary to respect the Governments of
the countries concerned and encourage them to play a

17

S/PV.6114

major role. Resolution 1612 (2005) stresses that the
Government of the country concerned bears the
primary responsibility for protecting its own children.
In carrying out their work in protecting children,
parties concerned should cooperate fully with the
Governments of the countries concerned in a joint
effort to keep children from the harm of armed
conflict. The Security Council and its Working Group
should maintain frequent communication with the
Governments of the countries concerned, acknowledge
and support the positive measures they have adopted
and continuously strengthen mutual trust with them.
Thirdly, the Security Council should continue to
work to improve the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and the work of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. The monitoring and
reporting mechanism has now been established in all
the countries listed in the annexes to the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2009/158). Since the main task of
that mechanism is to collect information, it is
necessary, in its operation, to enhance communication
and cooperation with the Governments of the countries
concerned. The Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict has done a great deal of work since its
inception, which is a source of satisfaction to us. We
hope that the Working Group will strengthen
cooperation with the Governments of the countries
concerned, address the relevant issues through
consultations and submit practical and viable
recommendations to the Security Council. The
Working Group is heavily burdened with a huge
workload. We therefore hope that it will set clear
priorities and improve its efficiency.
Efforts by the Security Council alone are far from
sufficient to address the question of children and armed
conflict. We welcome a more important role for
regional organizations in dealing with this question. In
addition, we encourage international institutions such
as UNICEF and the World Bank to play a greater role
in helping the countries concerned to prevent the
involvement of children in armed conflict. We also
welcome greater contributions from non-governmental
organizations.
China is concerned about the long-term effect of
armed conflict on children and deems it necessary to
take long-term measures to help children affected by
armed conflict to reintegrate into society and resume
normal lives. In post-conflict reconstruction, the
international community should make the return of

18

children to homes, schools and society a priority and
provide adequate financial guarantees for that purpose.
China attaches great importance to the protection
of the rights and interests of children. Having ratified
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, it has become a State party to the Protocol. We
call on countries that have not yet done so to join and
ratify the Protocol. It is our hope that, through our
common efforts, the situation of children in armed
conflict can be effectively improved and that all
children can look towards a better tomorrow.
Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express our
gratitude to you, Madam President, for being here
today to preside personally over this important debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing, as well as to commend Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and the Executive Director of UNICEF for their efforts
to protect children, both in situations of armed conflict
and elsewhere.
The report (S/2009/158) of the Secretary-General
before us focuses on the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 1612 (2005) and its
monitoring and reporting mechanism, as well as on the
recruitment and use of children by parties to conflict in
a number of countries. However, there is still much
that the international community must do to implement
that resolution.
We would like to emphasize that the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict are still taking
place. Children are forced to participate in combat and
the killing of people. They are often more subjected to
abduction and sexual violence.
Libya expresses its concern and condemnation of
the crimes committed against children involved in
armed conflict. In that regard, we support the appeal of
the Secretary-General to Member States to take
stringent measures, within the framework of their
national legislation and in accordance with
international humanitarian law, to hold the perpetrators
of those crimes accountable and to impose the harshest
penalties in order to eliminate impunity. By the same
token, Libya shares the view that the protection of
children in armed conflict should be considered an

09-31649

S/PV.6114

important facet of the strategy to prevent and resolve
armed conflict.
Children continue to be the main victims of grave
violations of human rights in conflicts throughout the
world. The report of the Secretary-General bears sad
testimony to that fact. My delegation shares the view
of the Secretary-General that the detention of children
in various conflict areas, based on their alleged
association with armed groups, constitutes an express
violation of human rights standards.
In particular, my delegation wishes to focus on
the abuse, torture and coercive interrogation of
Palestinian children in Israeli prisons. Here, we would
like to strongly condemn the Israeli military operations
that have recently led to the killing and displacement
of thousands of Palestinian children, caused by the
demolition of their homes and the killing of their
families. In addition, thousands of children suffer daily
while going to school because of the racist separation
wall erected on Palestinian land and the hundreds of
checkpoints that separate Palestinian villages. The
unique nature, duration and extent of their suffering, as
well as its continuation, constitute an established
policy pursued by the occupier, and affect tens of
thousands of children. These practices and policies
should be prosecuted.
The actions undertaken by the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict in
attempting to protect children and remove them from
hotbeds of tension and conflict deserve our
appreciation. However, my delegation appeals to the
Working Group to avoid selectivity and double
standards in the course of formulating its
recommendations and its actions as those should not be
politicized.
Given the regional dimension of some conflicts,
my country appreciates the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that United Nations country teams,
political missions and peacekeeping missions allocate
necessary resources to mechanisms for information
exchange and cooperation on cross-border child
protection concerns such as recruitment, release and
reintegration of children.
The state of abject poverty and degradation of an
area, the widening of an area of conflict, the absence of
development, the inability to obtain basic services and
lack of social and economic opportunity are all factors
that increase the risk of child recruitment and underline

09-31649

the necessity of far-reaching development and recovery
programmes aligned with disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration guidelines and programmes. Such
programmes must be based on the needs of local civil
society with a view to achieving the successful and
sustainable reintegration of former child soldiers into
society.
Libya calls on international institutions and
donors to help implement those programmes and hopes
that the appeal launched by the Secretary-General will
receive a positive response from the international
community, including the World Bank and other
influential actors. They must set aside long-term
resources for use by United Nations agencies,
non-governmental
organizations,
national
organizations and civil society to promote child
protection activities.
It must not be forgotten that the best way to
protect children in armed conflict is to prevent the
outbreak of such conflicts by addressing the
motivations and root causes of conflicts.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mexico for her presence among us today and
for convening this important debate. My country highly
values the work of the Mexican delegation in the
presidency of the Security Council and Mexico’s
leadership of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We also thank Ms. Ann Veneman,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund, and Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations for their presentations. In
particular, my delegation thanks the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict for her presentation of the
Secretary-General’s annual report (S/2009/158) and for
her recommendations for making the efforts of the
Working Group more effective and efficient.
We have also heard the harrowing testimony of
Grace Akallo. Her words should spur us on to work to
protect girls and boys around the world.
The creation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and the establishment of the Working
Group have focused the attention of the Council and of
the Organization in general on the plight of children in
situations of armed conflict, an issue that has become
prominent in our discussions and concrete analysis of
specific situations.

19

S/PV.6114

The use of new tools has already brought very
positive progress to the fight against the recruitment of
children. Throughout the world, parties to conflicts
have reached agreements to halt the recruitment of
children and secured the demobilization and
reintegration of child recruits subject to abuses and
violations of their rights. Nevertheless and in spite of
those achievements, we still face major challenges in
addressing the issues that affect children in conflicts.
The limited number of situations where plans of
action have been implemented, according to the report
of the Secretary-General, is a major concern for Costa
Rica, as is the limited scope of the existing
mechanisms that deal mainly with the recruitment of
children and relegate other grave violations to
secondary consideration. We firmly affirm that the lack
of systematic follow-up of the recommendations of the
Working Group has limited the potential scope and
efficiency of the Working Group.
Costa Rica believes that now is the ideal moment
to take stock of the Group’s work and to review, update
and strengthen the framework established in Security
Council resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005),
particularly in the following areas.
First, the number of violations that may trigger
the monitoring and reporting mechanism must be
expanded. On that issue, my delegation considers that
all six grave violations established in resolution 1612
(2005) are equally grave and we believe that they must
all receive due and balanced consideration on the part
of the Working Group. Costa Rica does not believe it
appropriate to establish artificial hierarchies, as has
been done up to now, subordinating the triggering of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism only to the
recruitment of children. In our opinion, such narrow
and outdated criteria put other violations in the
background when there is an absence of recruitment,
and they become neglected.
Costa Rica would support the implementation of
a progressive approach that would trigger the
monitoring and reporting mechanism on the basis of
two additional grave violations: the killing and
maiming of children and sexual violence. It is clear
that to ensure the viability of this approach it is
necessary, on the basis of international law, to clearly
define the limits of each grave violation, set forth
jurisdiction and identify the most effective response by
the various United Nations organs. My delegation

20

welcomes the Council’s intention to take action in
response to this concern within the next three months.
The second area of importance for Costa Rica is
that of the action plans. For us, it appears necessary to
carefully review the factors that have limited their
application until now. It is also necessary to determine
how timely and appropriate it is to use this tool to
respond to other grave violations.
My country considers that these plans must
include a component for dealing in a comprehensive
and sustained way with victims of violations, including
access to basic services in key areas such as education
and health, with a gender-sensitive approach and
special attention to particularly vulnerable groups such
as children with disabilities. This response calls for the
imperative participation of various United Nations
agencies and is key in preventing other violations.
Thirdly, my delegation considers it indispensable
to follow up more systematically on the
recommendations of the Working Group, which must
serve as true indicators of progress in successive
assessments of each situation. This follow-up of the
Working Group’s recommendations should also be
accompanied by measures and sanctions, as other
delegations have affirmed this morning, to make them
effective when necessary. In this respect, we agree with
the report’s recommendation that cases be referred to
the Security Council sanctions committees as a means
of deterrence. Moreover, we believe that the use of
complementary mechanisms to support national
judiciary institutions, such as the International
Criminal Court can also be a valuable tool in the fight
against impunity.
Finally, we deem it necessary that each report
include an assessment of the progress or deterioration
of each specific situation. These assessments would
bring a measure of accountability, both to those who
commit grave violations against children and to those
of us who are responsible for making the perpetrators
accountable. We encourage the Office of the Special
Representative to ensure that its reports go beyond the
compilation of statistical information and help to
identify with greater clarity trends and patterns of
violations, as well as to promote a strategic vision to
find solutions to each one of them.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express my
deep appreciation for Mexico’s leadership in
organizing this important debate. Our appreciation

09-31649

S/PV.6114

goes also to the former and current Chairs of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
Ambassador Ripert of France and you yourself,
Mr. President, for bringing this issue to the forefront of
the international agenda. Japan is committed to
extending its utmost support to the valuable work of
the Working Group.
I would also like to express gratitude to the
Secretary-General, the Deputy Secretary-General,
Special Representative, Coomaraswamy, the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and the
UNICEF Executive Director for their presence here
this morning and for their vital contributions to the
protection of children. We particularly thank Ms. Grace
Akallo for sharing with us her painful but inspiring life
experience and her advocacy activities.
In recent years, we witnessed a marked
improvement in the condition of children in some
countries, as several conflicts have come to an end. We
are encouraged that noticeable progress has been made
through action plans to release child soldiers in several
countries, including Burundi, the Central African
Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Uganda.
At the same time, many other parties to conflict
have still not implemented action plans. Indeed, 19
parties have been listed for the past four consecutive
years in the annexes to the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on this subject. Japan is deeply concerned
about those vulnerable children, particularly in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo where the situation
is still serious, and also in places such as Afghanistan,
Iraq, Darfur, Somalia and Sri Lanka.
We appreciate the contribution of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, but its work is
not complete when it reaches conclusions. In the
coming weeks, it should focus more on following up
on and implementing its conclusions effectively. The
Security Council should mobilize all means available
to us to combat violations against children and send a
strong political signal, including peacekeeping
operations, special political missions, integrated
offices, the Peacebuilding Commission, and the
sanctions committees.
The Security Council should also respond to
other grave violations against children in armed
conflict, such as sexual violence. Systematic rape as a
tactic of war is impermissible. The Council should

09-31649

react firmly and forcefully against any sexual violence
in conflict. It should strengthen monitoring and
reporting
mechanisms.
Japan
supports
the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to include
parties that commit rape and other grave sexual
violence against children in the annexes of his reports
in the future. We believe that expansion of the criteria
could enhance the capacity of agencies on the ground,
such as UNICEF, to carry out monitoring and
reporting.
Another serious threat posed to many children
comes from landmines, unexploded ordnance and
cluster munitions. Some 5,500 people were killed or
maimed by landmines and unexploded ordnance in
2007, and children account for more than one third of
all victims. We welcome the steady progress of the
Ottawa Convention, which has now marked the tenth
anniversary of its entry into force. The recent signing
conference for the Convention on Cluster Munitions
was also welcome.
It is imperative to prevent the deaths of innocent
civilians and children and to provide support to
victims. For this reason, we have contributed more
than $300 million, including for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Chad, the Sudan, Afghanistan
and Lebanon. We will continue to make similar
contributions.
Small arms and light weapons have the most
serious impact on the situation of child soldiers and on
violence against children, including recruitment and
abuse. Since small arms and light weapons frequently
circulate through illicit trade, we should encourage
every country to strengthen its implementation of the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. Japan has been
actively supporting projects related to the control of
small arms in conflict, such as the Disbandment of
Illegal Armed Groups (DIAG) in Afghanistan and the
Small Arms Control Programme of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
However, a more fundamental solution would be
to restrict the export of weapons to countries engaged
in armed conflict or where armed conflict is likely to
arise. Japan’s long-standing policy of prohibiting the
export of weapons imposes strict criteria for the
transfer of arms to any country. Based on this policy,
we support the establishment of a common

21

S/PV.6114

international standard in order to ensure the
responsible transfer of conventional arms, and we
actively participate in relevant discussions within the
United Nations on this issue.
In conclusion, in many conflict situations,
children are the most vulnerable. Japan is a strong
advocate of the concept of human security. We are very
proud that, together with Mexico, we are promoting the
Friends of Human Security at the United Nations. We
work with interested partners to achieve the goals of
protecting and empowering vulnerable people on a
regional and local level, including through the United
Nations Trust Fund for Human Security. By preventing
and alleviating the deleterious impacts of conflict, we
endeavour to enable children around the world to have
a brighter future.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Madame President,
I would first like to thank you for your presence here
today and for your personal commitment to the issues
that we are dealing with. I should also like to express
my sympathy and solidarity in regard to the epidemic
that your country is currently experiencing, an
epidemic that has, in the meantime, spread to other
countries, including to European countries such as my
own.
We are grateful to you, Madame President, for the
determination that you have shown in this matter today,
and you can certainly count on our full cooperation in
this issue. I would like to thank Mexico and the
Permanent Representative of Mexico here in New York
for the excellent work that has been done in the
preparation of this meeting and in the Working Group
that deals with this matter.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of the Czech Republic
on behalf of the European Union.
We are grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Coomaraswamy, Executive
Director Veneman and Under-Secretary-General Le
Roy for their statements. In particular, as others have,
we also welcome the presence of Ms. Grace Akallo and
thank her for her thought-provoking and moving
remarks. It is very important to us that the Council
listen to the voices of the victims of the very crimes
that we strive to prevent. I can assure Ms. Akallo that
we will learn from her thoughts and experiences and
that they will carry us forward in our work.

22

The new report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/158) provides an excellent overview and
assessment of the developments that have taken place
since late 2007. We appreciate the ongoing
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism in new country situations. The signing of
two additional formal action plans and the de-listing of
one party are welcome developments.
Nevertheless, the Secretary-General’s report
makes it very clear that less than 10 per cent of all
parties listed in the annexes have entered into formal
action plans. The vast majority of those parties are
non-State actors. We agree with the Secretary-General
that direct contact between the United Nations country
teams and non-State actors is of great importance to
ensure the effective protection of children and we call
on the concerned Member States to allow such contact
in the framework of resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612
(2005).
According to the report, 19 parties to conflicts
have been listed in the annexes for the past four years.
We believe that, for the sake of the children, the
Council must ensure respect for its resolutions and
should make better use of the tools available to it.
More systematic communication needs to be
established between the Security Council Working
Group and the relevant sanctions committees. We
welcome the fact that this idea is reflected in the draft
presidential statement that will be adopted at the end of
this debate. We also wish to encourage Member States
to provide sanctions committees with additional
information with a view to listing individuals or
entities committing violations and abuses against
children.
More has to be done, too, to end impunity and to
bring to justice individuals who commit crimes against
children. Concerned Member States must take decisive
action to strengthen the rule of law and must ensure
that those responsible are brought to justice either
through national justice systems or international justice
mechanisms. The International Criminal Court — and I
wish to stress this point — can play an important role
in ending impunity in this area also.
Furthermore, it is important to ensure that
provisions for the protection of children continue to be
included in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and political missions. The
protection of children must also be systematically

09-31649

S/PV.6114

considered in peace agreements. We recognize the
important work done by child protection advisers and
welcome their increasing deployment over the past few
years. Austria was honoured to support the ongoing
efforts within the United Nations system to develop
guidance for mainstreaming the protection of children
within United Nations peacekeeping by hosting a child
protection workshop organized by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations at the European University
Center for Peace Studies of Stadtschlaining, Austria, in
March 2009. The workshop brought together — for the
first time, as far as I know — child protection advisers
from all United Nations peace operations and
peacebuilding support offices.
We particularly welcome the special focus in the
Secretary-General’s report on the issue of rape and
sexual violence against children. They are horrendous
crimes that have far-reaching implications for the
development of the affected societies. Unlike the other
six grave violations, those crimes have no obvious link
to warfare, and yet sexual and gender-based violence
against children has reached appalling levels in many
situations of conflict.
It will be difficult to ensure the effectiveness and
credibility of our work if the recruitment and use of
child soldiers remain the only gateway to listing parties
to armed conflict in the annexes to the SecretaryGeneral’s reports. We therefore support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to add the crime of rape and
grave sexual violence as an additional element to
trigger the monitoring and reporting mechanism. We
are also open to including the crime of killing and
maiming of children in violation of applicable
international law.
Also, we welcome and encourage the ongoing
efforts within the United Nations to devise a strategy to
improve data collection and reporting on sexual
violence. We must ensure an effective response to these
violations. We also believe that the special situation of
children with disabilities should be given thought. We
fully support the view that resolutions 1612 (2005) and
1820 (2008) should be mutually reinforcing and that
complementary processes for the documentation of
and/or reporting on those resolutions should be
explored. The participation of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and other relevant
actors in United Nations country task forces is a
positive step.

09-31649

It is significant that we have achieved some
progress, important progress, during the negotiations in
the past days, but we regret that the Council was not
yet ready to take action on these pressing concerns. We
have noted that the members of the Security Council
are prepared to and will continue their considerations
on this very important matter. You can rest assured,
Madame President, that Austria remains committed to a
more effective and efficient framework for the
protection of children. We will continue to work with
others in order to allow for a more balanced and
credible response to the very real issues that children
are confronted with on the ground.
Mr. Tiendrébéogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank you personally, Madame
President, and the Mexican delegation — the new
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict — for having organized this open debate on
such an important issue as the protection of children in
armed conflict.
We note the presence this morning of the
Secretary-General and thank him for his important
remarks.
We
convey
our
gratitude
to
Ms. Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
for the presentation of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/158) and her personal commitment to
this cause. We also thank Ms. Veneman, Mr. Le Roy
for their statements, and we thank Ms. Akallo in
particular for having conveyed to us how difficult it is
to be a child soldier and for her vivid plea, which I am
sure the Council will have noted.
Although notable progress can be seen in the
protection of children in areas of armed conflict, the
situation remains troubling. As the news shows us, the
violation of children’s rights continues in different
forms, all equally serious, regardless of existing
standards on the issue. Recruitment and use of
children, rape and other forms of sexual violence,
murder and mutilation, attacks on schools and
hospitals, abductions and the impeding of humanitarian
access are part of their daily lot.
The recruitment and use of children by both State
and non-State actors continue in violation of resolution
1612 (2005) and of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. In some
regions, their scale, in particular the cross-border

23

S/PV.6114

recruitment of child soldiers, including in camps for
internally displaced persons and refugees, is especially
alarming.
With regard to sexual violence, it is traumatic and
has destructive psychological effects both on victims
and on their communities. Unfortunately, socio-cultural
inertia is still an obstacle to their elimination, to
prosecution of their perpetrators and, above all, to
adequate legal, medical and psychological care for the
victims.
Systematical and deliberate attacks against
pupils, teachers and schools are equally unacceptable.
Even in times of conflict, education must continue, and
the parties must shoulder their responsibilities in that
regard, in accordance with international law.
We are also particularly concerned by the
obstacles to humanitarian access. It is essential that the
Council ensure strict compliance with international
humanitarian law, all the more because the current
nature of conflicts makes civilians, including children,
who are the most vulnerable group, the main victims of
combat.
Protecting children in armed conflict is a shared
and multifaceted responsibility requiring concerted,
coordinated and renewed effort. We urge the Security
Council to take the necessary deterrent measures
against those who violate children’s rights in situations
of armed conflict by adopting a comprehensive
strategy for preventing conflicts and adequately
protecting all children.
There is also a need to end the impunity
prevailing at the national level. That is why my
delegation also advocates genuine independence on the
part of judicial systems.
The implementation of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism has produced encouraging
results. Given the damaging effects of other grave
violations, the mechanism should be extended. Until a
new relevant resolution is adopted, resolution 1612
(2005) should continue to be a guidepost for our
actions.
The formulation of action plans by a number of
State and non-State actors to put an end to all
recruitment of child soldiers has also proved useful.
Therefore, my delegation urges all parties, in particular
those listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s

24

report, to draft clear action plans containing precise
deadlines.
We welcome the initiative to ensure the presence
of child protection advisers in peacekeeping operations
and political missions. Once again, we urge the
Council to provide a concise and precise child
protection mandate to peacekeeping operations.
Peace agreements; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes; and reconstruction
activities should incorporate the protection of children,
including girl combatants or girls associated with
armed groups; the development of basic social services
for them; and professional training for former child
soldiers.
My delegation congratulates the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict on its leadership. We
urge it to improve its working methods and decisionmaking procedures. We also believe that the current
increase in its workload should receive appropriate
administrative support. Furthermore, the Council
should develop a system for regular follow-up on the
Working Group’s conclusions and recommendations.
The establishment of more fruitful cooperation
between the Working Group and the geographical
sanctions committees should also be incorporated into
that process.
The primary responsibility for protecting
populations in conflict areas lies with the parties. We
urge them to fully shoulder that responsibility, in
particular with regard to vulnerable groups such as
children.
In conclusion, we should like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and her team,
as well as UNICEF, for their leadership on issues
related to children and armed conflict. We are also
grateful to other United Nations institutions and to the
entire humanitarian community for their commitment
to and multifaceted support for this particularly
vulnerable sector of the civilian population.
Finally, we wish to thank the Mexican delegation
for the draft presidential statement, which my
delegation supports.
Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): Let me join
other speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on a very important topic. I
also wish to thank France for its successful
chairmanship of the Working Group on Children and

09-31649

S/PV.6114

Armed Conflict and congratulate Mexico on its
assumption of the chairmanship of that key body of the
Security Council earlier this year. I thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/158) and his
briefing. In addition, I am grateful to Special
Representative
Coomaraswamy,
Under-SecretaryGeneral Le Roy and UNICEF Executive Director
Veneman for their briefings.
My delegation is pleased to learn from both
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations on the ground that tangible progress has
been made in certain places in the world in the
protection of children in armed conflict. The success in
setting up monitoring and reporting mechanisms on
grave violations of children’s rights and in developing
and implementing action plans, as well as other kinds
of concrete commitments related to situations of armed
conflict, is equally heartening.
In that connection, we commend the dedicated
and effective efforts of all related institutional and
individual actors, without whom such progress and
success would be impossible. We especially appreciate
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and her team for their
work in this challenging field, including their country
visits, which have considerably helped to facilitate the
collaboration between the United Nations and relevant
partners in implementing resolution 1612 (2005).
However, my delegation is deeply concerned
about the fact that, with armed conflicts escalating in
many parts of the world, children continue to fall
victim to killing, maiming and all other sorts of
violence, including, in particular, sexual violence,
recruitment and attacks targeting schools and hospitals.
We reiterate our consistent position that, in situations
of conflict, all parties concerned are obliged to comply
with international human rights and humanitarian law.
We therefore condemn all such acts of violence and
abuse against children and call on the United Nations
system and the rest of the international community to
make greater efforts for the sake of children caught in
armed conflicts.
We
support
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the child protection mandate of
all relevant United Nations peacekeeping and political
missions be further enhanced, including by formulating
specific provisions for the protection of children and
deploying child protection advisers. We endorse the

09-31649

idea of establishing appropriate strategies and
coordination mechanisms among relevant Member
States, United Nations peacekeeping and political
missions and United Nations country teams for
information exchange and cooperation on cross-border
child protection concerns.
Given the long-term adverse impact of armed
conflicts and related violations and abuses against
children, it is our view that the Security Council should
pay equal attention to all grave violations and address
them accordingly. At the same time, if disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes for
children are to be effective and sustainable, timely and
adequate human, material and financial support is
essential.
Moreover, all necessary measures to be taken in
that connection should be undertaken within the
framework of a broader strategy of conflict prevention
and response that deals with, inter alia, the root causes
of armed conflict — hunger and poverty — and covers
social, economic and development issues during and
after conflicts. Such a strategy can and should involve
and be assisted by the United Nations, particularly
through close collaboration among United Nations
bodies, including peacekeeping and political missions,
UNICEF, the United Nations Development Programme
and other specialized agencies.
Finally, let me emphasize the importance of
education as an important means of preventing armed
conflict and of addressing violations against children in
conflict areas. The public — including, first and
foremost, children themselves — needs to be equipped
with knowledge about children’s rights and ways to
ensure their implementation, so that it will be willing
to report cases of violations and participate in fighting
them.
With that in mind, we support activities to raise
public awareness about children’s rights and to
disseminate best practices in the protection of children
in conflict areas. We strongly believe that United
Nations agencies, particularly UNICEF, and other
international organizations can be of great help in that
regard. We also encourage civil society organizations
to energetically engage in and constructively contribute
to such endeavours.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): We thank the Foreign
Minister of Mexico for coming to New York to preside
over this important meeting. We welcome the

25

S/PV.6114

Secretary-General’s
comprehensive
report
(S/2009/158), which covers compliance and progress
towards ending the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict and other grave violations. We also
welcome the presence of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Migiro, in our midst. We thank
Ms. Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Ann Veneman, Executive Director of
UNICEF, for their briefings. My delegation is grateful
to Ms. Grace Akallo, who was with us this morning
and who has shared her experience, as a former
abducted child, on the plight of children in armed
conflict.
My delegation is pleased to note that the
preparation of the report involved broad consultations
with all key stakeholders, especially the country-level
task forces on monitoring and reporting. We are
convinced that focus on this participatory approach
will yield better results in ensuring more effective
protection for children affected by conflict in situations
of concern.
Uganda is fully committed to and supports the
various efforts by the United Nations, including those
of the Security Council, to promote the protection of
children in armed conflict. My delegation condemns
the continuing recruitment, use and abuse of children
in armed conflict in violation of applicable
international law.
The negative psychosocial consequences on the
mental health of the affected children cannot be
overemphasized. While we acknowledge that there has
been significant progress as indicated in the report, we
are deeply concerned at the slow pace of
implementation. We have noted, for instance, that out
of the total of 56 parties listed and those not listed in
annex I and II of the Secretary-General’s report, only
four parties had signed action plans, one had signed an
action plan that did not meet the required minimum
standards, and there were three or four cases of
ongoing dialogue to translate commitment into action
plans.
Those statistics clearly demonstrate that quite a
lot of work remains to be done. We therefore call upon
Member States, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
country-level task forces, United Nations peacekeeping

26

and political missions and non-governmental
organizations to redouble their efforts.
The Government of Uganda signed and
implemented an action plan regarding children
associated with armed forces and continues to allow
regular access to the United Nations to any Uganda
People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) facilities upon
request to monitor compliance. The report of the
Secretary-General clearly attests to this by pointing out
that there were no cases of recruitment and use of
children by the UPDF or the now-disbanded local
defence units, and that the UPDF has accordingly been
de-listed.
Uganda continues to be vigilant in the
implementation of resolution 1612 (2005), and
tremendous progress has been made, resulting in the
release of many formerly abducted children and their
reintegration into their families and communities. The
most recent example of this commitment was the
rescue, reintegration and ongoing rehabilitation of
Catherine Ajok, the last of the 139 Aboke girls who
were abducted by the terrorist Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA), including Ms. Akallo, who was here this
morning.
As we have heard from the testimony of
Ms. Akollo, one of the most disturbing issues
considered in the report, which is unfortunately
common in most armed conflict situations, concerns
sexual and gender-based violence, with young girls as
the largest and most vulnerable group of victims.
Uganda strongly supports the recommendations by the
Secretary-General and the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict that the Security Council should
consider, at a minimum, including rape and other acts
of grave sexual violence as additional criteria for
inclusion in the annexes.
My delegation also expresses concern at the
increase in the reported cases of indiscriminate killings
of children caught in situations of armed conflict and
war as well as attacks on schools. We condemn these
inhuman acts and call upon the perpetrators to desist
from carrying out such gross atrocities. We also call
upon the international community to take decisive
action against all those committing crimes and
violations against children, including the LRA.
Finally, my delegation calls upon the parties to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child to strengthen
measures geared towards preventing the recruitment of

09-31649

S/PV.6114

children into armed forces. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation concerning effective
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes as vital for the well-being of children
associated with armed forces and groups. It is therefore
imperative that the respective Governments and donors
ensure that such programmes, including the provision
of social services and amenities, be community-based
and receive adequate and timely resources and funding
for their long-term sustainability. We agree with the
observation that this is an increasingly crucial factor
for durable peace and security.
We are grateful to the delegation of Mexico for
preparing the draft presidential statement, which my
delegation fully supports.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): Allow me to welcome the
presence of Her Excellency the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mexico in the Security Council this
morning. We very much appreciate her gesture and
desire to attend and preside over this important
meeting. It underlines the importance Mexico attaches
to this issue. Allow me to also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for
all her efforts to protect children against every form of
cruelty and violence. Furthermore, I congratulate
Mexico for assuming the chairmanship of the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict and wish it every success. Last but not least, I
must express our deep appreciation for the extensive
work covered by the Working Group during the
chairmanship of France.
Children are our future. We must protect them
from every danger, at all costs. Yet countless children
all over the world suffer every day from the most
horrible kinds of treatment, being forced to fight as
soldiers and being subjected to unspeakable forms of
abuse and violence. Listening to Grace Akallo and
hearing her moving story, we have been reminded once
again of the grave nature of the issue we are dealing
with today. We fully see once again how important it is
to work unrelentingly against the use of children in
armed conflict and how imperative it is for the Council
to fully assume its responsibilities in this regard. In this
context, the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/158)
provides us with a very useful basis to work from. We
fully agree with his observations. We also support his
recommendations.

09-31649

The loss of the lives of children in armed conflict
not only is a tragedy of the first degree, but also
deprives nations of their future. In addition, minors
who are raped or must face grave sexual violence are
physically and mentally wounded forever. We must
protect and save our young and future generations from
such an intolerable shame and burden. The cultural
values of humanity throughout the world require the
protection of children. No one should feel they can
trample this cardinal right and principle. We have zero
tolerance for the abuse of children under any pretext.
A number of criteria and issues were elaborated
during the deliberations of the Working Group. I need
not go into the details. However, we believe that the
following points should be borne in mind. There are
wide and justified expectations of the work of the
Security Council on all issues and problems related to
children. We all have to encourage and urge States to
continue to cooperate with the Working Group. And we
have to expedite and facilitate the work of our Group
by considering reports in a timely manner.
Turkey is party to each and every United Nations
instrument related to the rights of children. Of course,
these United Nations instruments have become very
much an integral part of our national legislation. We
also support initiatives, and are party to various
initiatives, outside the framework of the United
Nations promoting the rights of children.
We should do everything possible to hold
accountable before justice the violators of children’s
rights. There should be no impunity for the criminals
and violators if we are to put an end to these horrific
crimes. There is still a long way ahead of us in
achieving that objective. We must remain committed
and must not refrain from taking the necessary steps, as
appropriate. Turkey is resolved to be an active partner
in this honourable journey.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
start, Madam Minister, by welcoming you to the
Council today. We are delighted that you are able to
preside over this important meeting. I would like also
to thank the Mexican delegation, and in particular
Ambassador Heller, for the excellent Mexican
leadership of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.
We associate ourselves fully with the statement to
be delivered later by the representative of the Czech
Republic on behalf of the European Union.

27

S/PV.6114

We welcomed the opportunity this morning to
hear from the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, and from representatives of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and of
UNICEF. We were also struck by the powerful personal
testimony of Ms. Grace Akallo.
I would like to pay tribute to the outstanding
work that the United Nations agencies and funds
continue to undertake in the cause of children affected
by armed conflict. I would like to focus particularly on
the untiring work of the Special Representative and her
team and to recognize the pivotal role of nongovernmental organizations and civil society groups in
the field. That this strand of Security Council work
achieves such impact on the ground is testament to
their dedication and to Ms. Coomaraswamy’s
leadership.
When the Security Council established its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, it did
so with a clear sense that the new structure would need
to be able to adapt to changing realities. It is now time
to address some of the wider challenges of the child
protection agenda and some of the inefficiencies of the
original model. We have said repeatedly that the
Working Group does not make use of all the tools
available to it in support of child protection. That needs
to change in two ways.
First, we strongly believe that it is time for the
Council to expand the criteria for listing parties that
commit abuses against children. That should be
matched by measures to enhance the effectiveness of
the Working Group. In particular, we should expand
the monitoring and reporting mechanism’s trigger to
include both acts of rape and other forms of sexual
violence and acts of killing and maiming that are
committed against children. That would be consistent
with the Secretary-General’s recommendations and
would address the deeply worrying patterns that are set
out in his reports.
Secondly, it is vital that we improve the
monitoring of the implementation of the Working
Group’s recommendations. We need better feedback on
what works and what does not. The SecretaryGeneral’s reports to the Working Group should include
concrete information on progress made by listed
parties. That
may
require
some
additional
administrative support from the Secretariat, but the
impact would be significant.

28

I would like to turn briefly to several conflict
situations where we have particular concerns about the
impact on children. My Foreign Secretary, David
Miliband, is today visiting Sri Lanka with his French
counterpart, Bernard Kouchner. Tens of thousands of
civilians, including many children, are at extreme risk
as a result of the conflict and the dire humanitarian
situation there. The Security Council has made clear its
support for the efforts of the United Nations, led by the
Secretary-General. We continue to urge all parties to
respect international humanitarian law and to take the
necessary steps to ensure the safe evacuation and
protection of and assistance to the civilian population,
and especially the children, caught up in that conflict.
I would like also to highlight our concern about
forced labour in the military in Burma. Personnel
responsible for underage recruitment have been
identified. Bringing them to account would
demonstrate the commitment of the Burmese
Government to cooperate with the United Nations.
In Nepal, we hope to see the Government
implement its commitment to Ms. Coomaraswamy to
release minors remaining in the cantonments.
I note that Al-Qaida is a new addition to the
annexes of the Secretary-General’s report for their use,
and their wilful killing and maiming, of children in
Iraq. The measures contained in Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005) should be brought to bear in
preventing such crimes.
Today’s debate is another step forward in the
Security Council’s work on these important issues. The
international community must be prepared to take
action against those individuals and groups that
commit egregious abuses against children and that
refuse to undertake the remedial action demanded of
them. We look to the Working Group to lead such
action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now set
aside my functions as President of the Security Council
and make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Mexico.
On behalf of Mexico, I thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy for her introduction of the annual
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2009/158).
It is clear that, in spite of the progress that has
been made, children continue to be direct and

09-31649

S/PV.6114

defenceless victims of armed conflicts, and that we
must intensify our efforts to change that situation.
Mexico upholds the principle of the best interests of
the child and considers that the international
community must redouble its efforts to provide broad
and effective protection to children affected by armed
conflict.
The Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict has worked hard, initially under
French and now under Mexican leadership, to ensure
that all parties involved in a dispute respect the rights
that are unambiguously guaranteed under the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocols.
We condemn all acts that jeopardize the integrity
of children, such as attacks against schools; the
recruitment or use of child soldiers; rape and other
sexual violence, which affects girls in particular;
abduction; denial of humanitarian access; maiming;
and, of course, killing.
For us, it is clear that violations of the norms of
international humanitarian law are international crimes.
We therefore consider that the work of the International
Criminal Court in the case against Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo, who is accused of conscripting and enlisting
children under the age of 15 and using them in
hostilities, underlines the importance of fighting
impunity for those who violate the human rights of
persons as vulnerable as children and who violate
international humanitarian law. There are millions of
children in situations of armed conflict who are
subjected to systematic violations of their rights, a
situation that demands that we act with extreme
urgency.
As a State party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocols, and above all
as a State that is aware of its responsibility as a
member of the international community, Mexico
invites the States that have not yet done so to ratify
those and other instruments aimed at protecting those
who today are affected by the scourge of war,
exploitation, violence and abuse.
Mexico recognizes the important work of United
Nations agencies and programmes, in particular
UNICEF, and the International Committee of the Red
Cross, as well as the extraordinary efforts of civil
society organizations and individuals who, selflessly

09-31649

and often at the cost of their own lives, work every day
to help children affected by armed conflict.
The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. On that basis, Mexico calls on the Security
Council, within the framework of its mandate, to
continue addressing the repercussions of armed
conflict on children and to promote specific actions
aimed at fulfilling the recommendations of the
Working Group, including imposing sanctions on the
parties in conflict.
As Chairman of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, Mexico will promote actions to
put an end to the atrocities committed against children,
with particular attention to refugees; displaced,
separated and kidnapped children; those affected by
AIDS/HIV; the disabled; and those subject to sexual
exploitation and detention, as well as to address the
consequences of the trafficking of weapons, antipersonnel mines and other types of munition on the
lives and future of children.
Mexico calls on the international community to
strengthen its efforts to protect children, in particular,
first, to slow their recruitment and prevent their
reincorporation into armed groups; secondly, to
guarantee humanitarian access in every situation;
thirdly, to contribute to children’s physical protection
by preventing their maiming as a result of landmines
and the proliferation of arms; fourthly, to cooperate
with and assist States that suffer the consequences of
armed conflict in order to strengthen or establish
programmes for the disarmament, demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration of child soldiers into
their communities and families; and fifthly, to promote
assistance, with due consideration for age and gender,
that includes health care, psychological support and
education, always taking into consideration the wellbeing of children.
I wish once again to thank all the members of the
Security Council for their confidence in and support
for Mexico in its chairmanship of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, and to reiterate my
country’s commitment to this issue.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now
Philippines.

call

on

the

representative

of

the

29

S/PV.6114

Mr. Davide (Philippines): Let me begin by
expressing the Philippines’ solidarity with Mexico, its
Government and its people as they face a new crisis
that could affect the world.
The Philippines is grateful for this opportunity to
address the Security Council following the issuance of
the annual report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2009/158). With the high priority
that it gives to the promotion and protection of the
rights of children, including in the context of armed
conflict, the Philippines has always considered this
issue to be of special importance and continues to view
with utmost seriousness any negative report in this
regard.
Owing to time constraints, I shall only read
salient portions of my statement, the full text of which
will be circulated to the Security Council.
The Philippines’ commitment to the protection of
children affected by armed conflict was particularly
demonstrated when its Government facilitated the visit
to the Philippines from 7 to 13 December 2008 of
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. During that visit, she held dialogues with key
officials from the Office of the President and relevant
departments and offices of the Government. She also
met with local Government officials, civil society
actors and some women and children affected by armed
conflict. In the course of these meetings, she saw the
embodiment of our national comprehensive programme
on children involved in armed conflict. I would like to
highlight that, in order to drive the implementation of
the programme, the Government continues to mobilize
an inter-agency committee on children involved in
armed conflict to work closely with the Commission on
the Welfare of Children in overseeing actions to ensure
the effective and efficient implementation of our
national programme and to monitor the Philippines’
compliance with the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.
Since Ms. Coomaraswamy’s visit, our enhanced
action has, first, increased awareness and capacitytraining on children and armed conflict at the national
and provincial levels, including institutionalizing this
response in the training modules on national disaster
and emergency management; secondly, developed
rapid child-focused strategies within the various

30

concerned Government agencies to assess, formulate
and undertake action on the situation of children
affected by armed conflict; and thirdly, expedited the
submission of the report of the Philippines on the
Optional Protocol of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children and armed
conflict. Furthermore, in September 2009, the
Philippines will be ready to report to the Committee on
the Rights of the Child on its compliance with the
Convention.
As an extraordinary measure, Ms. Coomaraswamy
had an opportunity to meet with the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front (MILF) to discuss concerns about the
presence of children within the ranks of that rebel
group. Allow me to reiterate the position of the
Philippines that engaging non-State armed groups,
including for the purpose of securing the protection of
children, should be approached in a most careful
manner. Since the situation of children in armed
conflict arises against a complex background, any
strategy to protect children in this case should be in
harmony with the larger peace processes that the
Government has launched with non-State groups in the
country and in full coordination with the Philippine
Government.
In fact, we already include specific provisions on
children’s protection in all peace negotiations, peace
agreements and ceasefires. The protection of children
has been mainstreamed into the peace process with the
Communist Party of the Philippines-New Peoples’
Army-National Democratic Front through the signing
of the Comprehensive Agreement on Respect for
Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law.
The Tripoli Agreement of 2001 between the Philippine
Government and MILF provides a basis for expanding
the protection regime for children affected by conflict.
We wish to recall what we stated in our
intervention at the open debate of the Security Council
on this agenda item on 17 July 2008. The Philippine
Constitution enshrines the promotion and protection of
the rights of children. The Philippines also maintains a
vast arsenal of statutes on the promotion and protection
of the rights of children, the most relevant of which is
Republic Act No. 7610, providing for stronger
deterrence of and special protection against child
abuse, exploitation and discrimination. The Act
prohibits the use of children in armed combat, protects
them from armed conflicts, establishes children as
zones of peace, and provides for the evacuation of

09-31649

S/PV.6114

children during armed conflict. The Philippines is a
State party to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children and armed conflict.
The Security Council may recall that its Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict has
commended the Philippines for the high standard of its
legal framework and policies for the welfare and
protection of children. I am pleased to report that the
Philippine Government has started the process of
amending the act I just mentioned for the purpose of,
inter alia, effectively operationalizing the concept of
children as zones of peace and ensuring provisions for
the
non-criminal
treatment
and
non-judicial
rehabilitation of affected children, as recommended by
Ms. Coomaraswamy. The Working Group has also
lauded the Philippines for its cooperation with the
United Nations regarding the appropriate establishment
of a monitoring and reporting mechanism in the
Philippines. Indeed, the collaborative work between
my Government and the United Nations has begun
positively, and I would like to assure the Council of my
Government’s commitment to continuing this
cooperation.

function as the focal points for dialogue with the
United Nations country team on these issues.
As regards paragraph 125, the military has just
re-emphasized in their directives the importance of
respecting schools and ensuring that they remain safe
for children. With reference to paragraph 127, it would
be helpful if clarification could be provided in regard
to the need to bring release and reintegration measures
in line with good practices. To briefly describe our
procedures in this area, as a matter of priority, our
social workers trace the affected children’s parents and
relatives, who are given psychosocial and even
livelihood support for the effective reintegration of
their children. In cases where this is not possible,
suitable adoption measures, as appropriate, are
considered.

I would like to briefly address some specific
matters addressed in the section of the SecretaryGeneral’s report affecting the Philippines.

I believe that it is our common wish to eventually
clear the lists of offending parties. The Security
Council may wish to assess the level of commitment,
the extent of mechanisms, efforts and progress in
implementation, and the outcomes on the ground as
indicators for the de-listing of parties. As the
Philippines remains focused on these goals, the
Council may consider a stronger focus on the
encouragement and inspiration that de-listing can bring
to sustaining the efforts to protect children in armed
conflict.

I cannot overemphasize the commitment of the
Government of the Philippines to ensuring that
children’s rights are protected, including in the context
of armed conflict. Therefore, any allegation against our
armed forces is viewed with the highest degree of
concern and seriousness. My Government assures the
Security Council that all its mechanisms for
investigation and military justice are fully in place to
deal, as appropriate, with such cases.

Indeed, what the Philippines has accomplished so
far in the area of children and armed conflict, and its
excellent cooperation with the United Nations, now
justify dropping it from the countries that are listed in
annex II in accordance with Council resolution 1612
(2005). Justice demands, and due process supports,
such de-listing. Not to do that may perpetuate a double
standard of justice vis-à-vis other areas of more serious
concerns in many places in this suffering world.

With reference to paragraphs 122, 124 and 126,
the armed forces of the Philippines are conducting a
review of their procedures with a view to improving
and reporting on and the handling, treatment and
turnover of affected children; ensuring that directives
to field commanders concerning child protection
sensitivity and measures are carried out in their
operations; and strengthening their links with our
social development agencies to ensure the effective
rehabilitation of these children. Also, to enhance
accountability and facilitate coordination, both the
military and the police have human rights offices that

The President (spoke in Spanish): I appeal to all
speakers to make their statements as brief as possible
and to distribute their statements, if necessary.

09-31649

I call next on the representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate the Foreign
Minister of Mexico for her statement and congratulate
Mexico upon having assumed the chair of the Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We
are convinced that Mexico will discharge its duties

31

S/PV.6114

with the same conviction and efficiency as was shown
by the French chair.

mechanism for the security of these children, to
improve the protection provided.

This debate was introduced today by very useful
statements by United Nations representatives and by
the eloquent and necessary testimony by Ms. Grace
Akallo.

Canada would like to commend the work of the
Security Council Working Group created by resolution
1612 (2005). We would also like to acknowledge the
strong support provided by the Secretariat to the
Working Group. The actionable conclusions and
guidance issued by the Working Group have
demonstrated the Council’s commitment to prevent
crimes against children in situations of conflict and to
ensure that those responsible are held accountable
under national and international law. We hope that in
the coming months the Working Group will be able to
travel to the field for concrete exposure that would
better inform its work.

Canada welcomes this open debate and the
Secretary-General’s annual report on children and
armed conflict (S/2009/158). This debate provides us
another opportunity to bring to the attention of the
Council the severity of continued acts of violence
against children. Too often today, we see the
devastating effects that armed conflict has on children,
including the profound repercussions on their living
conditions. Sri Lanka, Somalia, the Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo illustrate this
tragedy. Children are injured, killed and displaced and
become victims of sexual and gender-based violence.
They are directly or indirectly recruited as soldiers. To
that we add separation from their families and the
impossibility of pursuing their education. Sadly, this
list is not exhaustive.
Canada commends the Security Council for its
innovative initiatives in building a framework for
protecting children in situations of armed conflict. We
applaud the work of the Secretary-General and his
team. In particular, I would like to thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, for her commitment, her vigorous
advocacy and for the wealth of reporting by her office.
(spoke in English)
Canada strongly supports Security Council
resolution 1612 (2005) and the implementation of an
effective monitoring and reporting mechanism for
violations against children. We would like to recognize
the tremendous work of UNICEF and the
non-governmental organization and civil society actors
who contribute to the 1612 monitoring and reporting
mechanism. The impact of resolution 1612 (2005) is
real and measurable, as demonstrated by the release of
children from the ranks of armed groups around the
world. The monitoring and reporting mechanism has
now been implemented or put in place in all the
situations listed in the annexes to the SecretaryGeneral’s 2007 report (S/2007/757). This is in itself a
significant achievement. We hope to see further
advancement of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, engaging with youth and strengthening the

32

Thanks to the hard work of these individuals and
organizations, there is a much greater awareness of the
terrible plight of these children. There remains,
however, an environment of impunity for those who
persist in committing the most serious crimes against
children in situations of armed conflict, which has been
highlighted by the Special Representative and the
Secretary-General. In this regard, let me take this
opportunity to register once again Canada’s strong
view that the existing monitoring and reporting
mechanism should be triggered by all six grave
violations against children outlined in resolution 1612
(2005).
We must continue to uphold the rights of children
in situations of armed conflict and to strengthen and
expand them. Violations of resolution 1612 (2005)
continue, including a disturbing increase in rape and
other sexual violations against both girls and boys. We
have an opportunity before us to fill an important gap
in the child protection framework, including through
negotiation of a new resolution. It should provide for a
monitoring and reporting mechanism triggered by the
recruitment and use of children, rape and other grave
sexual violence, intentional killing and maiming of
children, abductions, attacks on schools and hospitals
and the denial of humanitarian access to children by
parties to armed conflict. Canada urges the Council to
take concrete actions to make this happen.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to extend to you, Mr. President, our full solidarity
in this time when Mexico is confronting the serious

09-31649

S/PV.6114

swine flu epidemic. I also wish to express the
appreciation of my delegation for the presence of
Foreign Minister Patricia Espinosa at this discussion.
Her participation adds even more political significance
to our dealing with the important topic that brings us
together today. It also underlines Mexico’s
commitment to this issue and celebrates Mexico’s
competent presidency of the Council.
(spoke in English)
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his statement this morning and for the report before us
(S/2009/158). I also wish to commend Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy for the remarkable work she has been
doing. I wish to recognize as well the important
contribution that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and UNICEF bring to our common
endeavours.
The moving testimony of Grace Akallo is a
reminder to all of us of the need to pursue and
strengthen our efforts to protect children in armed
conflict.
My delegation is pleased with the progress
achieved in the implementation of Council resolutions
on the protection of children in armed conflict,
especially resolution 1612 (2005). Monitoring and
reporting mechanisms have been established for all
situations listed in annexes I and II to the SecretaryGeneral’s 2007 report (S/2007/757). Just as important,
new action plans have either been signed or are being
discussed with parties to conflicts. We encourage the
continuation of such efforts, always in close
consultation with interested Member States.
We
also
welcome
progress
made
in
mainstreaming children and armed conflict issues in
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions.
One aspect that deserves particular attention is the
protection of displaced persons camps, where
recruiting of children is reported to take place. Failing
to protect families and individuals from such a scourge
not only means inflicting new suffering on people
already struck by tragedy, but threatens the
Organization and its missions with unacceptable
discredit.
There has also been progress in specific conflict
situations. However, in reviewing the document, my
delegation was particularly struck by instances where a
variety of State actors were engaged in acts of violence

09-31649

against children or in behaviour that endangered them.
Although such acts are to be condemned regardless of
their perpetrators, States bear a special responsibility.
They must lead by example in their own territories and
in those territories where their forces are placed for
whatever reason and purpose. From the mountains in
Afghanistan to the towns in Gaza and the villages in
Africa, children in armed conflicts must find in States
an active protector and never an agent of violence,
even if unintended.
Brazil is particularly concerned with all forms of
sexual violence against children in armed conflicts.
Not only are such crimes particularly traumatizing but
they may also pose further obstacles to future
reconciliation. We therefore support efforts to better
monitor violations, provide reliable information on
sexual abuse by forces of all origins and improve
coordination among United Nations agencies. The
proposed inclusion of rape and other grave sexual
violence as a trigger for inclusion in the annexes to the
Secretary-General’s report certainly merits careful
consideration in light of the mandate of the Security
Council. In so doing, Council members should reflect
on the most appropriate way to address killing and
maiming of children.
Brazil is also concerned with the reintegration of
children in countries emerging from conflict. The
Peacebuilding Commission has an important role to
play in that matter. Disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes must address the recovery
and development of children affected by violence
committed by armed forces.
The report of the Secretary-General is yet another
powerful call to Member States to fight violence
against children in armed conflicts. We should heed the
call. In so doing, we will help lay a solid basis for
peace, stability and human development not only in
countries emerging from conflict, but also in their
regions. Importantly, the future of those children will
have been safeguarded and our mission accomplished.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): First, let me
express our sympathy with the people of Mexico for
the outbreak of the flu epidemic.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The candidate countries Croatia and

33

S/PV.6114

the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
countries of the Stabilisation and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, as well as Armenia,
Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine align
themselves with this statement.
At the outset, let me thank the presidency,
Mexico, for organizing an open debate and reaffirm the
European Union’s strong support to the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict. I would also like to
express our support for the work of Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, whose outreach activities and field
visits contribute significantly to improving the
situation of children in armed conflict. On behalf of the
European Union, I would like to thank UNICEF and
other United Nations agencies and implementation
partners for their vital field work and the input they
have made to the Secretary-General’s current report on
children and armed conflict (S/2009/158).
The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the situation of children affected by armed
conflicts around the world and endorses the current
report of the Secretary-General as well as the
recommendations contained therein. More efforts
should be made to eliminate harmful practices
affecting girls and boys in armed conflict. Moreover,
the European Union highlights the need to continue to
address the short- and long-term impacts of armed
conflict on children in an effective, sustainable and
comprehensive manner.
This year we commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, and the European Union wishes to use this
occasion to call on all countries to universally
implement that Convention and its Optional Protocol.
The European Union also calls on all countries to
adhere to and implement the Paris Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups, adopted in February 2007.
The European Union emphasizes the need for the
close coordination of policies regarding the protection
of civilians across the scope of United Nations
activities in key areas such as human rights, gender
equality, rule of law, development policies,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform.

34

The
European
Union
welcomes
the
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict established
by Security Council resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612
(2005), especially the progress on the design and
implementation of action plans as indicated in the
Secretary-General’s report. In that respect, the
European Union reiterates the importance of providing
specific child protection advisers in peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and political missions. In order to see
even more progress in the future, access to all parties
involved, including non-State parties, must be ensured.
The European Union calls on Governments and
all parties concerned to abolish and prevent the
practice of recruitment and use of children in armed
forces or armed groups in clear violation of
international legal obligations and other relevant
principles. Moreover, the European Union reaffirms its
full support of the work of the International Criminal
Court in the fight against impunity for the recruitment
and use of child soldiers and as a dissuasive instrument
for potential perpetrators. The European Union
emphasizes the need to ensure a more intensive
cooperation between the Working Group and the
relevant sanctions committees.
Furthermore, we support the call to the Security
Council to take appropriate account of all categories of
grave violations. The European Union encourages the
Council to take concrete measures vis-à-vis those
parties listed in the annexes of the Secretary-General’s
report, including the use of sanctions for repeat
offenders who have shown themselves unwilling to
engage in meaningful dialogue to put an end to
violations.
Accordingly, the European Union remains deeply
concerned with the increase of rape and other forms of
sexual violence against children, both boys and girls, in
armed conflict. Action needs to be taken without delay
against those egregious violations. Security Council
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) are relevant
in that regard and must be implemented. The European
Union urges the Security Council to expand the criteria
for violations that trigger the listing of a party in
annexes attached to the report of the SecretaryGeneral, and to include parties to armed conflict that
commit rape and other grave sexual violence against
children, as well as the intentional killing and maiming
of children.

09-31649

S/PV.6114

The European Union is firmly committed to
addressing the impact of armed conflict on children in
an effective, sustainable and comprehensive manner.
The European Union continues to implement updated
guidelines on children and armed conflict through the
monitoring and reporting mechanisms in 19 priority
countries, and cooperates with the United Nations,
national and regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations and civil society on the basis of
resolution 1612 (2005). A vast range of child protection
projects are financed by the European Union through
various instruments. Those include 15 million euros for
the 2008 thematic programme, Investing in People, to
support children affected by armed conflict and
trafficking; 5 million euros for the European
Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights —
towards children’s rights; in addition to substantial
broad humanitarian support.
Further, the European Union advocates a
systematic mainstreaming of human rights, gender
issues and child protection into the European Security
and Defence Policy operations on the basis of the
Checklist for the Integration of the Protection of
Children affected by Armed Conflict, and promotes a
comprehensive approach to the issue through

09-31649

humanitarian, development, security and human rights
instruments. Those commitments are further articulated
in the European Commission communication entitled,
“A Special Place for Children in European Union
External Action”.
The European Union strongly encourages the
Council to improve and enhance, without further delay,
its response to violations committed against children in
situations of armed conflict, in particular sexual
violence, building upon the experience and lessons
learned in the implementation of resolution 1612
(2005),
and
taking
into
consideration
the
recommendations proposed by the Secretary-General in
his current report. The European Union looks forward
to the adoption of an action-oriented presidential
statement by the Security Council as a first step in that
respect.
Let me assure the Council of the European
Union’s continued commitment to this important issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. I intend, with the concurrence of the members
of the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3.15 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

35
