24
General Assembly- Thirty-eighth Session
--------~--"- -- ··-------- --------==.:..:..::.:....:..:..::......:_ _..::...___:._:____..::..._~__:.--------------------

•4. Also invlfes the Government of France to open the
negotiations with the Government of the Comoros with a
view to ensuring the effective and prompt return of the
island of Mayotte to the Comoros:
5. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to follow developments concerning this question.
in conjunction with the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-ninth session:
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth session the item entitled "Question of the
Comorian island of Mayotte".
65th plenary meeting
2 I Noremher I 983

38/29.

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security

The General Assemhl_r,
Having considered the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security".
Recalling its resolutions ES-6/2 of 14 January 1980, 35!
37 of 20 November 1980, 36/34 of 18 November 1981
and 37/37 of 29 November 1982,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the obligation of all States to
refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of any State,
Rca..fjirmingfurther the inalienable right of all peoples to
determine their own form of government and to choose
their own economic, political and social system free from
outside intervention. subversion, coercion or constraint of
any kind whatsoever,
Gravely concerned at the continuing foreign armed intervention in Afghanistan. in contravention of the above
principles, and its serious implications for international
peace and security.
Noling the increasing concern of the international community over the continued and serious sufferings of the
Afghan people and over the magnitude of social and economic problems posed to Pakistan and Iran by the presence on their soil of millions of Afghan refugees, and the
continuing increase in their numbers,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need for a political solution of the grave situation in respect of Afghanistan,
Taking nole of the report of the Secretary-General, 36 and the status of the diplomatic process initiated by
him,
Recognizing the importance of the initiatives of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the efforts of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries for a political
solution of the situation in respect of Afghanistan,
I. Reitera/es that the preservation of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity. political independence and nonaligned character of Afghanistan is essential for a peaceful
solution of the problem:
2. Reaj/irms the right of the Afghan people to determine their own form of government and to choose their
economic, political and social system free from outside
intervention, subversion. coercion or constraint of any
kind whatsoever:
36 A/38/449-S/16005. For the printed text. see Official Records of the
Secunty Council. Thirtr-eighth Year. Supplement (or Julr. August and Septl'mher /98}, document S/16005.

3. Calls for the immediate withdrawal of the foreign
troops from Afghanistan:
4. Calls upon all parties concerned to work for the
urgent achievement of a political solution, in accordance
with the provisions of the present resolution, and the creation of the necessary conditions which would enable the
Afghan refugees to return voluntarily to their homes in
safety and honour:
5. Renews its appeal to all States and national and
international organizations to continue to extend humanitarian relief assistance with a view to alleviating the hardship of the Afghan refugees, in co-ordination with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees:
6. Expresses its appreciation and support for the efforts
and constructive steps taken by the Secretary-General.
especially the diplomatic process initiated by him. in the
search for a solution to the problem:
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue those
efforts with a view to promoting a political solution, in
accordance with the provisions of the present resolution,
and the exploration of securing appropriate guarantees for
the non-use of force, or threat of force. against the political
independence, sovereignty. territorial integrity and security of all neighbouring States. on the basis of mutual guarantees and strict non-interference in each other's internal
affairs and with full regard for the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations:
8. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member
States and the Security Council concurrently informed of
progress towards the implementation of the present resolution and to submit to Member States a report on the situation at the earliest appropriate opportunity:
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-ninth session the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security".
69th plenary meeting
23 Nm•emher 1983

38/34.

Return or restitution of cultural property to
the countries of origin

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3187
(XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3391 (XXX) of 19 November 1975, 31/40 of 30 November 1976, 32/18 of II
November I 977, 33/50 of 14 December 1978, 34/64 of 29
November 1979, 35/127 and 35/128 of 11 December
1980 and 36/64 of 27 November 198 I,
Recalling also the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property, 37 adopted on 14 November 1970 by the General Conference of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General submitted in co-operation with the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 38
A ware of the importance attached by the countries of
origin to the return of cultural property which is of fundamental spiritual and cultural value to them, so that they
3 7 United

Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization.

Records of the General Conference. Sixteenth Session, vol. I. Resolutions.

p. 135. •
38 A/38/456.

•

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

may constitute collections representative of their cultural
heritage,
Noting with satisfaction that some countries have taken
positive steps towards the return or restitution of museum
pieces, archives and ohjets d'art to their countries of origin,
Reaffirming the importance of inventories as an essential tool for the understanding and protection of cultural
property and for the identification of dispersed heritage
and as a contribution to the advancement of scientific and
artistic knowledge and intercultural communication,
Deeply concerned at the clandestine excavations and the
illicit traffic in cultural property that continue to impoverish the cultural heritage of all peoples,
Supporting the solemn appeal made on 7 June 1978 by
the Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization for the return of irreplaceable cultural heritage to those who created it.
l. Commends the United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization and the Intergovernmental
Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural Property
to its Countries of Origin or its Restitution in Case of
Illicit Appropriation on the work they have accomplished.
in particular through the promotion of bilateral negotiations, for the return or restitution of cultural property, the
preparation of inventories of movable cultural property,
the development of infrastructures for the protection of
movable cultural property, the reduction of illicit traffic in
cultural property and the dissemination of information to
the public;
2. Reaffirms that the restitution to a country of its
ohjets d'art, monuments, museum pieces, archives, manuscripts, documents and any other cultural or artistic
treasures contributes to the strengthening of international
co-operation and to the preservation and flowering of universal cultural values through fruitful co-operation
between developed and developing countries;
3. lnl'ites Member States to draw up, in co-operation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, systematic inventories of cultural
property existing in their territory and of their cultural
property abroad;
4. Also invites Member States engaged in seeking the
recovery of cultural and artistic treasures from the sea-bed,
in accordance with international law, to facilitate by mutually acceptable conditions the participation of States having a historical and cultural link with those treasures;
5. Appeals to Member States to co-operate closely with
the Intergovernmental Committee for Promoting the
Return of Cultural Property to its Countries of Origin or
its Restitution in Case of Illicit Appropriation and to conclude bilateral agreements for this purpose;
6. Also appeals to Member States to encourage the
mass information media and educational and cultural
institutions to strive to arouse a greater and more general
awareness with regard to the return or restitution of cultural property to its country of origin;
7. Takes note with satisfaction of the importance
accorded by the World Conference on Cultural Policies,
held at Mexico City from 26 July to 6 August 1982, to the
question of the return or restitution of cultural property
during the debate on cultural policies;
8. Endorses the opinion expressed at the World Conference on Cultural Policies that the return of cultural
property to its country of origin should be accompanied by
39See A/38/456, p. 12. para. 17.

40 Official Records <l the (ieneral Assemhlr. Thirty- e1i:hth Session, Supple-

menl No. 24 (A/38/24).
41 fbid .. Supplement No . .'3 (A/38123). chaps. I-VI and VIII.

25

the training of key personnel and technicians and the provision of the necessary facilities for the satisfactory conservation and presentation of the property restored; 39
9. Invites once again those Member States that have
not yet done so to sign and ratify the Convention on the
Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import.
Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property;
I0. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to submit to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution;
I I. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Return or restitution of
cultural property to the countries of origin".
7 1st plenary meeting
:?5 Nol'e111her 1983

38/36. Question of Namibia
A
SITUATION IN NAMIBIA RESULTING FROM THE ILLEGAi
OCCUPATION OF THI TFRRITORY BY SOUTH AFRICA

The General Asse111h!r,
Haring examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 40 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. 41
Recalling its resolution I 5 14 (XV) of 14 December 1960
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2 I 45 (XXI) of 27
October 1966 and 2248 (S- V) of 19 May I 96 7 and subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council relating to Namibia, as well as the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June
1971, 42 delivered in response to the request addressed to it
by the Security Council in its resolution 284 ( 1970) of 29
July I 970,
Recalling also its resolutions 3111 (XXVIII) of 12
December 1973 and 31/146 and 31/152 of20 December
1976, by which it, inter alia. recognized the South West
Africa People's Organization as the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people and granted observer
status to it,
Recalling further its resolutions ES-8/2 of I 4 September
1981 and 36/121 B of 10 December 1981, by which it
called upon States to cease forthwith. individually and collectively, all dealings with South Africa in order totally to
isolate it politically, economically. militarily and culturally,
Recalling the Political Declaration adopted by the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government ofNonAligned Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March
1983. 43
Recalling the Paris Declaration on Namibia and the
report of the Committee of the Whole and the Programme
of Action on Namibia adopted at the International Confer4 2 Legal Consequences/or States of the Continued Presence ()(South A_li-ica
in Namibia (South !Vest Africa! notwithstanding Security Council Resolution
7
2 6 (1970). Advisor.I' Opinion. I.CJ. Reports 1971. p. 16.
43 A/38:132-S/15675 and Corr.I and 2, annex. sect. L
