Re1olutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

--------------------

Reiterating that freedom of information forms an
important part of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms to the promotion of which the United Nations
is dedicated,
Decides to take up at its twenty-third session the
consideration of the item on freedom of information.

1638th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.
2337 (XXII). Status of the Intemational Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
the Intemational Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in its resolution 2200 A (XXI) of
16 December 1966 it expressed the hope that the International Covenants on Human Rights and the Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights would be signed and ratified or acceded
to without delay and come into force at an early date,
Noting that according to the report of the SecretaryGeneral, submitted in pursuance of resolution 2200 A
(XXI) on the status of ratifications of the Covenants
and of the Optional Protocol,11 there have been no ratifications of or accessions to any of these instruments
and that there have been only nineteen signatures to
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, eighteen to the International C'.,ovenant
on Civil and Political Rights, and eleven to the Optional
Protocol,
Desiring to accelerate the ratifications of and accessions to the Covenants and the Optional Protocol,
Convinced that the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations would be greatly enhanced by the coming into force of the Covenants and
the Optional Protocol,
1. Invites States which are eligible to become parties
to the International Covenants on Human Rights and
the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights to hasten their ratifications of or accessions to these instruments;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on the status of the Covenants and the Optional Protocol to the International Conference on Human Rights
to be held at Teheran in 1968 and to the General
Assembly at its twenty-third session ;
3. Decides to include this item in the provisional
agenda of its twenty-third session.

1638th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.
2338 (XXII). Question of the punishment of war
criminals and of persons who have committed crimes against humanity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3 (I) of 13 February 1946
and 170 (II) of 31 October 1947 on the extradition
and punishment of war criminals, resolution 95 (I) of
11 December 1946 affirming the principles of inter11 A/6820 and Add.1. See also Official Records of the General
A.sstmbly, Twmty-second Session, Third Committee, 1553rd
meeting, para. 53.

national law recognized by the Charter of the Niirnberg Tribunal and the judgement of the Tribunal, and
resolutions 2184 (XXI) of 12 December 1966 and
2202 ( XXI) of 16 December 1966, which expressly
condemned as crimes against humanity the violation
of the economic and political rights of the indigenous
population, on the one hand, and the policies of apartheid, on the other,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1074 D (XXXIX) of 28 July 1965 and 1158 (XLI)
of 5 August 1966 on the punishment of war criminals
and of persons who have committed crimes against
humanitv,
N oti~ that none of the solemn declarations, instruments or conventions relating to prosecution and punishment for war crimes and crimes against humanity
makes provision for a period of limitation,
Considering that war crimes and crimes against
humanity are among the gravest crimes in international
law,
Convinced that effective punishment for war crimes
and crimes against humanity is an important element
in the prevention of such crimes, the protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms, the encouragement of confidence, the furtherance of co-operation
among peoples and the promotion of international
peace and security,
Noting that _the application to war ~r!mes and cri~es
against humamty of the rules of mumc1pal law relatmg
to the period of limitation for ordinary crimes is a
matter of serious concern to world public opinion, since
it prevents the prosecution and punishment of persons
responsible for those crimes,
Recognizing that it is necessary and timely to affirm in international law, through a convention, the
principle that there is no period of limitation for war
crimes and crimes against humanity, and to secure
its universal application,
Having considered the report of the joint working
group of the Third and Sixth Committees on the draft
convention on the non-applicability of statutory limitation to war crimes and crimes against humanity, 10
Expressing its regret that owing to the lack of time
it has not been possible to complete consideration of
and to adopt the convention on the non-applicability
of statutory limitation to war crimes and crimes against
humanity,
1. Expresses its thanks to the joint working group
of the Third and Sixth Committee for the work it
has accomplished;
2. Takes note of the report of the joint working
group;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
Member States the report of the joint working group
containing the text of the draft convention adopted by
the group and to invite them to submit comments on
the draft convention;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to issue
to Member States, before the twenty-third session of
10 The joint working group was established, for the twentysecond session, following consultations between the Chairman
of the Third Committee and the Chairman of the Sixth Committee, in accordance with the recommendation adopted by the
General Assembly at its 1564th plenary meeting, on 23 September 1967. For the re_port of the joint working group, ace

0 fficial Records of the Gmeral Assembly, Twm~-second Session, Annexes, agenda item 60. document A/C.3/L.1503.

Genera) A11sembly-Twenty-~econd Se.ion

the General Assembly, a report containing the replies
received from Member States in accordance with
paragraph 3 above;
5. Recommends that no legislative or other action
be taken which may be prejudicial to the aims and
purposes of a convention on the non-applicability of
statutory limitation to war crimes and crimes against
humanity, pending the adoption of a convention by the
General Assembly ;
6. Decides to give high priority to the completion
of the draft convention on the non-applicability of statutory limitation to war crimes and crimes against
humanity, with a view to its adoption at the twentythird session.
1638th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.
2339

(XXII). International Year for Human
Rights

The GeneraJ Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1961 (XVIII) of 12 December 1963 designating the year 1968 as International Year for Human Rights,
Recalling also its resolutions 2081 (XX) of 20 December 1965 and 2217 (XXI) of 19 December 1966
relating to the International Year for Human Rights,
Reaffirming its conviction that the celebration of the
International Year for Human Rights, including the
holding of the International Conference on Human
Rights, will contribute significantly to the promotion
of universal respect for and observance of human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as
to race, sex, language or religion,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the International Year for Human Rights,11
H<Wing also considered the report of the Preparatory
Committee for the International Conference on Human
Rights,12
Bearing in mind the conclusions and recommendations of the International Seminar on Apartheid, Racial
Discrimination and Colonialism in Southern Africa,
held in 1967 at Kitwe, Zambia, of the Seminar on the
Realization of Economic and Social Rights contained
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, held
in 1967 at Warsaw, Poland, and of recent United
Nations seminars on human rights held at Manila,
Philippines, at Kingston, Jamaica, and at Helsinki,
Finland,
1. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States, specialized agencies, regional organizations and
national and international organizations concerned that
have supplied information on the measures and activities
contemplated or undertaken by them in connexion with
the International Year for Human Rights;
2. Welcomes the measures taken or envisaged by
the Secretary-General to co-ordinate activities undertaken in connexion with the International Year for
Human Rights and to implement the relevant parts of
the programme for the Year set forth in the annex
to General Assembly resolution 2217 A (XXI) ;
11 A/6866 and Add.I

and 2.
the General Assembl_v, Twcnty-suond
Su.non, Annexu, agenda item 58, document A/6670.
11 Official Records of

3. Further welcomes the special activities contemplated or undertaken by other organs of the United
Nations in connexion with the International Year for
Human Rights ;
4. Invites Member States, the specialized agencies,
the regional intergovernmental organizations and the
national and international organizations concerned to
continue to intensify throughout 1968 their efforts and
undertakings in the field of human rights, including
the measures set out in the annexes to its resolutions
2081 (XX) and 2217 A (XXI), and to keep the
Secretary-General informed of these efforts and undertakings ;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the Preparatory
Committee for the International Conference on Human
Rights for the work it has accomplished;
6. Takes note of the provisional agenda for the
!nternational Conference on Human Rights, contained
m annex II to the report of the Preparatory Committee;
7. Expresses the hope that the Conference will devote particular attention to the adoption of l]leasures
to ensure the immediate and complete elimination of
all forms of racial discrimination, apartheid and
colonialism ;
8. Decides to modify rule 34, paragraph 1, of the
draft rules of procedure of the Conference 18 to read
as follows:
"Decisions of the Conference on all matters of
substance shall, unless otherwise decided, be taken
by a simple majority of the representatives present
and voting" ;
9. Invites the Council of Europe, the League of
Arab States, the Organization of African Unity and
tht'. Orga~ization of American States and any other
reg10nal intergovernmental organizations particularly
concerned with human rights to send observers to the
Conference ;
10. Invites non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council
that have a demonstrable interest in the items on the
provisional agenda for the Conference and may wish
to he present at the Conference to send observers to it;
11. Invites other non-governmental organizations
that may be interested in sending observers to the Conference to make application to the Secretary-General
before 1 February 1968 and requests the Preparatory
Committee to consider such applications and to approve
them if the non-governmental organizations concerned
are of recognized standing, are international in their
structure and have a demonstrable interest in the items
on the provisional agenda for the Conference;
12. Decides to add the following rule to the draft
rult's of procedure of the Conference :18
"OBSERVERS FOR NON-GOVERNMENTAL
ORGANIZATIONS

"Rule 62
"Observers for non-governmental organizations invited to this Conference may, with the authorization
of the General Committee, circulate through the
Secretariat written statements of a general character
on questions of human rights which are on the agenda
of the Conference" ;
rn Ibid, annex I.
