A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/178
7 March 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 91 (g)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/48/717/Add.8)]
48/178.

Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 43/181 of 20 December 1988, in which it adopted
the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000 and designated the Commission
on Human Settlements as the United Nations intergovernmental body responsible
for coordinating, evaluating and monitoring the Strategy,
Recalling also its resolution 47/180 of 22 December 1992 on the United
Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), in which it affirmed
that a mid-term review of the implementation of the Global Strategy should be
conducted at the Conference,
Noting with satisfaction the recognition of the renewed commitment to
the Global Strategy expressed in Agenda 21, 1/ adopted by the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development,
Bearing in mind the high potential of enabling shelter strategies, which
rely on labour-intensive and locally based technologies, to generate
employment, demand for local products and savings, and thereby promote
economic development and poverty reduction,
__________
1/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted
by the Conference, resolution 1, annex II.

/...

A/RES/48/178
Page 2

Bearing in mind also that enabling strategies typically include
activities, such as institutional reform, revision of building codes and
regulations and steps aimed at facilitating the access of the poor to critical
resources, especially land and finance, which can best be implemented through
partnership arrangements among the public, private and community sectors, and
the empowerment of the poor and of women,
Convinced that the concept of enabling strategies synthesizes the
lessons learned in the development of living conditions since Habitat: United
Nations Conference on Human Settlements, held at Vancouver from 31 May to 11
June 1976, and that broad commitment to the implementation of such strategies
represents the only viable way of reversing the trend towards deterioration of
those conditions,
Recognizing that, since the adoption of the Global Strategy, additional
weight has been given to and further insights have been reached into several
essential aspects of enabling shelter strategies, such as the requirement for
sensitivity to gender considerations, and their potential for contributing to
environmentally sustainable development,
Aware that adequate information plays a pivotal role in the proper
analysis of the outcome, opportunities and constraints of current housing
processes, and in assessing the impact of policies, strategies and programmes
thereon,
Having considered the third report of the Commission on Human
Settlements on the implementation of the Global Strategy for Shelter to the
Year 2000, 2/
Noting with satisfaction that a number of Governments have initiated or
reformulated their national shelter strategies based on the principle of
enabling all actors in the shelter sector, that many other Governments have
initiated action on particular components of a national shelter strategy and,
furthermore, that a number of Governments have commenced a process for
applying selected indicators for monitoring the progress and efficiency of
their national shelter strategies,
Noting also with satisfaction the support given to the implementation of
the Global Strategy by donor Governments, international bodies and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
Cognizant of the importance of maintaining the momentum already
generated at the national and international levels for the implementation of
the Global Strategy,
1.
Commends Governments that are already revising, consolidating,
formulating or implementing their national shelter strategies based on the
enabling principles of the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000;
__________
2/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eight Session,
Supplement No. 8 and addendum (A/48/8/and Add.1).

/...

A/RES/48/178
Page 3

2.
Urges all Governments to adopt and/or strengthen integrated
national shelter strategies based on the enabling approach and principles of
social, economic and environmental sustainability, and to review them
regularly with a view to ensuring the improvement of living conditions,
particularly of the rural and urban poor, women and the homeless;
3.
Recommends that all Governments adopt a cost-effective system for
monitoring the progress of their national shelter strategy and, when assessing
the performance of the shelter sector, also adopt, as far as is feasible,
taking into account local conditions and sensitivity to gender considerations,
guidelines for monitoring national shelter strategies and the application of
shelter sector performance indicators, and publicize the guidelines within
their countries, particularly on World Habitat Day, and also submit them to
the Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
(Habitat), in order to enable him to prepare the reports on the implementation
of the Global Strategy for consideration by the Commission on Human
Settlements;
4.
Urges Governments to integrate fully the environmental dimension
in the formulation and implementation of national shelter strategies, taking
into account the relevant components of Agenda 21; 1/
5.
Invites Governments to make voluntary contributions to the United
Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation in order to facilitate the
implementation and monitoring of the Global Strategy;
6.
Urges the international community to strengthen its support for
national efforts to formulate and implement enabling shelter strategies in
developing countries, as recommended in Agenda 21;
7.
Urges the organizations of the United Nations system, particularly
the United Nations Development Programme, and other multilateral and bilateral
agencies to provide increased financial and other support to Governments on
the basis of an approach consistent with the Global Strategy for the
implementation of the Plan of Action for the Global Strategy;
8.
Adopts the Plan of Action for 1994-1995 for the implementation of
the Global Strategy for Shelter to the Year 2000, 3/ and urges all
Governments, relevant United Nations and private sector organizations and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to prepare and implement
their specific plans of action.
86th plenary meeting
21 December 1993

__________
3/

Ibid.
