United Nations

A/RES/61/276

General Assembly

Distr.: General
20 July 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 132

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 29 June 2007
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/968)]

61/276. Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations:
cross-cutting issues
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/233 A of 23 December 1994, 49/233 B of
31 March 1995, 51/218 E of 17 June 1997, 57/290 B of 18 June 2003, 58/315 of
1 July 2004, 59/296 of 22 June 2005 and 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the overview of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations 1 and the related report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 2 the annual
report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on peacekeeping operations 3 and
the note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments thereon, 4 the report of
the Joint Inspection Unit on the evaluation of results-based budgeting in
peacekeeping operations 5 and the note by the Secretary-General transmitting his
comments thereon, 6 the report of the Secretary-General on the improvement of
internal controls in the management, accounting and reporting of assets of all United
Nations field missions, 7 the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
the investigation conducted by the Investigations Task Force into fraud and
corruption allegations at Pristina Airport 8 and the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting his comments thereon, 9 the report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on the audit of the standard costs applied to Headquarters overhead, 10 the
report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the global review of discipline
_______________
1

A/60/696 and A/61/786.
A/61/852.
3
A/61/264 (Part II).
4
A/61/264 (Part II)/Add.1.
5
See A/60/709.
6
A/60/709/Add.1.
7
A/60/843.
8
A/60/720 and Corr.1.
9
A/60/720/Add.1.
10
A/60/682.
2

06-51093

A/RES/61/276

in field missions led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the
Secretariat, 11 the report of the Secretary-General on procedures for the purchase and
utilization of vehicles and other equipment by United Nations field missions, 12 the
report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the horizontal audit of fuel
management in peacekeeping missions, 13 the report of the Secretary-General on
special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse, 14 the
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on sexual exploitation and sexual
abuse, including policy development, implementation and full justification of
proposed capacity on personnel conduct issues, 15 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee, 16 the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on its
investigation into allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse in the Ituri region
(Bunia) in the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, 17 and the report of the Secretary-General on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration 18 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee, 19
I
1.
Reaffirms its resolutions 57/290 B, 59/296 and 60/266, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of their relevant provisions;
2.
Appreciates the efforts of all peacekeeping personnel in the field and at
Headquarters;
3.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the general
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,2
subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
4.
Emphasizes that the submission of budget proposals by missions to
Headquarters should constitute part of the leadership and accountability functions of
the Head of Mission/Special Representative of the Secretary-General;
Takes note of the management initiatives proposed in sections III.B and
5.
III.C of the report of the Secretary-General; 20
6.
Recalls section B, paragraphs 24 and 25, of its resolution 52/214 of
22 December 1997, and requests the Secretary-General to present his report in full
conformity with the provisions of those paragraphs;
Notes with concern that a number of reports requested in resolution
7.
60/266 have not been introduced during the current session, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that the outstanding reports are submitted to it at the
second part of its resumed sixty-second session;
_______________
11

A/60/713.
A/60/842.
13
A/61/760 and Corr.1.
14
A/60/861.
15
A/60/862.
16
A/61/886.
17
A/61/841.
18
A/60/705.
19
A/60/929.
20
A/61/786.
12

2

A/RES/61/276

8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the possible
application of the relevant provisions of the present resolution to other field
operations administered by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, including
special political missions, where applicable, under the agenda item entitled
“Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2008–2009”;
II
Budgeting and budget presentation
1.

Reaffirms the provisions of section II of its resolution 60/266;

2.
Requests the Secretary-General, when submitting future budget proposals
and performance reports, to include information on the most significant
management decisions relating to the mission’s budget and its implementation,
including those related to operational costs;
Notes with concern the late submission of the budgets of some
3.
peacekeeping operations, which puts considerable strain on the work of the General
Assembly and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,
and, while recognizing the challenges faced in preparing budget proposals and
related reports on peacekeeping and the special factors affecting some missions,
requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts to improve the quality and
timely issuance of peacekeeping documents;
Reaffirms that budget submissions should reflect management
4.
improvements and efficiency gains to be achieved and present future strategies in
that regard;
Recognizes that mandate and operational changes may lead to variances
5.
in budget implementation, and requests the Secretary-General to take further steps
towards improving budget assumptions and forecasts and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-second session;
Notes with concern the significant increase in the cancellation of prior6.
period obligations in several missions, and requests the Secretary-General to
improve control over obligations;
Takes note of the observations contained in paragraph 23 of the report of
7.
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;2
III
Results-based budgeting
1.
Reaffirms its resolution 55/231 of 23 December 2000, and requests the
Secretary-General to prepare the budgets for peacekeeping operations in full
compliance with that resolution;
Requests the Secretary-General to integrate operational, logistical and
2.
financial aspects fully in the planning phase of peacekeeping operations by linking
results-based budgeting to the mandate implementation plans of peacekeeping
operations;

3

A/RES/61/276

IV
Planning and staffing structure
1.
Emphasizes the importance of ensuring that the work undertaken during
the planning phase preceding the deployment of missions is as effective and
accurate as possible, and emphasizes also the importance of drawing on lessons
learned;
Notes the benchmarking analysis referred to in paragraph 26 of the report
2.
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,2 and
requests the Secretary-General, when undertaking the analysis, also to take into
account the complexities, mandate and specificities of each mission;
V
Best practices
1.
Recognizes the importance of incorporating lessons learned and best
practices in the planning and conduct of ongoing and future peacekeeping missions;
2.
Notes that the policy on capturing best practices is still evolving, and
requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on this issue to the
General Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-second session, including
on how information on best practices is being utilized in mission planning, as well
as efficiency gains and improvements in effectiveness being made as a result of
those efforts;
VI
Use of consultants
Reaffirms section III of its resolution 60/266, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report to the General Assembly on this subject at its sixty-second
session;
VII
Staffing, recruitment and vacancy rates
1.
Reaffirms that locally recruited mission staff may be recruited as
international staff only through the normal recruitment process in which they
compete for international posts in another mission along with other external
candidates;
Requests the Secretary-General to review the standards for the
2.
recruitment of National Professional Officers and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its sixty-second session for its consideration and action;
Also requests the Secretary-General, cognizant of the continuously high
3.
international staff vacancy rates in many missions, to consider, when formulating
budget submissions, greater utilization of national staff, as appropriate,
commensurate with the requirements of the mission and its mandate;
Reaffirms its request contained in section I, paragraph 6, of its resolution
4.
55/238 of 23 December 2000, and reiterates its concern over high vacancy and
turnover rates for civilian staff in some peacekeeping operations and, while
recognizing efforts made to improve the vacancy rates, reiterates its request to the
Secretary-General to ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously;
4

A/RES/61/276

5.
Takes note of paragraph 36 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,2 and requests the Secretary-General to
review the staffing structure of missions on an ongoing basis, bearing in mind, in
particular, the mission’s mandate and concept of operations, and to reflect this in his
budget proposals, including full justification of any additional posts proposed;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that any delegation of authority
6.
to mission officials with regard to recruitment is accompanied by appropriate steps
to ensure accountability;
Takes note of paragraph 41 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
7.
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,2 and recalls section II, paragraph 17, of its
resolution 61/244 of 22 December 2006, in which it acknowledges that the
interaction of United Nations personnel with the local population is necessary and
that language skills constitute an important element of the selection and training
processes, and therefore affirms that a good command of the official language(s)
spoken in the country of residence should be taken into account as an additional
asset during those processes;
VIII
Use of 300-series and 100-series appointments
1.

Recalls section XIV of its resolution 60/266;

2.
Decides to continue to suspend the application of the four-year maximum
limit for appointments of limited duration until 31 December 2007;
3.
Authorizes the Secretary-General, bearing in mind paragraph 2 above, to
reappoint, under the 100 series of the Staff Rules, those mission staff whose service
under 300-series contracts has reached the four-year limit by 31 December 2007,
provided that their functions have been reviewed and found necessary and their
performance has been confirmed as fully satisfactory, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-second session;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue the practice of using
4.
300-series contracts as the primary instrument for the appointment of new staff;
IX
Training
1.
Emphasizes the importance of further steps to make training programmes
more relevant and cost-effective through, inter alia, the training of trainers and the
use of videoconferencing and e-learning where feasible;
Notes the increasing role of national staff in peacekeeping operations and
2.
the need to build national capacities and provide professional development
opportunities for national staff, and emphasizes that national staff should be fully
included in all relevant training programmes;
X
Death and disability claims
1.
Emphasizes the importance of the expeditious settlement of all death and
disability claims as a measure of relief to the beneficiaries and of removing all
bureaucratic impediments delaying payments to the beneficiaries;
5

A/RES/61/276

2.
Reaffirms its resolution 52/177 of 18 December 1997, in which it
authorized the Secretary-General to implement without delay the administrative and
payment arrangements and procedures contained in section II of his report 21 for the
payment of awards in cases of death and disability sustained by troops for incidents
occurring after 30 June 1997;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure strict implementation of the
3.
procedures approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 52/177 whereby,
inter alia, in the case of injury or illness resulting in permanent disfigurement or the
permanent loss of a member or function there shall be paid to the injured party a
lump sum, the amount of which shall be determined by the Secretary-General on the
basis of the schedule set out in paragraph (b) of annex V to the report of the
Secretary-General21 and in accordance with the principles of assessment set out in
paragraph (c) of that annex, and applying, where necessary, proportionate and
corresponding amounts in cases of permanent disfigurement or loss of a member or
function not specifically referred to in the schedule;
Also requests the Secretary-General to review the payment of awards in
4.
cases of disability sustained by members of peacekeeping contingents and formed
police units, civilian police officers and military observers in incidents occurring
after 30 June 1997 with a view to ensuring that for those cases of permanent
disfigurement or loss of a member or function specifically referred to in the
schedule of awards set out in annex V to the report of the Secretary-General21 and
appendix D to the Staff Rules, the amount of compensation paid by the United
Nations has not been less than the award levels set out in the schedule, and to report
on the results to the General Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixtysecond session;
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to settle death and
5.
disability claims as soon as possible, but not later than three months from the date
of submission of a claim;
Expresses deep concern about delays in the settlement of claims in
6.
respect of death and disability, and requests the Secretary-General to take urgent
measures to eliminate the existing backlog of death and disability claims pending
for more than three months and to report on the progress made to the General
Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-second session;
Requests the Secretary-General to officially inform Member States of
7.
incidents involving their nationals in United Nations peacekeeping missions that
may result in death or disability claims, as well as of the procedures governing the
submission of such claims, no later than seventy-two hours from the time of the
incident;
Stresses the importance of board of inquiry reports on incidents resulting
8.
in death and disability being completed and submitted to United Nations
Headquarters and to the Member State concerned within the shortest possible period
of time so as to ensure that the time limit referred to in paragraph 5 above is
respected;
Requests the Secretary-General to conduct a comprehensive review of the
9.
administrative and payment arrangements and procedures for the payment of
compensation in cases of death and disability sustained by members of
_______________
21

6

A/52/369.

A/RES/61/276

peacekeeping contingents and formed police units, civilian police officers and
military observers with a view to simplifying, streamlining and harmonizing the
current process, and to submit a report thereon to the General Assembly at the
second part of its resumed sixty-second session addressing, inter alia, the following
issues:
(a) Options to ensure the equal treatment of members of peacekeeping
contingents and formed police units, civilian police officers and military observers;
(b) The possible establishment of a deadline for the completion and
submission of board of inquiry reports and measures to ensure its observance;
(c) Clear delineation of responsibilities of the United Nations and the
Member States in the submission of documentation in support of death and
disability claims;
(d) Full lists of documents to be submitted in support of death and disability
claims by the Member States and, where applicable, beneficiaries;
(e) Possible limits in the number of requests for documents besides those
specified in the lists referred to in subparagraph (d) above;
(f) The principle that in cases of doubt, death and disability claims are given
sympathetic consideration;
(g) Possible procedures for a simplified settlement of death and disability
claims whenever the Secretary-General is unable to complete the administrative
procedures for processing such claims within the established time limit;
10. Reaffirms the principles enunciated in section III, paragraph 1, of its
resolution 49/233 A and in paragraph 1 of its resolution 50/223 of 11 April 1996;
XI
Military
1.
Emphasizes the importance of ensuring the provision of good quality
rations in concluding the global contract on rations;
2.
Decides to authorize the payment, as necessary, of mission subsistence
allowance to staff officers during in-mission official travel in cases where
accommodation and/or food cannot be provided by the mission and to review this
issue in the context of the analysis requested in paragraph 56 of the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;2
3.
Endorses the recommendation of the Secretary-General in paragraph 94
of his overview report20 and the recommendations thereon of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, as set out in paragraph 35
of its report,2 and decides that the support arrangements for staff officers should be
revised accordingly;
4.
Recognizes the importance of rapid deployment of military resources to
the field, as referred to in paragraphs 91 to 93 of the overview report of the
Secretary-General,20 and requests the Secretary-General to provide updated
information on this matter in the context of his next overview report;

7

A/RES/61/276

XII
Internal controls and conflict of interest
1.
Affirms that an effective internal control framework, accountability
mechanisms, a commitment to strong control and ethics are important components
of internal control;
Stresses that the secretariat management structure for peacekeeping
2.
operations must ensure that operational and management processes are fully
integrated with a strong internal control framework and supported by effective
accountability mechanisms;
Reiterates paragraph 9 of section V of its resolution 60/266 and
3.
paragraph 9 of its resolution 61/246 of 22 December 2006;
XIII
Air operations
1.

Reaffirms paragraph 2 of section XI of its resolution 60/266;

2.
Encourages the Secretary-General to continue efforts to explore
possibilities for economies and efficiencies in air operations, and stresses that these
should not undermine the safety and operational requirements and rotation and troop
deployment cycles;
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, contained in paragraph 3
3.
of section XIX of its resolution 59/296, to improve the formulation of resource
requirements for air operations in budget submissions to make them more reflective
of actual operations, bearing in mind the overbudgeting of air transportation
requirements in some peacekeeping operations;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that missions, when reviewing
4.
their transportation requirements, take into account means that are efficient, costeffective and responsive to their operational needs and that ensure the safety of their
personnel and take fully into account the unique mandate, complexities, specificities
and operational conditions of each mission;
Also requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen coordination
5.
with relevant United Nations entities in the area of air operations and to report on
progress made in his next overview report;
Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to conduct aviation
6.
quality inspections and aviation assessments to confirm that established standards
are being fully complied with;
XIV
Ground transportation and utilization of vehicles and spare parts
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to include information on progress made
towards global management of spare parts in his next overview report;
2.
policy;

Notes with concern the uneven implementation of the vehicle rotation

3.
Notes that the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions did not make recommendations on the proposal of the Secretary-General
on spare parts;
8

A/RES/61/276

4.
Emphasizes the importance of full implementation of the car log security
system and the fuel log system;
5.
Notes the efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
develop, within Galileo, its assets management system, a comprehensive fleet
management system on spare parts management, and requests the Secretary-General
to report at the second part of its resumed sixty-second session on the results
achieved regarding the completion of that project;
Requests the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to plan the
6.
acquisition of spare parts with due regard to realistic estimates of consumption and
to dispose of unserviceable and obsolete items in a timely manner;
XV
Fuel management
1.
Notes that fuel is a major item of expenditure and that its management is
vulnerable to serious risk of fraud and abuse;
2.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to prepare a fuel
management manual and standard operating procedures and to include in his report
thereon information on the review of the current business model for the provision of
fuel, measures taken to improve fuel management, including information on
experience with mission electronic fuel accounting system and fuel log system
projects, and plans to introduce alternative systems designed to support global fuel
management;
Notes the high vacancy rates in fuel management-related posts and the
3.
difficulties in recruiting appropriately qualified staff in this area, and encourages the
Secretary-General to continue his efforts in this regard;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure annual certification and, where
4.
necessary, updating of fuel contingency plans at its field missions;
XVI
Conduct and discipline
Recalling section XIV of its resolution 59/296,
Reaffirming its resolution 59/300 of 22 June 2005,
1.
Underlines the great importance it attaches to the elimination of
misconduct, including sexual exploitation and sexual abuse, and calls for full
implementation of the United Nations zero-tolerance policy;
Takes note with appreciation of the comprehensive report of the
2.
Secretary-General on sexual exploitation and sexual abuse;15
3.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on special measures for
protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse;14
4.
Notes with concern the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
on its investigation into allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse in the Ituri
region (Bunia) in the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo;17
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to examine ways to strengthen
cooperation and coordination of conduct and discipline teams, the Office of Internal
9

A/RES/61/276

Oversight Services and other entities of the United Nations system, both at
Headquarters and in the field, and to report in this regard at the second part of its
resumed sixty-second session in the context of the overview report;
Stresses the importance of having a dedicated capacity in the Department
6.
of Peacekeeping Operations at Headquarters and, as appropriate, in its field
missions to address conduct and discipline issues, decides to convert seven
temporary positions at Headquarters and forty-one temporary positions in the field
into posts and to authorize that the remaining positions in the field be funded from
general temporary assistance, and requests that a comprehensive report on the issue
of conduct and discipline, including full justification of all posts, with staffing
levels, functions and their impact on conduct and discipline, be submitted to the
General Assembly at its sixty-second session;
XVII
Disarmament, demobilization (including reinsertion) and reintegration
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,18 and endorses the
observations contained in the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;19
2.
Reaffirms the provisions of its resolution 59/296 on disarmament,
demobilization (including reinsertion) and reintegration;
XVIII
Quick-impact projects
1.
Affirms that quick-impact projects play a critical role in strengthening the
link between missions and local populations and in accomplishing their objectives,
and that their implementation should take into account the situation and needs on
the ground;
Welcomes the inclusion of quick-impact projects in the budgets of
2.
peacekeeping operations, and recognizes the important contribution that they make
towards the successful implementation of the mandates of peacekeeping operations;
Stresses that quick-impact projects are an integral part of mission
3.
planning and development and of the implementation of comprehensive strategies to
meet the challenges facing complex peacekeeping operations;
Recognizes that, in accordance with the purpose of such projects, that is,
4.
that they be used by United Nations peacekeeping operations to establish and build
confidence in individual missions, their mandates and the peace process, thereby
improving the environment for effective mandate implementation, they should be
executed by the missions to the extent possible and that, in instances when they are
implemented by partners, steps should be taken to ensure that the missions are given
due recognition;
Emphasizes that quick-impact projects should be implemented with
5.
minimal or no overhead charges in order to ensure that the maximum amount is
spent for the direct benefit of the local population;
Recognizes that funding for quick-impact projects for the third year of a
6.
mission and beyond may be requested if there is a requirement for confidencebuilding activities, in which case a needs assessment should be conducted;

10

A/RES/61/276

7.
Emphasizes the importance of coordination with humanitarian and
development partners in order to avoid duplication and overlap of activities between
missions and humanitarian and development partners in the field;
Stresses that mission budgets allocated for quick-impact projects should
8.
not be used to finance humanitarian and development activities already being
carried out by United Nations agencies or other international organizations;
XIX
Procurement
1.
Reaffirms its resolution 61/246, and regrets that the Secretary-General
did not present the reports requested by the General Assembly in that resolution;
2.
Reaffirms also section VII of its resolution 60/266, and reiterates its
request to the Secretary-General that he increase efforts to improve procurement
opportunities for vendors from developing countries and countries with economies
in transition and report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-second session;
Recognizes that procurement reform is an ongoing process that should
3.
focus, inter alia, on ensuring the efficiency, transparency and cost-effectiveness of
United Nations procurement, strengthened internal controls, greater accountability
to Member States and the full implementation of General Assembly resolutions on
procurement reform;
Requests the Secretary-General to identify obstacles preventing the
4.
participation of developing countries and countries with economies in transition in
United Nations procurement contracts;
Recognizes the efforts by the Procurement Division of the Department of
5.
Management of the Secretariat to increase the number of business seminars in
developing countries, and requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as
Chairman of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination,
to encourage the organizations of the United Nations system to facilitate, in
cooperation with Member States, the organization of business seminars in
developing countries and countries with economies in transition;
XX
Regional coordination
Reaffirming section IX of its resolution 60/266,
1.

Acknowledges progress made in regional cooperation;

2.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General that regional coordination
plans aligned to the objectives of missions be developed and implemented, keeping
in mind the specific mandate of each mission, and that he report thereon to the
General Assembly in the context of his next overview report;
Welcomes efforts to enhance regional and inter-mission cooperation,
3.
where feasible, with a view to achieving greater synergies in the use of the resources
of the Organization and the implementation of the mandates of the missions, while
bearing in mind that individual missions are responsible for the preparation and
implementation of their own budgets and for controlling their own assets and
logistical operations;

11

A/RES/61/276

XXI
Partnerships, country team coordination and integrated missions
1.
Stresses the importance of close collaboration with partners, both inside
and outside the United Nations system, including partnerships with regional
organizations, and notes the efforts of the Secretary-General to strengthen such
partnerships;
Requests the Secretary-General to provide, in the context of the budget
2.
submissions of complex integrated peacekeeping missions, a clear description of the
role and responsibility of missions vis-à-vis integrated mission partners as well as
the strategies of the missions for enhancing coordination and collaboration with
United Nations country teams in order to achieve better results under relevant
components;
XXII
Liabilities and reimbursements
Notes with concern the status of liabilities and reimbursements to troop- and
formed police-contributing countries for their troops, formed police units,
contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment, emphasizes the importance of
the full settlement of those liabilities, and, in this regard, urges all Member States to
pay their assessed contributions on time, in full and without conditions.
104th plenary meeting
29 June 2007

12
