General A1t1eJ11bl:, - Tenth Se11ion

36

(a) AU revenue derived from the Staff Assessment
Plan not otherwise disposed of by specific resolution
of the General Assembly ;
( b) The sum of $1,500,000 standing to the credit
of Member States in the Working Capital Fund, as at
31 December 1955, representing the amount derived
from the transfer of budget surpluses in prior years;
2. That the credit's to the Trut Equalization Fund
under paragraph 1 (a) above shall be recorded in subaccounts of the Fund in the name of each Member State
in the proportion of its contribution to the budget for
the financial year concerned ;

3. That the credit to the Fund under paragraph 1 (b)
above shall be recorded in the sub-accounts of the Member States in the Fund in the amounts established as
their specific credits in the said amount of $1,500,000
as set out in schedule G21 of statement III of the financial accounts of the United Nations for the year ended
31 December 1954;
4. That there shall be charged against the credits
of the appropriate Member States under paragraph 2
above all amounts paid under resolution C below by way
of double-taxation relief in respect of national income
taxes, excluding any local or state income taxes, levied
on staff members by the Member States concerned during each financial year provided that, should the credit
under paragraph 2 above be insufficient for this purpose,
all such payments made after the credit has been liq.uidated shall be charged to the credit of the appropr1ate
Member State under paragraph 3 above;

5. That the Secretary-General may record obligations against the credits under paragraphs 2 and 3 above
to the extent that he anticipates that they will be neces·
sary to cover liabilities for double-taxation relief;
6. That the amount credited to the sub-account of
each Member State in the Tax Equalization Fund under
paragraph 2 above, less the amounts charged or obligated
against that sub-account under paragraph 4, shalt be set
off against the contributions due from the Member State
concerned in accordance with the provisions of financial
regulation 5.2 ( e) ;

7. That for each of the financial years 1956, 1957
and 1958, one-third of the amounts credited to the subaccount of each Member State in the Tax Equalization
Fund under para~raph 3 above, less the amounts. charged
or obligated aga1nst that sub-account in the financial
year concerned, shall be set off against the contributions
due from the Member State concerned in accordance
with the provisions of financial regulation 5.2 (e).
557th plenary meetin_g_,
15 December 1953.

B
AMENDMENTS TO THE FINANCIAL REGULATIONS OF THE
UNITED NATIONS (REGULATIONS, 5.2 AND 7.1)

The General Assembly
Decides to amend the Financial Regulations of the
United Nations as follows, with effect from 1 January
1956:
1. Add to financial regulation 5.2 a sub-paragraph
(e) to read:
"Members' credits in the Tax Equalization Fund
21 Ibid., Tenth Stssion, Svpplement No. 6

(A/2901), p. 30.

estimated to be not required to meet charges for tax
refonds during the year, and any adjustments in the
estimated credits previously taken into account";
2. Add to financial regulation 7.1 a sub-paragraph
(d) to read:

"Revenue derived from the Staff Assessment Plan".
557th plenary meetiKg,
15 December 1955.
C
AMENDMENTS TO GENERAL AssEMBLY RESOLUTION 359
(IV) ENTITLED "TAX EQUALIZATION-STAFF
AssEsSMENT PLAN"

The General Assembly
Decides to amend the provisions of its resolution 359
(IV) of 10 December 1949 entitled "Tax Equalization
-Staff Assessment Plan", as follows, with effect from
1 J anuary 1956:

1. Replace article 7 by the following :
"That revenue derived from staff assessment not
otherwise disposed of by specific resolution of the
General Assembly shall be credited to the Tax Equalization Fund established by General Assembly resolution 973 A (X)";

2. Add the follo• \ng new article 8:
"Where a :, aff member is subject both to staff
assessment under this plan and to national income
taxation in respect of the salaries and emoluments
paid to him by the United Nations, the SecretaryGeneral is authorized to refund to him the amount
of staff assessment collected from him provided that:
" (a) The amount of such refund shall in no case
exceed the amount of his income taxes paid and payable in respect of his United Nations income ;
" ( b) If the amount of such income taxes excecds
the amount of staff assessment, the Secretary-General
may also pay to the staff member the amount of such
excess;
" ( c) Payments made in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be charged to the Tax
Eq ualization Fund."
j57th plenary meeting,
15 December 1953.

974 (X). Amendment to the Staff Regulation1 of
the United Nation• (regulatlon 3.2)
Tite General Assembly,
H aving considered the report28 of the SecretaryGeneral on personnel questions and the recommendations
thereon of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions as set forth in its twentieth
report 29 to the General Assembly at its tenth session,
1. Adopts as an amendment to the Staff Regulations
of the United Nations the text contained in the annex
to the present resolution, which amendment shall become
effective on 1 January 1956;

2. Requests the Secretary-General to establish the
conditions for the administration of the education grants,
28

Ibid., Tentli Session, Annexes, agenda item 56, document

A/2996.

29 Ibid., document A/3036.

8-olatlom aulopled on 11ae.....- of dae llflla 1::a

If

f"IN

on the basis of the pertinent sections of bis above-men·
of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of
tioned rèport and taking into consideration the SUIJeSGreat Britain and Northem Ireland and the United
tions made durinJ the debate on personnel questions
States of America each to nominate
expert to serve
in the Fifth Cornri11ttee at the tenth session of the General
on the Committee;
Assembly, to the extent that these suggestions fall within
3. Req1Ust.s the S~-General, in consultation
the general principles set forth in the new text of staff
with the heads of the apecialized ~cies, to invite theregulation 3.2.
Governments of two States whicti are members of the
557th plenary meeting,
specialized agencies co-operating but not of the United
15 Deceinbw 1955.
Nations, to nominate one expert each to serve on ~e
ANNEX
Comrnittee;
Staff r,g,,lalion 3.2 (amended text)
iJ, Inflites the co-operation of the specialized agencies
The Secretary-General shall establish a scheme for the payin this review ;
ment of children's allowances under the conditions specified in
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
annex IV, paragraph 1, to the present regulations.
with the eleven Governments concemed, to appoint a
The Seci-etary-Gcneral ■hall also e5tablish terms and conditime for the convening of the Committee and to provide
tions under which an education grant shall be available to a
the necessary. services and facilities for the work of the
staff member serving outside bis recognized home country, ·
,
whose dependent child under the age of twenty-one is in fullCommittee;
time attendance at a school, university, or similar educational
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
institution of a type which wil~ in the opinion of the Secretaryreport of the Committee to the specialized agencies;
Gcneral, facilitate the child's re-assimilation in the staff mem7. Invites the Secretary-General and the heads of
ber's recognized home countrY, ·The maximum amount of the
th
'al' ed
·
f
· h
th
grant shall be $400 per annum for a child. Travel costs of the
e spea iz agencies to umis any comments ey
child may also be paid for an outward and r~um journey once
may wish to make on the report of the Comrnittee prior
in each scholastic year between the educational institution and
to its consideration by the General Assembly at its
the duty station, by a route approved by the Secretary-General,
eleventh session.
557th plenary meeting_,
but not in an amount exceeding the cost of such a joumey
between the home countrY and the duty station.
15 December 1955.
The SecretarY•General shall also establish terms and condi976 (X). Co1t-of-UYIQ adju11ment and dependtions under which an education grant shall be available to a staff
. .. eney allowancee for Headqu.arten peraonnel
member serving in a countrY whose language is different from
his own and who is obliged to pay tuition for the teachinr of
The General Assembly,
· the mother tongue to a dependent child attending a local school
H œing considered the reports•0 of the Secretaryin which the instruction js given in a language other than his
General relating to cost-of-living adjustments and deown.
pendency allowances, as well as the recommendations
The SecretarY•General may decide in each case whether the
children's allowance or the educational grant shall extend to· thereon of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
adopted children or stepchildren.
and Budgetary Questions, as set forth in its twenty(ln ann,x IV, cancel paragraphs 2 and 3 and renvmbw parosecond and twenty-third reports11 to ~e General Asserngroph 4 as paragrap.h 2.)
bly at its tenth session,
Believing that some interim provision is called for in
975 (X). EatabU..hment of a Committee to reYiew
respect of these allowances, pending consideration of
the United Nation• aalary, allowanee and benethe report of the Committee established under resolution
fita ayatem
975 (X) to teview the United Nations salary, allowance
and benefits system,
The General Assembly,
1. Decides that, fr01;111 January to 31 Decernber 1956,
Hœing considwed the reports'° of the Secretarythe dependency credits authorized as a temporaty measGeneral relating to salary differentials, cost-of-living
ure by General Assembl:f resolution 894 (IX) of 17
adjustments and d~dèncy àllowances, as well as the
December 1954 shall continue to be given to staff memrecommendations thereon of the Advisory Committee
bers stationed àt Headquarters and at Washington, D.C.;
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, as set
forth in its twenty-second and twenty-third reports11 to
~- Decides, as an interim measure for the ~ 1956,
the General Assembly at its tenth session,
to increase, f rom 7.5 per cent to 10 per cent, w1th a minimum of $400 gross and a maximum of $1,000 gross,
Believing that the United Nations salary, allowance
the existing ternporary non-pensionable cost-of-living
and benefits system, which is based on a survey conadjustment applied to the gross salaries of staff metnbers
ducted in 1949, should be reviewed to detennine what
at Headquarters and at Washington, D.C.
adjustments should be made as the result of experience
since the system became effective,
551th plnaory meemag,
15 Decembw 1955.
Toking into account that the United Nations and a
majority of the specialized agencies have developed a
977 (X). EatabU..hment and malnteaanee of a
cœimon system of salaries and allowances,
United Nadom Memorlal Cemetery in Korea
1. Decides to establish a Committee of eleven experts
The Gmeral Assembly,
nominated by Govet'l)ments to undertake a comprehenDesiring to pay tribute to all those who, purs~t to
sive review of the United Nations salary, allowance and
the call of the United Nations, laid down their lives
benefi.ts system, and to report its fi.ndings and recommenin resisting aggression in Korea and in upholding the
dations to the General Assembly at its eleventh session ;
cause of peace and freedom,
2. Requests the Governments of Argentina, DenN oting that, in a cernetery at Tanggok, near Pusan
mârk, Egypt, France, lndia, New Zealand, the Union
in the Republic of Korea, there are the graves of nearly
80 Ibid., documents A/C.5/632 and A/C.5/636.
• two thousand men who served with forces which fought
lt,{bid,, documents A/3038 and A/3039.
under the United Nations Command,

an
