United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/ES-10/18
Distr.: General
23 January 2009

Tenth emergency special session
Agenda item 5

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/ES-10/L.21/Rev.1)]

ES-10/18. General Assembly resolution supporting the immediate
ceasefire according to Security Council resolution
1860 (2009)
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the permanent responsibility of the United Nations with regard to
the question of Palestine until it is solved in all its aspects, in accordance with
international law,
Recalling the relevant rules and principles of international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law, particularly the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of
12 August 1949, 1 which is applicable to the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem,
Expressing grave concern about the developments on the ground since the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) on 8 January 2009, especially
following the intensified military operations in the Gaza Strip, causing heavy
casualties among civilians, including children and women, and the shelling of
United Nations headquarters, hospitals, media premises and public infrastructure,
and emphasizing that the Palestinian and Israeli civilian populations must be
protected and that their suffering must end,
Convinced that achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement of the
question of Palestine, the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, is imperative for the
attainment of comprehensive, just and lasting peace and stability in the Middle East,
1.
Demands full respect for Security Council resolution 1860 (2009),
including its urgent call for an immediate, durable and fully respected ceasefire,
leading to the full withdrawal of Israeli forces from the Gaza Strip, and its call for
the unimpeded provision and distribution throughout the Gaza Strip of humanitarian
assistance, including food, fuel and medical treatment;
2.
Calls upon all parties to exert all efforts to ensure, in cooperation with
the Security Council, full and urgent compliance with resolution 1860 (2009);
_______________
1

09-21279

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.

A/RES/ES-10/18

3.
Expresses its support for international and regional initiatives and efforts
under way and for the mission undertaken by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations;
4.
Expresses its support for the extraordinary efforts by the United Nations
agencies, particularly the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, to provide emergency relief, medical and other
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian civilian population in the Gaza Strip;
5.
Calls upon all Member States to urgently extend the necessary support to
international and regional efforts aimed at alleviating the critical humanitarian and
economic situation in the Gaza Strip, and emphasizes in this regard the need to
ensure the sustained opening of border crossings for the free movement of persons
and goods into and out of the Gaza Strip, in accordance with the Agreement on
Movement and Access of 15 November 2005;
6.
Decides to adjourn the tenth emergency special session temporarily and
to authorize the President of the General Assembly at its most recent session to
resume its meeting upon request from Member States.
36th plenary meeting
16 January 2009

2
