United Nations

A/RES/62/145

General Assembly

Distr.: General
4 March 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 69

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2007
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/62/438)]

62/145. Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights
and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to
self-determination
The General Assembly,
Recalling all of its previous resolutions on the subject, including resolution
61/151 of 19 December 2006, and taking note of Commission on Human Rights
resolution 2005/2 of 7 April 2005, 1
0F

Recalling also all of its relevant resolutions in which, inter alia, it condemned
any State that permitted or tolerated the recruitment, financing, training, assembly,
transit and use of mercenaries with the objective of overthrowing the Governments
of States Members of the United Nations, especially those of developing countries,
or of fighting against national liberation movements, and recalling further the
relevant resolutions and international instruments adopted by the General Assembly,
the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the Organization of
African Unity, inter alia, the Organization of African Unity Convention for the
elimination of mercenarism in Africa, 2 as well as the African Union, 3
1F

2F

Reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations concerning the strict observance of the principles of sovereign equality,
political independence, the territorial integrity of States, the self-determination of
peoples, the non-use of force or of the threat of use of force in international
relations and non-interference in affairs within the domestic jurisdiction of States,
Reaffirming also that, by virtue of the principle of self-determination, all
peoples have the right freely to determine their political status and to pursue their
economic, social and cultural development, and that every State has the duty to
respect this right in accordance with the provisions of the Charter,

_______________
1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda
(E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
2
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1490, No. 25573.
3
On 8 July 2002, the Organization of African Unity ceased to exist and, in its place, the African Union
came into force on 9 July 2002.

07-47247

A/RES/62/145

Reaffirming further the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, 4
3F

Alarmed and concerned at the danger that the activities of mercenaries
constitute to peace and security in developing countries, in particular in Africa and
in small States,
Deeply concerned at the loss of life, the substantial damage to property and the
negative effects on the policy and economies of affected countries resulting from
criminal mercenary activities,
Extremely alarmed and concerned about recent mercenary activities in Africa
and other places and the threat they pose to the integrity of and respect for the
constitutional order of those countries,
Concerned by the new modalities of mercenarism, and noting that the
recruitment of former military personnel and ex-policemen by private military and
private security companies to serve in their employ as “security guards” in zones of
armed conflict seems to be continuing,
Convinced that, notwithstanding the way in which they are used or the form
that they take to acquire some semblance of legitimacy, mercenaries or mercenaryrelated activities are a threat to peace, security and the self-determination of peoples
and an obstacle to the enjoyment of all human rights by peoples,
Takes note of the report of the Working Group on the use of mercenaries
1.
as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of
peoples to self-determination; 5
4F

2.
Reaffirms that the use of mercenaries and their recruitment, financing and
training are causes for grave concern to all States and violate the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations;
Recognizes that armed conflict, terrorism, arms trafficking and covert
3.
operations by third Powers, inter alia, encourage the demand for mercenaries on the
global market;
Urges once again all States to take the necessary steps and to exercise
4.
the utmost vigilance against the menace posed by the activities of mercenaries and
to take legislative measures to ensure that their territories and other territories under
their control, as well as their nationals, are not used for the recruitment, assembly,
financing, training and transit of mercenaries for the planning of activities designed
to impede the right of peoples to self-determination, to destabilize or overthrow the
Government of any State or to dismember or impair, totally or in part, the territorial
integrity or political unity of sovereign and independent States conducting
themselves in compliance with the right of peoples to self-determination;
Requests all States to exercise the utmost vigilance against any kind of
5.
recruitment, training, hiring or financing of mercenaries, including nationals, by
private companies offering international military consultancy and security services,
as well as to impose a specific ban on such companies intervening in armed
conflicts or actions to destabilize constitutional regimes;

_______________
4
5

2

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
See A/62/301.

A/RES/62/145

6.
Encourages States that import the military assistance, consultancy and
security services provided by private companies to establish regulatory national
mechanisms for the registering and licensing of those companies in order to ensure
that imported services provided by those private companies neither impede the
enjoyment of human rights nor violate human rights in the recipient country;
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to consider taking the
7.
necessary action to accede to or ratify the International Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries; 6
5F

Welcomes the adoption by some States of national legislation that
8.
restricts the recruitment, assembly, financing, training and transit of mercenaries;
Condemns mercenary activities in Africa, and commends the
9.
Governments of Africa on their collaboration in thwarting those illegal actions,
which have posed a threat to the integrity of and respect for the constitutional order
of those countries and the exercise of the right of their peoples to selfdetermination;
10. Calls upon States to investigate the possibility of mercenary involvement
whenever and wherever criminal acts of a terrorist nature occur and to bring to trial
those found responsible or to consider their extradition, if so requested, in
accordance with domestic law and applicable bilateral or international treaties;
11. Condemns any form of impunity granted to perpetrators of mercenary
activities and to those responsible for the use, recruitment, financing and training of
mercenaries, and urges all States, in accordance with their obligations under
international law, to bring them, without distinction, to justice;
12. Calls upon Member States, in accordance with their obligations under
international law, to cooperate with and assist the judicial prosecution of those
accused of mercenary activities in transparent, open and fair trials;
13. Requests the Working Group to continue the work already done by the
previous Special Rapporteurs on the strengthening of the international legal
framework for the prevention and sanction of the recruitment, use, financing and
training of mercenaries, taking into account the proposal for a new legal definition
of a mercenary drafted by the Special Rapporteur in his report to the Commission on
Human Rights at its sixtieth session; 7
6F

14. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, as a matter of priority, to publicize the adverse effects of the
activities of mercenaries on the right of peoples to self-determination and, when
requested and where necessary, to render advisory services to States that are
affected by those activities;
15. Expresses its appreciation to the Office of the High Commissioner for its
support for convening in Panama the regional governmental consultation for Latin
American and Caribbean States on traditional and new forms of mercenary activities
as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of
peoples to self-determination, in particular regarding the effects of the activities of
private military and security companies on the enjoyment of human rights, and
requests the Office of the High Commissioner to convene other regional
governmental consultations on this matter;
_______________
6
7

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2163, No. 37789.
See E/CN.4/2004/15, para. 47.

3

A/RES/62/145

16. Requests the Working Group to continue to take into account, in the
discharge of its mandate, the fact that mercenary activities continue to occur in
many parts of the world and are taking on new forms, manifestations and
modalities, and in this regard requests its members to continue to pay particular
attention to the impact of the activities of private companies offering military
assistance, consultancy and security services on the international market on the
enjoyment of human rights and the exercise of the right of peoples to selfdetermination;
17. Urges all States to cooperate fully with the Working Group in the fulfilment
of its mandate;
18. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to provide the Working Group with all the
necessary assistance and support for the fulfilment of its mandate, both professional
and financial, including through the promotion of cooperation between the Working
Group and other components of the United Nations system that deal with countering
mercenary-related activities, in order to meet the demands of its current and future
activities;
19. Requests the Working Group to consult States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations in the implementation of the present resolution and
to report, with specific recommendations, to the General Assembly at its sixty-third
session its findings on the use of mercenaries to undermine the enjoyment of all
human rights and to impede the exercise of the right of peoples to selfdetermination;
20. Decides to consider at its sixty-third session the question of the use of
mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the
right of peoples to self-determination under the item entitled “Right of peoples to
self-determination”.
76th plenary meeting
18 December 2007

4
