UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFIitICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR
\

;
‘..I

1830 th

MEETING:

:

-.I

; -i’.

13 JUNE 1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

...... ..... ......... ... ....... ..... ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in, Cyprus:
Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/11717) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (SIAgendal1830)

S/PV. 1830

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which infor: mation about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1%4, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Securiry Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

I
I

1830th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 13 June 1975 at 4 p.m.
President:

Mr. Abdul Karim

AL-SHAIKHLY

(Iraq).

of Turkey and Greece to participate
without the right to vote.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic,
China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan,
Mauritania,
Sweden, Union
of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon,
United Republic of Tanzania and United States of
America.
Provisional
1. Adoption

in the discussion

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Olcay (Turkey)
and Mr. Papoulias (Greece) took places at the Council
table.
3. The PRESIDENT:
At this stage, I wish also to
recall that during our informal consultations yesterday
members of the Council agreed that the Council
should extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Vedat Celik. I shall
take it, if I hear no objection, that the Council agrees
and I shall, at the appropriate time, invite him to come
to the Council table to maki a statement.

agenda (S/Agenda/l830)

of the agenda

2. The situation in Cyprus:
Report by the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/l 1717)

it was so decided.
4. I should like to draw particular attention to the
report by the Secretary-General
[S/11717] which is
listed on the agenda for this meeting.

The meeting was called to order at 6.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

5. Members of the Council have also received the
text of a draft resolution [S/11725] that was prepared
in the course of prior consultations among all the
members of the Council. In the course of consultations
held this afternoon before the opening of this meeting,
members of the Council agreed on a new formulation
of the last paragraph of the draft resolution. I shall
read out the new text of operative paragraph 6, which
appears in document S/11725/Rev+l:

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/11717)
1. The PRESIDENT:
I have received a letter bearing
today’s date from the representative of Cyprus, who
requests that Cyprus be invited to participate in the
debate. The letter also states that the delegation will
be headed by Mr. Glafcos Clerides. This request for
.participation. is based on relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure
of the Security Council. In conformity with the usual
practice and with the consent of the Council, I propose
to invite the representative of Cyprus to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote.

“Requesfs the Secretary-General
to continue
the mission of good of&es entrusted to him by
paragraph 6 of resolution 367 (1975), to keep the
Council informed of the progress made and to submit
an interim report by 15 September 1975 and a
definitive report not later than 15 December 1975.”
6. Although the revised text of the draft resolution
has not yet been circulated in all languages, it is my
hope that members of the Council will be prepared
to proceed to a v&e on the basis of the text that I
have just read out.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. C&rides
(Cyprus) took a place at the Security Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I have aiso received letters
dated 12 and 13 June’ from the representatives of
Turkey and Greece respectively, requesting that they
be invited to participate in the discussion in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter. In conformity with the usual practice and with the consent
of the Council, I propose to invite the representatives

7. The Council agreed also in the .course of the
consultations that the draft resolution should be voted
upon before statements were made. I intend therefore
first of all to call for a vote on the draft resolution.
8. I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/l 17251Rev. 1.
1

d

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution
none.’
One member
voting.

(China)

was adopted

spirit of mutual understanding and mutual accommodation, and strive for an early and reasonable settlement of the Cyprus question.

by 14 votes to

did not participate

16. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America): We
have today unmistakably
affirmed the conviction of
the Council that those concerned must commit themselves to rapid progress towards a negotiated settlement on Cyprus. Our responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations, together with the prolonged
suffering of all the Cypriot people, make this an urgent
requirement.

in the

9. The PRESIDENT:
Now that the Security Council
has concluded its voting procedure, I shall call first
on the Secretary-General, who has expressed the wish
to make a statement.

17. The United States welcomes the recent agreement of the parties concerned to resume the Vienna
discussions on 24 July. We thank the Secretary-General
for the great skill and patience he has shown in helping
to advance these talks and in preserving their
momentum. His objective, thoughtful report, which is
before us, emphasizes not only the hopeful start which
has been made but also the patient efforts, good faith
and mutual understanding which are still required
to achieve a settlement.
The continued
skilful
assistance of the Secretary-General
will be essential
to the success of this process.

10. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have carefully
noted the terms of the resolution which the Council
has just adopted. In particular I have noted paragraph 6, in which the Council requests me to continue
the mission of good offices entrusted to me by paragraph 6 of resolution 367 (1975).
11. I wish to assure the Council that I shall continue
to do my best to achieve progress in this very complex
and difficult mission. However, I do not wish to
conceal from the Council my concem.at the absence
of progress on the substance of the problem. In spite
of all our efforts at Vienna, the basic differences of
approach which I have described in my report persist.

18. The United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP),
whose mandate we have just
extended, has continued to make an outstanding
contribution to the safety and welfare of all the people
of Cyprus. In so doing, it has also significantly
assisted the negotiating process. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Cyprus, the
Commander of the United Nations Force and his staff
and men have continued, to demonstrate the professional ability and sensitive understanding the world
has come to expect of them. We earnestly hope that
all parties will make every effort to assist and to
safeguard the men of the Force as they carry out their
demanding tasks.

12. I very much hope that all concerned will make
the maximum effort to find an agreed basis for progress
in the weeks and months to come. I know that this
is in line with the views of the members of the Council,
and I shall do my best to give all possible assistance
to this end.
13. The PRESIDENT:
A number of representatives
have inscribed their names on the list to speak following
the vote. I shall now call on them.
14. Mr. CHUANG
Yen (China) (translation from
Chinese): The Chinese delegation’s
stand on the
question of Cyprus has been consistent and clear.
In accordance with this principled stand, we voted
in favour of General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX)
and Security Council resolutions 365 (1974) and 367
(1975). Therefore, we are in favour of that portion of
the draft resolution
which reaffirms the aforementioned resolutions and calls for the continued
implementation
of resolution 367 (1975). However,
as the draft resolution mainly concerns the question
of United Nations forces, on which the Chinese
delegation has always held its well-known position
of principle, we did not participate in the voting on it.

19. My Government fully supports the action the
Security Council has just taken. The President of the
United States and the Secretary of State have in
recent days directly urged the parties to recognize the
paramount importance of reaching a settlement through
free negotiations among themselves and to make
effective use of the assistance to them which the
Council has provided in the personal auspices of’the
Secretary-General. We join the Council and the world
community. in emphasizing that progress must be
made towards permanent peace in Cyprus, and it
must be made now.
20. Mr. SAITO (Japan): My delegation wishes to
express its satisfaction over the adoption of the draft
resolution with the agreement of the parties concerned.
Since the situation on the island is unstable and
precarious, what the Council has decided today is
required by the circumstances.

15. We are pleased to note that over the recent period
the parties concerned with the Cyprus question have
already started their talks and achieved initial progress. We sincerely hope that the two Cypriot communities and the parties concerned will continue to
do away with super-Power meddling and intervention,
take the over-all interests to heart, conduct peaceful
and patient negotiations on an equal footing and in a

21. We agree with the Secretary-General’s
view that
the continued presence of UNFICYP
is essential not
2

only to maintain the cease-fire in the island but to
facilitate the search for a peaceful settlement.

27. Today’s extension of the mandate of UNFICYP,
although indispensable, is only a part of that process.
A maximum effort is now necessary to follow this up
and achieve the results we all hope for.

22. But we wish to emphasize our belief that this
extension of the mandate of the Force should not be
used by any of the parties to drag out the negotiations
indefinitely;
the urgent need for a just and lasting
settlement impels me to appeal to the parties to take
conciliatory
positions and to give maximum
cooperation to the Secretary-General in his efforts. In
the meantime, of course, the Council can congratulate
itself upon the admirable success of the SecretaryGeneral and his staff in administering
UNFICYP.
Working
in close co-operation
with the United
Nations
High Commissioner
for Refugees, Coordinator of United Nations humanitarian assistance
on the island, and the International
Committee of the
Red Cross, UNFICYP,
in addition to its cease-fire
responsibilities,
has proved of the greatest value in
relieving the hardships of the people of Cyprus. We
wish once again to pay a tribute to the offricers and
men of the Force and to the Governments that have
contributed contingents.

28.

Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
Of the two questions before the Council,
questions that while linked are nevertheless distinct,
the first, namely, the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Force on Cyprus, does not in the
present circumstances
seem to call for lengthy
comments.

from French):

29. In the first place, the usefulness of the presence
of the Force is challenged by no one. The Govemment of Cyprus and all the parties concerned are in
favour of maintaining the Force in the island where,
with much devotion and competence, it discharges
the many tasks that the requirements of a situation
that remains as alarming as ever have led us to confer
on it. In order to complete its mission, the Force
needs not only the agreement of all concerned but
also their assistance. In this connexion my delegation renews the appeal we launched last December
that no restrictions be placed on UNFICYP,
particularly as regards freedom of movement in the
exercise of its functions. It is necessary and in
accordance with the very spirit of its mission that it
be able to act under similar conditions in the north
and in the south of the island so as to guarantee the
same protection to the two communities.
However,
such is not always the case, as the report of the
Secretary-General indicates.

23. My delegation has taken note with great concern
that, in the words of the Secretary-General’s
report,
the deadlock “over the fundamental basis of a settlement” still persists in spite of the two rounds of
talks at Vienna between representatives of the two
communities.
We are somewhat encouraged, however, by the decision to hold a third round of talks
between representatives of the two communities, again
in the presence of the Secretary-General,
between
24 and 27 July, in fulfilment
of Security Council
resolution 367 (1975).

30. Furthermore, as in the past, we have, with the
unanimity of those voting, renewed the mandate of the
Force, which is sufficient to emphasize the support it
enjoys in the Council. Because the vote in favour of
the resolution was unanimous, no reservation that any
of the parties represented here might make-for
reasons of principle that none of us all accepts,
incidentally-can
relieve them of the duty of cooperating with the Force.

24. In the view of my delegation, this provides
evidence of the desire of both communities to seek a
settlement through the negotiating
process. This
inspires us to hope that the goo,d will of both communities will make itself felt during the continuing
talks and will yet overcome the deadlock reported
by the Secretary-General.
25. All of us appreciate the importance of the
reciprocal gestures from all the parties which the
Secretary-General
hopes will now be forthcoming.
I would only remind the Council that one side
or the other has to be the first to make such a gesture,
and I hope that a friendly contest will develop between
now and the end of July to determine which side
will be the first to do so.

31. Finally, I should like to pay a tribute to the
Force, to its Commander, General Prem Chand, and
to the contingents it comprises. They all deserve
nothing but our praise and our gratitude for the manner
in which, in difficult circumstances, they are carrying
out the mission we have entrusted to them. I may add
that the Force has been exposed to danger, and as the
Secretary-General’s
report indicates, there have been
24 incidents involving shooting at United Nations
troops. Such acts are inadmissible, particularly when
they are committed by organized military forces, as is
the case. It is the duty of those responsible for the
units involved to ensure that there is no recurrence
of such incidents in future. This is what we expect
of them. I also wish to express to the Government of
Canada our feelings of deep regret on the death on
active duty of a Canadian officer of the civilian police
of the Force.

26. In other words, let us all hope that the SecretaryGeneral will have the full co-operation of all parties as
he presses his efforts to maintain and if possible
accelerate the negotiating process. My delegation
wishes to pay a tribute to the Secretary-General for the
determination
with which he is meeting his great
responsibility. I appeal to all the parties to co-operate
with these efforts and not to jeopardize the negotiating
process.
3

32. I come now to the other part of the debate, which
results from resolution 367 (1975). Like the SecretaryGeneral, we are forced to note that the situation of
confrontation resulting from the events of last summer
remains unchanged; despite our reiterated appeals, the
provisions of General Assembly resolution
3212
(XXIX),
which the Council endorsed in its resolution 365 (1974) and on the basis of which a settlement
has to be reached, have not been implemented,
nor
are they about to be; This is a sombre picture, indeed,
particularly when one thinks of the human misery
which this entails, the scattered populations that for
many months have been reduced to the sad condition
of being refugees in their own country, and if one also
considers their impoverished and paralysed economy.

report that the Secretary-General has given us on the
activities of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force
in Cyprus during the period from 6 December 1974
to 9 June 1975, and for his report in the same document
on the meetings he held with the leaders of the
Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities at
Vienna from 28 April to 3 May and from 5 to 7 June,
in pursuance of his new mission of good offices.
36. In his report, the Secretary-General
observes
that the situation of confrontation resulting from the
events of July and August 1974 has persisted, and
that in the present conditions
he considers the
continued presence of UNFICYP
to be essential, not
only to maintain the cease-fire in the island but to
facilitate the search for a peaceful settlement.

33. Despite this unhappy picture, we can hope nevertheless, thanks to the determination
of the SecretaryGeneral and to his high sense of the responsibilities
conferred on him, that a genuine dialogue, which is
a necessary condition
for settlement,
will be
established between the parties. There have already
been two rounds of talks. We believe that although
most of the aspects of the Cypriot problem have been
brought up, there has not been, strictly speaking, a
substantive consideration of the proposals advanced
by both sides, and this has resulted in the parties’
marking time, as has been reported by the SecretaryGeneral. Nevertheless, it has been decided to continue
those talks at the end of next month, which is obviously
a positive commitment. We hope that in the meantime
the parties will have proceeded to a study of the
questions brought upat previous meetings and that they
will be in a position to get to the heart of the matter-in
other words, that they will jointly seek points of
convergence in their respective positions and, from
there, proceed to build an acceptable settlement.

37. My delegation shares the view that there is a real
need for UNFICYP
to continue to perform the tasks
that it is currently undertaking, and we agree with the
Secretary-General that the mandate of the Force should
be extended for a further six months. The United
Kingdom therefore voted in favour of the resolution
that we have just adopted.
38. As the Secretarv-General’s
renort makes clear.
the United Kingdom-has provided-the largest single
contingent in the Force, and has also maintained
logistic support for the entire Force. Moreover, in the
light of the agreement reached in principle on the
reopening of Nicosia International Airport, and at the
request of the Secretary-General,
the Government
of the United Kingdom recently provided an assessment team to draw up preliminary plans for the repair
of the airport. Following completion of that survey,
the United Kingdom has made available the services
of an airfield repair detachment, which began the
repair work on 3 June.

34, It is a difficult exercise because of the understandable sensitivities in the present situation in the
island, the heritage of a recent past, and declarations
and- decisions improvised to meet the circumstances
that seem to mortgage the future or, at least, prejudge
the very purpose of the debate. This exercise can
succeed only if the parties wish it to and are willing
to make the inevitable compromises. The SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative, with a merit
and patience to which we pay a tribute,
are
endeavouring
to bring about and maintain
that
dialogue, but the final result does not depend on them.
Thus, we once again appeal to the parties to undertake
the comprehensive
negotiations
called for by the
Council in its resolution 367 (1975), in accordance with
the terms used in that text and in a spirit of mutual
understanding and restraint, and to avoid any action
that might jeopardize those negotiations.
Without
real progress the Cypriot people will never know the
peace to which it aspires, nor will the two communities
attain that harmonious coexistence which remains
our main concern.

39. It .will, I think, be clear from what I have said
that the Government of the United Kingdom has fully
met its commitments to UNFICYP.
I am glad to be’
able to say that we ‘intend to maintain a contingent
for the coming mandate period. We shall continue to
play our part in this theatre of international peacekeeping in the belief that in present circumstances this
remains essential to the maintenance of peace in the
island.
40. At the same time, we have noted the statement in
the Secretary-General’s
report that he will make a
reduction in the strength of UNFICYP
as soon as
it is possible to do so without impairing the effectiveness of the Force or its capacity to perform the duties
entrusted to it by the Security Council. We welcome
this statement, and would urge the Secretary-General
to keep the size of the Force under continuous review
in the light of the situation on the ground. We hope
that a more far-reaching reduction than was achieved
during the period under review can soon be effected.

35. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdon): My delegation
is grateful for the clear, concise and comprehensive

41. We ‘have also noted the section of the report
which comments on the financial situation of the
4

Force. The Secretary-General describes this as critical,
and we for our part are seriously concerned at the
growing financial burden carried by the contributing
countries. My Government informed the Secretariat
that its contribution to logistic support for the Force
in the year ending June 1975 must be limited to
f 1.9 million. This in itself represents an increase of
more than half a million pounds sterling in our contribution to logistic support by comparison with the
situation prior to enlargement last summer. We understand that the cost of logistic support is now running
at a lower level than it was after the events of July
and August last year. We welcome this, but the
United Kingdom Government will be obliged to apply
the most stringent control of expenditure on logistic
support for the Force during the forthcoming year.
42. Like the Secretary-General,
my delegation is
disturbed by the increase in the number of cases of
shooting at UNFICYP
troops during the period under
review. The United Nations Force is present in Cyprus
because the parties have signified their concurrence
in its deployment in the interests of preventing a
recurrence of fighting and to contribute to the maintenance and the restoration of law and order. The
parties, therefore, have a clear obligation to do their
utmost to facilitate the task of UNFICYP
and to
co-operate with the terms of successive resolutions,
including the one we have just adopted, which appeal
to the parties to extend their full co-operation to
UNFICYP
in the performance of its duties. It seems
to my delegation that the 24 cases of shooting at
UNFICYP
troops represent a serious lapse in the
fulfilment of these obligations. In the interests both
of the personal safety of the men of UNFICYP and of
the successful execution of the Force’s functions,
this really must cease.
43. May I, too, express our condolences and our
regrets to the Government and people of Canada at
the loss of one of their offrcers in Cyprus during the
period under review.
44. Turning now to the intercommunal
talks, my
delegation whole-heartedly supported Security Council
resolution 367 (1975) because we believed that talks
between the two communities
under the SecretaryGeneral’s personal auspices offered the best chance
of a peaceful solution to the problems of Cyprus.
My delegation does not regard this confidence as
misplaced, and we take this opportunity to put on
record our continued warm support for the principle
of intercommunal
attempts to find a solution. Moreover, the skilful part which the Secretary-General
himself has played in the talks deserves high praise;
we hope that he will continue to play this crucial role
in the search for a peaceful settlement of the Cyprusproblem.
45. But unfortunately,
as the Secretary-General’s
report makes only too clear, only limited progress
has been made so far and it has not yet been possible

to achieve agreement on basic issues. My delegation
has said before in the Council chamber that time is
not on the side of the people of Cyprus. We therefore
condemn any action or statement by either side which
is liable to place obstacles in the way of progress,
and we cannot but deplore the inclinations of some to
substitute for genuine negotiations the reiteration of
past grievances. The two sides have a heavy
responsibility, for the legacy of disagreement, if they
disagree, will be an embittered, impoverished
and
divided people for whom the opportunity
to live
together -in one harmonious nation will have been
lost forever.
46. My delegation was, however, pleased to note the
friendly atmosphere at the meeting between the Greek
and Turkish Foreign Ministers at Rome and subsequently, at the meeting at Brussels between Prime
Ministers Karamanlis
and Demirel. According to
reports we have received, both sides regarded the
summit meeting at Brussels as encouraging. We
particularly welcomed the affirmation in their‘joint
communique
that the two Prime Ministers decided
that the problems between their two countries must
be solved peacefully and, with regard to the Cyprus
problem, that they supported the intercommunal
negotiations at Vienna. We hope that Greece and
Turkey will do all they can to encourage the intercommunal negotiations so that they may soon move
forward on to matters of real substance. In this
connexion we are pleased to see that a further round
of talks is to be held at Vienna between 24 and 27 July.
The Government of the United Kingdom, for its part,
remains willing to assist in any way possible in this
search for a negotiated settlement. But we can only
reiterate our belief that the best hope for agreement
still lies ,in direct discussions between the two communities, and that the function of the Security Council
is to do all it can to encourage them.
47. Mr. PLAJA (Italy): The Italian delegation had
very much hoped that it would have been possible to
re-examine the question of Cyprus in the Security
Council and the renewal fo the mandate of UNFICYP
in the light of consistent progress along the lines
indicated in resolution 367 (1975) that reaffirmed,
inter alia , the provisions of General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX),
endorsed by Council resolution 365 (1974).
48. The Secretary-General’s
report, which we have
read very carefully, informs us in paragraph 65 that
“while some limited progress has been made [in the
negotiations between the two communities] in Vienna,
it has not yet been possible to achieve agreement
on the basic issues” and in paragraph 66 that “the
deadlock over the fundamental basis of a settlement
persists”. Needless to say, the Italian delegation is
deeply worried about this situation. Indeed, I share the
Secretary-General’s
opinion that the situation in
Cyprus remains potentially dangerous and this is a
source of special concern to Italy, which is particularly

interested in the restoration of stability to the area
both because of its geographical position and because
of its friendly relations with all the countries involved.
Moreover, all of us are certainly preoccupied and
saddened at the continuing plight of the displaced
persons, whose difficulties
and sufferings have
been confirmed in the Secretary-General’s
report.

commendable efficacy to preserve the cease-fire, to
help to maintain law and order on the island and, on
the humanitarian level, to relieve the suffering of the
population. My delegation hopes that its role will be
increasingly appreciated and that it will be encouraged
in its practical activity by all the parties as a decisive contribution
towards the improvement
of the
-atmosphere that is needed to achieve the peaceful
settlement we all seek.

49. As I had occasion to mention during my
statements in the debate last February and March
[281&h, 1819th and 2820th meetings], Italy is firmly
convinced that the responsibility
for seeking reconciliation-which
alone can lead to the lasting solution
that will bring back tranquillity and prosperity to the
people of the island-lies
with the parties directly
concerned and, in particular, with the leaders of the
two communities.
Negotiations should be conducted
in an atmosphere of freedom, good faith and a spirit
of compromise; and all the States should steadily work
to encourage the parties to proceed along this line.

55. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden): The resolution just
adopted by the Security Council concerns two
separate but closely interrelated issues, namely, the
prolongation of the mandate for UNFICYP
and the
ongoing efforts ,under United Nations auspices to
find a solution to the serious political problems in
Cyprus.
56. It is apparent from the Secretary-General’s
report that the present situation in Cyprus is precarious. The situation is described as unstable and
potentially dangerous. To my delegation it is obvious
that there exists a serious risk that the tension in
Cyprus could lead to renewed violence and bloodshed.
UNFICYP
is deployed in areas where the risks of
confrontation between the Greek and Turkish sides
are greatest. A withdrawal of UNFICYP
would have
the most detrimental effect on the situation which is
even now so tense and unstable. The Council’s
decision to prolong the mandate of UNFICYP
is thus
a necessary and logical one in the prevailing situation.

50. Since, as I have stated, my Government firmly
places its hopes in the results of the negotiations,
it continues, as in the past, to believe that all parties
should refrain from any action which could prejudge
the progress of such negotiations.
51. The Italian delegation therefore believes that the
Council’s present task is to continue to encourage
and stimulate the negotiations and to call again urgently
for progress towards the full implementation
of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council.

57. It is a great pleasure for me to convey to the
Force Commander and to the men and offricers of
UNFICYP
my Government’s
deep appreciation for
their outstanding services in their difficult task.

52. In this respect, I wish to express my Govemment’s deepest appreciation and praise for the action
taken by the Secretary-General.
We know the
difficulties with which he was faced in tackling the
mandate entrusted to him by the Council. Thanks to
his well-known eminent qualities, he has been able to
find a most satisfactory way of serving as an active
presence and guide in the Vienna negotiations, as we
all wished, in the interest of both furthering the results
of the negotiations and enhancing the prestige of the
Organization.

58. We have studied the important and informative
report of the Secretary-General
with much interest.
These are at this stage two specific points on which
I would like to comment.
59. One problem is freedom of movement
for
UNFICYP
personnel. UNFICYP
is entrusted with
great responsibilities
by the international community
in the interest of the parties concerned. But to be able
to carry out its task according to our expectations and
the needs of the situation, the Force must be allowed
full freedom of movement all over the troubled area.
I regret to say that reports from UNFICYP
indicate
that the Force does not enjoy adequate freedom of
movement in the northern part of Cyprus. We strongly
urge the party concerned to abandon its restrictive
attitude and to co-operate fully with UNFICYP.

53. The Italian delegation wishes to appeal to all the
parties. It expresses the hope that they will do their
utmost to reach the compromises
necessary for
the achievement of a peaceful, negotiated settlement
by adopting flexible positions, and that they will bear
in mind the extent of the responsibilities
that the
actual situ&ion imposes on each of them in order to
break the deadlock and work out the compromise
we all hope for.

60. The other problem that I cannot avoid mentioning
is the precarious financial situation of UNFICYP.
It is my Government’s hope that Member States will
recognize the seriousness of the problem and be
prepared to contribute to its solution.

54. By the resolution we have just adopted we have
extended, as proposed by the Secretary-General,
the
mandate of UNFICYP.
I should like, therefore, to
conclude this statement by once again paying a welldeserved tribute to that Force. As is clear from the
Secretary-General’s
report, the Force has acted with

61. Through the Secretary-General’s
report, the
Security Council has been informed of the develop6

ment of the political
contacts between the two
communities
in Cyprus. Although, to our regret,
concrete results have so far not been achieved, we
think that the very fact that it has been possible
to get the talks started and to create a working
procedure is an achievement
in itself. We must
commend the parties for their efforts. We are of the
view that any action which could disturb the process
of negotiations must be avoided at this stage. In due
time the moment will come when a more thorough
evaluation of the political situation in Cyprus and of
possible further action on the part of the United
Nations will have to be made. At this stage, the
role of the Council is to encourage the parties to come
to peaceful negotiations and achieve positive results.

serving-- peace and security on the island is still very
necessary- we wish to -emphasize that. But the
extension of the mandate of the Force, which is at
present a necessity, cannot become a virtue; that is
why we plead with the two parties to do everything
in their power so that the negotiation process started
at Vienna may show more significant progress as to
substance within the framework of resolution 3212
(XXIX),
which was unanimously
adopted by the
General Assembly, and endorsed by the Security
Council in its resolutions 365 (1974) and 367 (1975).
67. Indeed this resolution, which essentially places
the solution of the question of Cyprus within the
United’Nations
framework, calls for respect for the
sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and
non-alignement policy of the Republic of Cyprus. It
calls also for the speedy withdrawal from Cyprus of
foreign armed forces and all foreign military elements
and personnel. It considers, too, that all the refugees
should return to their homes and calls upon the
parties to take urgent measures to that end.

62. My Government wants to express its gratitude to
the Secretary-General,
who, with great diplomatic
skill, has carried out the task with which the Council
has entrusted him in its resolution 367 (1975). To
him personally and to his immediate staff, we express
our appreciation for what has so far been achieved
in the creation of a process towards a stable and
peaceful solution. They have the fullest confidence
of my Government.
63.

68. We note with regret that since that resolution
was adopted and up to the period covered by the
Secretary-General’s
report no substantial progress
has been made specifically along those lines and
that, within the framework of the discussions under
way at Geneva, the parties continue to come
- -.up against
-i
questions of constitutional
and structural pnonty in
the island.

Mr. Ahmed OULD

SID’ AHMED (Mauritania)
Having voted a few
moments ago in favour of the draft resolution, the
Mauritanian delegation wanted, once again, to express
the position of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania
with regard to the situation prevailing in Cyprus. This
position has always been and remains that of a nonaligned country devoted to scrupulous respect for the
sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and
non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus. That is why
my delegation is gratified at the progress achieved in
the negotiations under way between the representatives of the parties concerned, and we would urge
them to redouble their efforts, in close co-operation
with the Secretary-General,
so as to avoid any action
which might be contrary to the spirit of negotiation,
and to promote the climate of confidence that is so
necessary for the success of these talks.

(interpretation

from

French):

69. We regret also that on the scene certain restrictions are imposed on the Force which do not allow it
to carry out the task assigned to it in Security Council
resolution 186 (1964). These obstacles are likely
greatly to affect its action and effectiveness and to
make an already tense situation explosive.
70. In the light of that state of affairs, my delegation
urgently appeals to the representatives of the two
communities
to work towards getting round their
irreconcilable differences, and to refrain from taking
-any measures likely to result in the failure of the aims
sought by the Council. Finally, we appeal to them
resolutely to place their discussions within the framework of the well-understood interest of Cyprus-that
is, without prejudice to its sovereignty,
without
prejudice to its independence and territorial integrity,
and without prejudice to its policy of non-alignement.
In that regard the agreement reached to reopen shortly
the international airport of Nicosia seems to us to be
encouraging.

64. Finally, my delegation would like to congratulate
the Secretary-General on the praiseworthy efforts that
he tirelessly deploys on the mission of good offices
entrusted to him.
65.

Mr. OYONO

Republic of Cameroon)
Bearing in mind the
particularly grave and alarming situation which prevails
in Cyprus, where active antagonism and tension
persist among the two communities on the island-as
witness a total of more than 3,000 shooting incidents
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General-my
delegation cast a positive vote in favour of the resolution for a new six-month extension of the mandate of
UNFICYP.
(interpretation

from

(United

French):

71. We are convinced that, with the parties’ manifestation of a determination
to succeed and with the
almost inevitable obligation to coexist, co-operate and
succeed that history, geography and the international
community
has placed on them, all the difficulties
which still seem to lie in the path of the negotiation
towards a solution mutually acceptable to the parties
will be overcome.

66. For my delegation, the extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Force in the interest of pre7

72. In conclusion, I should like to express my deep
gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his clear and
precise report, his realisitc and impartial assessment
of the situation and the efforts that he; along with his
distinguished
assistants, is making towards the
maintenance of international
peace and security. I
express gratitude too to all the Governments which
are supplying contingents to the Force and by so doing
are assisting the United Nations to carry out its
difficult tasks.

and break this deadlock. We fully share his concern
at the absence of progress.
77; The delegation of the USSR cannot fail to express
serious concern at the continuing tension and abnormal
situation in Cyprus. We consider it necessary to
reconfirm the Soviet Union’s position of principle on
this matter.

78. The USSR firmly and consistently favours the
safeguarding
of. the independence,
sovereignty,
73. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
territorial integrity and non-alignment of the Republic
(interpretation
from Russian): The Security Council
of Cyprus and opposes any attempts to partition the
has met today to consider the question of extending
island. Effective measures should be taken to protect
UNFICYP.
It is quite natural that the need has arisen - the Republic of Cyprus from -outside intervention
for the Council to focus on another question, in addiand to ensure the withdrawal from the territory of
tion to the one to which I have just referred. That
Cyprus of all foreign troops, giving the Cypriots
additional question relates to the extent to which
themselves the possibility of settling their internal
earlier Council resolutions on Cyprus-resolutions
365
affairs.
(1974) and 367 (1975)-have
been and are being
complied with. As is well known, resolution 365
79. The Soviet Union has consistently favoured the
(1974) supported and approved resolution 3212 (XXIX)
idea of having the Cyprus problem considered not
of the General Assembly, in which the Assembly
somewhere behind the scenes within the. narrow
urged the parties concerned to comply with the resocircles of the North Atlantic Treaty Grgani&on
lution as soon as possible.
[NATO], but in a broad international forum within the
framework of the United Nations with the participation
74. For almost a year now, the Republic of Cyprus
of a wide circle of countries. The recent course of
and its people have been living in extremely difficult
events has once again confirmed the correctness of
and completely abnormal conditions, conditions that
this approach of the Soviet Union. The necessary
are inadmissible in our day. Outside interference in the
objective conditions exist for a just and peaceful
internal affairs of Cyprus is continuing despite the
settlement of the international aspects of the Cyprus
Security Council’s decisions calling for the immediate
conflict.
cessation of foreign armed intervention against the
Republic of Cyprus and for the withdrawal of all
80. Finally, the Soviet Union believes it is necessary
foreign troops and military personnel from the territory
immediately
to comply with the decisions of the
of Cyprus. The people of Cyprus have been suffering
Security Council and the General Assembly with
tremendous privation and severe hardship. Almost a
regard to a settlement of the Cyprus problem.
third of the people of the country have been compelled
to leave their homes and have been eking out a
81. In view of the fact that the Government of the
miserable existence as refugees.
Republic of Cyprus had agreed to it, the Soviet
delegation did not object to the extension of the
75. There is a threat to the very existence of the
mandate of UNFICYP
for a furter six-month period,
Republic of Cyprus as a sovereign, independent and
always with provision that the voluntary basis of the
non-aligned State, an equal Member of the United
financing of the Force would be maintained.
Nations, and to its territorial
integrity.
As the
Secretary-General points out in paragraph 65 of the
82. In conclusion,
the delegation of the USSR
report submitted at today’s meeting of the Security
considers it necessary to stress that the further
Council: “The present situation in Cyprus is unstable
extension of the mandate of UNFICYP
does nothing
and potentially dangerous and will remain so unless and
to resolve the essential tragedy of the Cyprus problem.
The Security Council, with the active participation of
until an agreed settlement of the basic problems can
its members belonging to the group of non-aligned
be reached.” It emerges clearly from paragraph 66
countries, should make use of all the capabilities it
of the same report that during the first two rounds of
has under the Charter to bring about a speedy, just
intercommunal talks, held at Vienna with the active and
settlement of the Cyprus conflict- in the interests
positive participation
of the Secretary-General,
the
deadlock over the fundamental basis of a settlement
of the whole Cypriot people and for the purpose of
maintaining the Republic of Cyprus as a sovereign,
persists.
independent State with its territorial integrity intact.
That would be in keeping with the interests of the
76. The delegation of the Soviet Union listened
Republic of Cyprus as one of the States which has
attentively to the statement made by the Secretarytaken an active part in the work of the group of nonGeneral at this meeting of the Council on the course of
aligned countries; it would also be in keeping with the
the intercommunal
talks. We should like to pay a
tribute to him for the efforts he has made to overcome
interests of both communities of the State, the Greek
8

Cyprus, a call for the continuation of the negotiations
between the two communities,
the wish that all the
refugees might return to their homes in safety and
that all parties concerned would undertake urgent
measures towards that end.

and the Turkish, and with the interests of strengthening
peace and security in the eastern Mediterranean.
83. Mr. CHALE (United Republic of Tanzania): The
resolution we have just adopted has two aspects.
First, it extends the mandate of UNFICYP
for a
further period of six months, and, secondly, it deals
with the substantive issue of the Cyprus problem in
the light of the Secretary-General’s
report.

89. The Security Council, which had endorsed
General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) in its own
resolution 365 (1975), was obliged to take up the
Cyprus question again in February and March of this
year [1813th to 1820th meetings] in the aftermath of
the unilateral declaration by the Turkish Cypriot
community of 13 February 1975 [S/21624, annex II].
At that time the Council found that no progress had
been made towards the implementation
of resolution
3212 (XXIX) and called for the urgent and effective
implementation
of all its parts. At the same time, being
conscious of the need to give a new impetus to the
intercommunal
talks, which were at a stalemate, the
Council, after expressing its regret about the unilateral
declaration of 13 February, requested the SecretaryGeneral to undertake a new mission of good offices
and to place himself personally at the disposal of the
two communities. The Secretary-General was further
asked to report on the progress of the talks as well
as the implementation
of resolutions 365 (1974) and
367 (1975).

84. My delegation has voted for the renewal of the
mandate of UNFICYP
in the hope that the extension
will offer a further opportunity
to find a peaceful
solution to the Cyprus problem. The extension of
the Force’s mandate, however, should not be viewed
as a substitute for peace. It is our sincere hope,
therefore, that the time provided by the ‘renewal .of
the mandate will be put to good use by all the parties
concerned in the search for a just and durable peace
on the island of Cyprus.
85. In paragraphs 67 and 68 of his report, the
Secretary-General
has expressed the view that the
negotiating process should be maintained
and, if
possible, accelerated. My delegation solemnly appeals
to all the parties to extend their full co-operation to
the Secretary-General
in his mission of good
offices, so that peace can be achieved in Cyprus on
the basis of the island’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity and its policy of non-alignment.
The success or failure of the negotiations depends
squarely on the degree of co-operation and understanding the two communities can show each other as
weil as the co-operation all the parties concerned
can extend to the Secretary-General.

90. The Secretary-General
has now provided the
Council with a full and comprehensive report of the
situation in the island, for which my delegation wishes
to commend him. His report indicates that, on the
island, tension between the two communities remains
high, while at Vienna not much progress on the
substantive issues has been made.

86. Finally, my delegation believes that .peace and
justice, which we all desire to see prevail in Cyprus,
rests in the strict implementation
of General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX) and Security Council resolution 367 (1975). We urge all the parties concerned to
implement these resolutions scrupulously and speedily.

91. The delegation of Guyana notes with regret that
the call of the Security Council for the speedy withdrawal of all foreign armed forces and foreign military
personnel from the Republic of Cyprus has been
ignored. It is also a matter of deep regret to my deelgation that the call of the General Assembly for urgent
measures to be taken to allow the refugees to return
to their homes in safety has remained unheeded. In
these respects, my Government believes that Turkey
bears a heavy measure of responsibility.

87. Mr. JACKSON
(Guyana): At the time of the
adoption of resolution 3212 (XXIX), the international
community held out considerable hope that the resolution that had been so carefully and labouriously
prepared by non-aligned countries and that sought
judiciously
to reflect the essential concerns of the
interested parties without sacrificing basic principles
would go a long way towards assisting in the process
of achieving a settlement of the Cyprus problem. It
will also be recalled that resolution 3212 (XXIX) was
accepted by Cyprus, Greece and Turkey,
who
committed
themselves to work towards its implementation.

92. The only positive element which can be discerned
from the situation-and
it is an important one-is the
fact that under the Secretary-General’s
auspices the
talks between Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktag have
taken place, that they have taken place up to now in
an atmosphere characterized by the Secretary-General
as being one of goodwill and great frankness, and that
they will be resumed at Vienna between 24 and
27 July. The successful conclusion of the negotiating
process between the two communities
is a most
important element in the search for a solution to the
problem of Cyprus. The chances for the success of
those talks would, however, be immeasurably
improved if progress were made towards implementing other aspects of General Assembly resolu-

88. The key elements in that resolution included a
call to all States to respect the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment of the
Republic of Cyprus, a demand for the speedy withdrawal of foreign armed forces from the Republic of
9

tion 3212 (XXIX).
My delegation looks forward to
seeing those with particular responsibility
in this
regard taking steps at an early date, thereby confirming
their commitment to these processes.

98. On the basis of the recommendations in the report
of the Secretary-General, everything indicates that the
most reasonable course is to maintain the Force in the
performance of its delicate task until such time as
negotiations
between the two parties in Cyprus
produce sufficient progress to render unnecessary
its presence in Cyprus.

93. Throughout the last few months, the presence of
UNFICYP
has been an indispensable element in
maintaining
the relative quiet on the island and in
helping to create conditions which could make progress
towards peace.possible. We commend the SecretaryGeneral and the officers and men of UNFICYP for the
difficult and dangerous task they are performing in
Cyprus-a
task that would be facilitated by greater
co-operation from the parties involved. We share the
Secretary-General’s
concern for the safety of the
Force, and echo his call for greater co-operation with
the troops.

99. My delegation endorses the recommendation
of
the Secretary-General,
who, in paragraph 69 of his
report, states:
“In the present conditions, I consider the continued presence of UNFICYP
to be essential not
only to maintain the cease-fire in the island but to
facilitate the search for a peaceful settlement.”
100. My delegation wishes to avail itself of this
opportunity
to congratulate the Secretary-General,
who, apart from questions that may be termed routine,
in his brilliant report gives us a most enlightening
picture of the present situation in Cyprus, and a
detailed account both of the events that have occurred
during the period of the UNFICYP
mandate that has
just expired and of the very delicate negotiations which
the Council entrusted to him to undertake between the
conflicting parties. In this connexion, it is encouraging
that, thanks to the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral, the parties have been able to hold two series
of meetings at Vienna, although the most controversial
issues dividing them have not yet been taken up.

94. The resolution
which the Council has just
adopted, extending
once again the mandate of
UNFICYP,
recognizes the continuing need for the
presence of the Force in Cyprus. In addition, however,
the Council has also confirmed that in its best judgement the provisions of Assembly resolution 3212
(XXIX) and Council resolution 367 (1975) continue to
provide the necessary framework for a solution to the
Cyprus question, and in this regard has once again
called for their urgent and effective implementation.
Most specifically, the fact that it is essential to continue
the negotiations between the two communities has
been recognized and has been encouraged.

101. Despite the emphasis placed by the SecretaryGeneral himself on his good offices, there has been no
significant progress between the parties; however
it is to be hoped that in accordance with the wishes
shared, I am sure, by the entire international community, the quest for a negotiated settlement will go
on.

95. Guyana has been only too pleased to give its
full support to this recognition, and in particular to the
call for the implementation
of the provisions of resolution 3212 (XXIX). We urge all the parties concerned
to co-operate fully and whole-heartedly
with the
Secretary-General in his mission of good offices, and
with UNFICYP,
and to recognize that, unless a solution is found quickly, the tension in the island may
produce another tragic and bloody confrontation.
We hope that by the time the Secretary-General
reports to us again in December he will be able to
indicate marked progress towards implementation
of
the relevant resolutions. Should he be unable to do
so, however, the Council-and
indeed the General
Assembly, which will be in session at that time-would
be required to take a new, hard look at the situation,
and perhaps to participate more directly in the search
for peace in Cyprus.

102. Moreover, my delegation shares the concern
expressed by the Secretary-General
in his report
regarding the personal safety of the soldiers of
UNFICYP.
The fact that on several occasions there
has been shooting at UNFICYP
soldiers deserves
our censure, since we all know the noble purposes
pursued by the Force, and the sacrifice made by the
Governments
that have contributed
contingents.
Therefore, under no circumstances can there be any
justification for endangering, by quarrels among the
conflicting bands, the lives of the men who under the
banner of the United Nations are playing a decisive
role in the pacification of the island and carrying out
humanitarian tasks.

96.

Mr. SAIAZAR (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
The purpose of this meeting today was to
consider a further extension of the mandate of
UNFICYP.
The report of the Secretary-General has
been of fundamental
assistance in helping us to
ascertain the facts.

Spanish):

103. In conclusion, my delegation, in accordance
with the terms of the noble mission entrusted to the
Secretary-General
in resolution 367 (1975) of the
Council, wishes to urge the parties directly concerned
in the diflicult problem that overwhelms Cyprus to
continue their dialogue in the hope that they can
progress towards the desired goal of a just and lasting

97. The affirmative vote of my delegation on the
draft resolution just adopted is in keeping with our
belief that UNFICYP
must continue to discharge the
mandate entrusted to it by the Council.
10

peace and establish the new institutional
Cyprus has a right as an independent
nation.

order to which
and sovereign

for the immediate and effective implementation
lutions 365 (1974) and 367 (1975).

of reso-

109. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR believes
that it is necessary immediately
to implement the
resolutions both of the Security Council and of the
General Assembly with regard to a settlement of the
Cyprus problem.

104. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet
Socialist
Republic)
(interpretation
from
Russian):
The delegation of the Byelorussian
SSR
voted in favour of extending the mandate of UNFICYP
for a further.period of six months, since the Govemment of the Republic of Cyprus had agreed to it. At
the same time we did so on the understanding that the
former voluntary basis for the financing of that Force
would be maintained.

110. The PRESIDENT:
As there is no other member
of the Council wishing to speak at this stage, I should
like to make a brief statement in my capacity as the
representative of IRAQ.
111. My delegation wishes to express its thanks to
the Secretary-General,
his Special Representative,
Mr. Weckmann-Muiloz,
and their staff for the comprehensive report.

105. However, the question of extending the mandate
of UNFICYP is only a part, and by no means a decisive
part, of the whole problem that is being considered by
the Security Council today. At the same time, the
Council is considering the important
question of
achieving progress towards the implementation
of
resolution 365 (1974), in which it endorsed General
Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX),
and .of resolution 367 (1975). These resolutions contain important
provisions aimed at a settlement of the Cyprus
problem. A considerable portion of the report of the
Secretary-General was devoted to this very question
and contains both valuable information and important
conclusions.

112. My delegation sincerely hopes at this stage that
all the parties concerned will co-operate with
UNFICYP
and that the representatives of the Greek
and the Turkish communities
will continue to cooperate with the Secretary-General
and with his
Special Representative in order to maintain the process
of negotiations and to achieve some tangible progress
which would facilitate the speedy implementation
of
the resolutions mentioned in the resolution which was
adopted by the Council today.

106. Our delegation would like to pay a tribute to the
efforts of the Secretary-General to bring about progress
in the intercommunal
talks for a settlement of the
Cyprus problem. But unfortunately
we cannot but
note, as does the Secretary-General himself in paragraphs 65 and 66 of his report, that the situation in
Cyprus remains “unstable and potentially dangerous*’
and that for the time being the talks have not yielded
resuits because “the deadlock over the fundamental
basis of a settlement persists”.

113. We are convinced that the continuation of the
negotiations and the implementation
of the United
Nations resolutions on Cyprus, especially General
Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) in all its parts, are in
the best interests of the two communities in the island,
because therein lies the only hope of maintaining the
peace, sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity
and non-alignment of Cyprus.
114. Speaking now as PRESIDENT,
I call on the next
speaker, the representative of Greece.

107. The continuing
outside intervention
in the
internal affairs of Cyprus, despite the resolutions
adopted by the Council calling for non-intervention
in
the internal affairs of Cyprus and the withdrawal of all
foreign troops from the territory of that country, is the
fundamental reason for the tragedy which has lasted
for almost a year now in Cyprus. Our delegation
has consistently favoured the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus as an active
participant in the non-aligned movement,
and we
support the lawful Government of the Republic of
Cyprus.

115. Mr. PAPGULIAS
(Greece) (interpretation from
Mr. President, I am pleased to extend our
warm congratulations
to you on your accession to
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Your authority, your well-known competence and
your great experience in the question on our agenda
is a guarantee that our debate will be successful. I
also wish to thank you and all the members of the
Council for having allowed me to speak.

French):

116. In the resolution just adopted, the Security
Council has agreed, on the proposal of the SecretaryGeneral to a renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP
for a further period of six months. That resolution,
in regard to which the Government of Cyprus and the
parties concerned have given their assent, has the
approval of my Government.
I therefore wish to
express, on behalf of the Hellenic Government, our
profound appreciation to the Member States that have
placed their contingents at the service of the United

108. We believe that the Cyprus problem should be
considered not within narrow NATO circles, but in a
broad international forum within the framework of the
United Nations. In the view of our delegation, the
prevailing
situation in Cyprus requires that new
efforts be exerted aimed at a peaceful and just settlement of the Cyprus problem. We cannot fail to stress
in this connexion the importance of the provisions
contained in the resolution just adopted, which calls
11

.

Nations and to the Governments
that are making
voluntary contributions
for the maintenance of the
Force. We also express our gratitude to the representative of the Secretary-General
on Cyprus, to the
Commander of the Force, General Prem Chand, and
to his assistants, who carry out the peaceful and
humanitarian nature of their task, discharging it under
difficult conditions and, unfortunately,
not without
personal danger.

122. Consequently, the second military operation by
Turkey against the island on 14 August 1974 is still
less justified. It was that operation that led to failure
of the efforts then being made at Geneva to arrive at
a peaceful settlement, since the Turkish Government
presented an ultimatum to be complied with within
such a short time that the outcome was assumed in
advance. That second Turkish military operation
aggravated the hardships of the island by causing
enormous destruction, the dislocation of the economy
and immense human suffering of which we are all
aware.

117. We share the hope that in maintaining the force
on Cyprus we shall succeed not only in compelling
respect for the cease-fire, but also in promoting a
rapid and peaceful settlement.

123. It should suffice for me to say that the crisis,
thus provoked and the threat against peace led the
Security Council to adopt a series of resolutions which
you, as the authors, know better than anyone else,
and also led the General Assembly to adopt resolution 3212 (XXIX). All those resolutions categorically
call for respect for the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and non-alignment of the Republic
of Cyprus and call on States to refrain from any action
or intervention against the island with intent either to
divide it or to unite it with another State. They also
urgently call for the speedy withdrawal from the
Republic of Cyprus of foreign military forces and
the return of all refugees, in safety, to their homes.
Furthermore, the resolutions I have mentioned invite
the two communities concerned to start negotiations
on a footing of equality and in complete freedom so
as to arrive at a mutually
acceptable political
settlement.

118. Before considering the report of the SecretaryGeneral, we once again are bound to note that the
situation on the island continues, as in the past, to
be a sad one. Forty per cent of the territory of the
Republic of Cyprus, which the General Assembly in
its resolution 3212 (XXIX) and the Security Council in
its resolutions 365 (1974) and 367 (1975) recognize as
a non-aligned country, is still under the military
occupation of a foreign Power; one third of the Greek
Cypriot population, that is to say, 182,000 persons,
are refugees in their own country; it must be further
recalled that the Greek Cypriot population,
which
constitutes 80 per cent of the total population of the
island, has been deprived by force of 70 per cent of its
economic resources, 80 per cent of its mining potential
and 90 per cent of the tourist facilities of the island.
119. That is the picture of the tragic fate of the
refugees and of the rest of the Greek Cypriot population, a fate which is in obvious contradiction with the
principles of the Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well as the most elementary
concepts of humanity.

124. Later developments did not accord with the
hopes aroused by those resolutions. This is not surprising, since it is difficult to conceive of free negotiations on a footing of equality when one of the parties
finds itself faced with a massive military force from
another country. Furthermore, nothing was done about
the urgent problem of the refugees; on the contrary,
the British Government allowed itself to be persuaded,
according to its own statements, by the urgent requests
of the Government of Turkey invoking humanitarian
reasons, and allowed the departure from British
military
bases of approximately
10,000 Turkish
Cypriots, who were later transferred to the northern
part of the island and installed on the despoiled
properties of the Greek Cypriot refugees. The Turkish
Government, which requested and succeeded in having
humanitarian criteria applied in respect of the Turkish
Cypriots, did not apply them to the Greek Cypriots,
who simply wished to return to their homes. For them,
only “political”
criteria are applicable !

120. I do not wish to take up the Council’s time with
a lengthy analysis of the causes and the series of
events which have led to the present dramatic situation.
I shall limit myself to giving a brief account of events
since the month of July 1974.
121. We know that it was armed intervention
by
Turkey that unleashed the present crisis, an intervention that had as a pretext the shameful coup d’e’tat
perpetrated by the military dictatorship against the
legitimate President of the Republic of Cyprus and in
regard to which Turkey invoked and applied article IV
of the Treaty of Guarantee,* in violation of the Charter,
which prohibits the use of force. We must note that the
Turkish Cypriot population did not suffer from that
coup d’e’rut at all. But, whatever the pretext for that
intervention which, according to the Treaty, should in
any case have had as its sole purpose the restoration
of the former rkgime, that pretext ceased to exist
once the military dictatorship had fallen and Greece
had returned to democracy, and also once the usurpers
of power in Cyprus had been overthrown and constitutional order had been restored.

125. What is even worse, while the negotiations
between the two communities continued in accordance
with paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution
3212 (XXIX), on 13 February there was a unilateral
proclamation
of the so-called Turkish Federated.
State by the Turkish Cypriot community a fait accompli which, as was to be expected, brought about a
breakdown in negotiations and an aggravation of the
12

crisis. The Security Council urgently considered the
question during the month of March and adopted resolution 367 (1975), in which it regretted the unilateral
decision taken by the Turkish Cypriot community and
called on the Secretary-General to convene the two
parties to resume, intensify and achieve progress in
negotiations, under his guidance, with the purpose of
seeking a just and lasting settlement on the basis of
General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) and of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

countries, was not felt at Vienna, as I have just
said. We wonder, furthermore, how the organization
of this “referendum”
could be regarded as compatible
with the determination proclaimed at Brussels to solve
the problem peacefully and through negotiations.
129. I come now to the Secretary-General’s
report.
I do not think it necessary to make any lengthy comments on certain parts of the report-for
example,
the indication that the United Nations Force has
complete freedom of movement in the southern part of
the island, in contrast to the restrictions on the Force’s
movements in the northern part, or the reference to
the excellent co-operation
of the Force with the
Government of Cyprus, in contrast to the situation in
the zone of occupation. Moreover, the members of the
Council have certainly noted the paragraph of the
Secretary-General’s
report which points out that the
Turkish Cypriots in the south receive food and financial aid from the Government
of Cyprus, which
applies the same criteria to the Turkish Cypriots as to
the Greek Cypriots.

126. With regard to the conduct of those negotiations-now known as the “Vienna negotiations” and
which are the subject of some sections of the SecretaryGeneral’s report-I
shall only make a brief comment.
I should like, nevertheless, to bring to the attention
of the Security Council something that all its members already know full well, namely, that the Govemment of Greece has, since the beginning of the crisis,
shown the greatest restraint and goodwill and a spirit
of conciliation in its desire to see the problem solved
peacefully, has rendered every assistance and will
continue to do so to aid the Secretary-General in his
mission. To him we extend our warmest gratitude
and express our great esteem for his assiduous efforts,
as well as to those of his assistants, in seeking a
solution.

130. With regard to section VII of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, which contains his observations,
I would indicate that we fully share his opinion that
the present situation in Cyprus is unstable and potentially dangerous and will remain so until an agreed
settlement of the basic problems has been reached.
We agree also with the Secretary-General
that a
settlement cannot be achieved by force, but only
through free negotiations among the parties concerned
and in the first instance between the representatives
of the two communities of Cyprus. We agree too that
it is urgent that the deadlock be broken.

127. I also believe that the Council will agree with
me as I say that the representative of the Greek
Cypriot community, Mr. Clerides, went to the Vienna
negotiations with the best will. But, regrettably, it must
be pointed out that Mr. Clerides was not able, either
at the initial phase of the negotiations or in the second
phase, to obtain any serious proposals from the representative of the Turkish Cypriot community regarding
the primary problem of the refugees or the means of
reaching a solution for the political and economic
deadlock created by the occupation of 40 per cent of
the island by the Turkish army. All hopes of concrete
proposals to settle the question of the refugees and the
geographical aspects of a future political solution that
had been raised in the communique
issued at the
conclusion of the first phase were left unfulfilled.
During the second phase, all Mr. Denktas did was to
express certain reflections on the constitutional aspect,
the discussion of which did not bring about any real
progress. Furthermore, we must add that the negotiations were not facilitated-to
say the least-by a new
fait accompli. I am referring to the so-called referendum which was organized on 8 June of this year in
the occupation zone, in violation of Security Council
resolution 367 (1975), and which is therefore null and
void, the more so since the question of the constitutional structure of the Republic of Cyprus can only
be resolved by negotiations.

131. Nevertheless, I regard it as indispensable to
draw the Council’s attention to the next phase of the
negotiations, which is scheduled to begin on 24 July
at Vienna and which I am sure the Council, like us,
wishes to see fully succeed. I must also draw attention to the need for those negotiations to be conducted
in good faith and to be meaningful. The difference of
views on the question of priorities should not be
allowed to take the negotiations off the indicated path.
Indeed, the choice of priorities cannot be left to
one of the parties, to be used as a delaying tactic or
as an arbitrary way of laying down prerequisites
hindering real progress and designed to create irreversible situations. The Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, which the Council has just
confirmed today, foresaw that possibility and therefore established the priorities-that
is, the speedy
withdrawal of foreign armed forces from the territory
of the non-aligned Republic of Cyprus and the return
of all the refugees, safe and sound, to their homes
and their property.

128. It might be useful to supplement the information before the Council by informing members that the
result of the meeting of the Prime Ministers of Greece
and Turkey on 31 May at Brussels, which contributed
to an improvement
in the relations between the two

132. I believe that everyone will agree that what is
at stake here is the application of the basic principles
of the United Nations and the international community,
and that under no pretext can those principles be
13

violated. A just solution can be found only through
serious and sincere negotiations, in conformity with
the basic principles of the Charter, and the implementation
of the Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions on Cyprus, which more than
ever have an urgent character. For it is only in that way
that the danger created by the prolongation of the
present state of affairs can be eliminated.

139. I shall not make any statement tonight regarding
the political situation on the island. I may have to
ask to be allowed to speak again, should there be a
debate later on.
140. The PRESIDENT:
of Turkey.

I call on the representative

141. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): Mr. President, as .a
guest of the Security Council, permit me to express
my satisfaction at being present here today for the first
time under your able guidance. The fact that the Chair
is occupied by a representative of Iraq, a country
with which mine entertains the best of relations, and
your wisdom are for us a guarantee of success for
this series of meetings.

133. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council will
recall that at the beginning of this meeting it was
decided, in accordance with the understanding reached
in the course of our prior consultations, to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Vedat Celik. I therefore invite him,
in accordance with the Council’s decision, to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

142. We have examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral in detail. Although we may not agree with
every element in the report, we concur with most of
the points mentioned is his observations, and we are
grateful to him and his dedicated stafffor their untiring
efforts.

lj4.
Mr. CELIK: I have asked to speak in order to
make a brief statement regarding the resolution just
adopted by the Council and to express the views
of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus on the
question of the extension of the mandate of UNFICYP
for another six months, until 15 December 1975.

143. I have a few comments to make at this stage of
the debate concerning the draft resolution the Council
has just adopted. I would first like to express, if I
may, my surprise at the last-minute changes it was
found necessary to introduce into the text, especially
on a point on which I thought agreement had been
reached among the members of the Council in another
sense. 1 was informed that as a result of an oversight
on the part of the Secretariat this agreement was not
properly reflected in the published draft. It is always
regrettable to have to take into consideration the
possibility of such material errors, especially when
they may conveniently be used to alter a given situation
at the last moment. But, having said that, I of course
have absolutely no objection to the new wording, it
having been long understood that the SecretaryGeneral could, can and certainly will, whenever’he
feels it necessary, present a report to the Security
Council.

135. The fifth paragraph of the preamble to the resolution just adopted makes a reference to the so-called
Government of Cyprus. That reference immediately
makes the resolution unacceptable to us. The members
of the Council are well aware of our position vis-a-vis
the so-called Government of Cyprus. There are two
national communities
on the island; there are two
distinct administrations;
but there is no Government
representing both sides. Therefore, since that reference has been made in the resolution to this nonexisting entity, we cannot accept the resolution as a
whole.
136. Nevertheless, since Mr. Denktag, the President of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus, has
been consulted on the matter by the Secretary-General,
through his Special Representative
in Cyprus,
Mr. Weckmann-Muiioz,
and has given his consent to
the extension of the mandate of UNFICYP,
we shall
continue to co-operate with the Force and help to make
its operation a success.

144. The resolution that has just been adopted
contains not one, as is usual, but two operative
elements. First, it gives UNFICYP
a mandate to carry
out its duties for a further period of six months, to
which my Government agreed on the understanding
that the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus was
consulted and gave its consent. We believe that, under
the prevailing
circumstances,
the presence of
UNFICYP
retains its usefulness. Secondly, the
resolution refers to the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral and the talks between the representatives
of the two communities of Cyprus and requests their
continuance. Fully aware that the only sensible way
of solving the problems concerning Cyprus lies in
negotiations, we welcome this reference.

137. I take this, opportunity to express the thanks
and appreciation of my side to the Secretary-General
for his tireless efforts and invaluable contribution to the
search for a negotiated settlement of the Cyprus
problem. Our thanks go also to his Special Representative in Cyprus, to the Commander, officers and men
of UNFICYP
and to the Secretariat for their contributions.
138. We are convinced that the continuing intercommunal talks are the best, in fact, the only way to
solve the Cyprus problem. We shall continue our
efforts in search of a peaceful settlement and shall
contribute in every way possible to an early settlement.

145. I would have been very happy to conclude my
remarks on the resolution at this point, but the
14

unfortunate reference in the fifth preambular paragraph to a “Government
of Cyprus” compels me to
refer briefly to my Government’s by now well-known
position regarding the so-called Government
of
Cyprus.

positively the efforts that are being undertaken to solve
the problem of Cyprus.
15 1. We know there is no easy answer to the question
of Cyprus. If there were, we would not have been
meeting here for the past 10, 11 or 12 years. But
however difficult the answer is, it can only emerge
around the negotiating table. The greatest danger to any
negotiating process is the adoption of what I would call
“by-tactics”
by one of the parties. By this I mean a
situation in which the negotiations go on but one of the
parties goes ahead and makes use of every opportunity,
international or otherwise, to discredit, slander and
downgrade or even suppress the other party.
Unfortunately,
from time to time we have been faced
with such situations and sometimes their frequency
has been seriously augmented.

146. We have in the past, as we will in the future,
continued to dissociate ourselves from any document,
any text containing any reference to it in any form.
We shall do so until the true representative character
of the Cyprus Government-which,
incidentally,
it
held for a very short time in its history-is
restored.
Therefore we cannot accept this resolution in toto,
but we shall of course in good faith implement its
provisions concerning UNFICYP
and the intercommunal talks.
147. With regard to this last point, I should like to
draw the Council’s attention to the fact that, in the
view of my delegation, no representative in these
chambers should take it upon himself to express what
he considers to be the feeling of other members
regarding the reservations that some of the interested
parties, including my Government, may have on the
text just adopted.

152. I could name at least a dozen such attempts
where the existing or self-appointed
international
forum was utilized for such tactics. I will refrain
from doing so, but I wonder if the members of the
Council are aware, for instance, of Archbishop
Makarios’ message, to an international
conference,
calling for the implementation
of United Nations resolutions on Cyprus, in which it was suggested that the
Republic of Cyprus could only be a unitary State.
That statement was made not two years ago but on
10 May 1975, when the Archbishop’s chief negotiator
was discussing a federal system for Cyprus with his
Turkish counterpart. I will not dwell on this subject;
if need be I can come back to it later. But I find it
significant.

148. Significant developments
have taken place,
in the view of my Government,
since the .Security
Council last met to consider the question of Cyprus.
The intercommunal
talks envisaged in the resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council
are under way at Vienna under the auspices of the
Secretary-General.
In fact, their second phase was
completed only recently and the third round, which
is to take place in late July, is under preparation,
I believe. I do not think detailed comment on the
talks is appropriate at this stage, nor do I think I
should be the first to make such comment. But it is a
fact that serious and very frank talks are taking place
under the guidance of the Secretary-General.

153. Now, some momentary achievements may give
certain quarters a sense of support and confidence,
but in the long run it is precisely those who adopt
such tactics who are bound to suffer most. I am not
making any accusations; I am merely trying to put on
record clearly and, I hope, soberly what the Turkish
side understands by negotiations. I just wish to convey
to those who are interested in a settlement in Cyprus
that my Government
does not consider serious
negotiations and slanderous propaganda as compatible.

149. One suggestion, which also appears in the press
statement issued after the last series of talks is, at
least for us, very significant. I am referring to the
suggestion made by Mr. Denktas to Mr. Clerides to
form a transitional government in which both communities would be represented. This, if accepted and
properly implemented, could, we hope, be a milestone
in the history of the Cyprus conflict. It may at the same
time eliminate the abnormal situation in which one
community alone speaks for the State of Cyprus, as
we have witnessed and will no doubt be witnessing in
the course of this debate, while the other partner
community must go to great lengths to make itself
heard.

154. I took a few notes while my colleague from
Greece was speaking and would like now to read
them. This will not constitute a reply to everything
he has said. I should like first to draw his attention
to the fact that it is a bit too easy to lay all the blame
for what has happened on the last days of a Govemment which can now very easily be disposed of as the
“hateful dictatorship’*, without taking into consideration that the suffering of the Turks in the island goes
back not only to the seven long years of that dictatorship-now branded by the Greeks-but
to more than a
decade after the creation of the Republic-and
even
before the creation of that Republic. Therefore, we
believe that no solution of the problem of Cyprus
can ever be achieved if the beginning of the history of
the crisis is put at July 1974. If evil has to be extirpated
from the body politic of Cyprus, we should all be

150. Another important development is the reactivation of high-level contacts between Turkey and Greece,
the two countries most directly concerned, after the
communities in the island, with Cyprus. We hope that
improvement in the relations between the two mother
countries, as they are sometimes called, will influence
15

careful how we pass our judgement
that evil is.

as to what or who

“As is well known, Turkey has special responsibilities under international agreements. These apply
to the constitutional structure and the international
status of Cyprus. It is, in our view, the duty of the
world community to restore the sfuatus quo ante.”
[1780th meeting, pura. 55.1

155. Our bitter experience shows us that that evil is
rooted in the belief that Cyprus was, is and shall remain
Greek-so
much so that my colleague from Greece
considers, for instance, that foreign occupation is the
Turkish occupation-in
an island where Turkish
troops were and are welcomed as saviours by the
Turks of Cyprus. Yet no mention is made of the permanent occupation, on the basis of that mistaken
belief that ,Cyprus is Greek, by Greek troops under
various regimes and practically up to the present
day.

161. I suppose that in those days, it was the agreements to which we are referring, namely, the agreements of London and Zurich and the Treaty of
Guarantee.* I do not know of any other international
agreements that were in force on that date. I find in
that statement a quotation which is very precise.
162. The PRESIDENT:
of Turkey.

156. Therefore, we do believe that if we have to have
serious negotiations in Cyprus, the root of the evil
should be well defined, and the period to which we
want to return also has to be well defined, because,
as far as I can see it, a return to the status quo
ante in Cyprus for the Turks would be like all the
“antes” that I remember in Cyprus, which have all
been very detrimental to the Turks. Hence a new
status has to be found; a new status has to be devised
and I think-I
hope I am correct-that
this is the aim
being pursued by both Mr. Denktag and Mr, Clerides.

I call on the representative

163. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I just wish to reply to
the statement made by the representative of Greece.
When he quoted my having mentioned the return to
the status quo ante, need I remind him that the status
quo ante at that time impiied a continuous series of
negotiations which had lasted then for more than five
years, if I’m not mistaken, in order to find a form of
coexistence for the two communities in Cyprus. Therefore, it was certainly not a desire to return to the kind
of constitution which had been violated several times,
though certainly not by us nor by the Turkish
Cypriots. Our desire to return to the status quo ante
at that time meant exactly what it said-to a situation where the President would not be the notorious
megalomaniac--I
think I can use that term because
nobody has challenged it, neither the Greek Cypriots
nor the Greeks nor anyone else-the megalomaniac
who for a short time occupied the seat of the President. That was all that it meant at the time. I still
stick by that statement, and I am ready to repeat it
today.

157. There was also a reference to the situation of
the Turks in the south of Cyprus, as opposed to the
situation of the Greeks in the north of Cyprus. I should
just like to say that it is probably because of the
paternal care of the Greek Cypriot authorities that the
Turks in the south emigrate by the thousands,
abandoning everything but their hope to find a
decent life as first-class citizens among their own
people in the north.
158. I should not like to make a longer statement at
this late hour. I understand that one of the interested
parties intends to make further statements on the
issue; therefore, with your permission, Mr. President,
and with the permission and tolerance of the members
of the Council, I reserve my right, if and when necessary, to present my country’s views on the basis of
the comments made around this table, or to be made
around this table at a future meeting of the Council.

164. The PRESIDENT:
of Greece.

I call on the. representative

165. Mr. PAPOULIAS
(Greece): I am sorry to have
to indulge in this kind of dialogue. As I am new here
at the Security Council I certainly do not want to draw
upon me your wrath, Mr. President, or the wrath of
Mr. Olcay. However, I must point out that this statement was not made on a day that was without signiflcance, nor was it just referring to some kind of
constitutional difficulties in Cyprus. The statement was
made on 19 July 1974, on the night that Turkey invaded
Cyprus. It was made, I submit, in order to allay the
fears of the Security Council with respect to the
purposes of the Turkish invasion of Cyprus, because
there was a very clear promise here to the effect,
“Do not worry; what we are trying to do in Cyprus
is simply to return to the status quo ante”. Once the
operation was successful, then of course the status
quo ante was scrapped. They are trying now to find
other pretexts. The date 19 July 1974 appears in the
verbatim record of the 1780th meeting of the Security
Council. That is the date, those were the words and

159. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Greece, who has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply.
160. Mr. PAPOULIAS
(Greece): Certainly I have no
wish to engage in polemics with the representative of
Turkey; but he himself posed the question as to what
szuzus qlro unfe we should go back to. I think the
Turkish Government has already given its reply. At
least, I have before me here the verbatim record of
the 1780th meeting held here on 19 July 1974, I suppose
this is the official position-at
least it was in those
days before the invasion of Cyprus. Mr. Olcay stated
as follows:
16

that was the night that the Turkish ships were sailing
for Cyprus. Therefore, it is not as simple as it is made
out to be. I do not have to explain this any further;
otherwise I might be accused of considering members
as not understanding something which is very simple.
166. The PRESIDENT:
of Cyprus.

accomplis by representing himself as the representative of the separate Turkish Federated State, while
at the same time attempting to show that there is no
legal Government in Cyprus. I wonder if this should
have been allowed to take place in this chamber? I
think a point of order should have been raised, and
think that Mr. Celik’s attempt is deplorable in that
he abused the privilege given to him to express his
ideas here as an individual. But that is not the main
reason why I have asked to be allowed to speak.

I call on the representative

167. Mr. CLERIDES
(Cyprus): It has been a rather
long debate and I am sure the patience of most representatives here is exhausted. I had indicated my intention to speak on 16 June and I was very kindly informed
that I could do so. However, it is necessary for me to
intervene at this stage because tonight, in this chamber,
we have witnessed an attempt to create a new fait
accompli.

173. We have been discussing here the extension of
the mandate of UNFICYP,
and it has been agreed that
that mandate should be extended because the presence
of the Force in Cyprus is essential. We have been
discussing the progress-or
non-progress, which is
nearer to reality-of the talks that have become known
as the “Vienna talks”. We have been discussing
details of the report of the Secretary-General._Very
few voices have been heard reminding us that today
almost one year has elapsed since the Turkish forces
invaded Cyprus. Very few voices have been heard
stressing the fact that 40 per cent of the territory of
the Republic is still under foreign occupation. Very
few voices have been heard saying that 200,000 Greek
Cypriots are suffering as refugees. No voice has been
heard saying that there are 2,700 missing persons or
that the situation in Cyprus is really deplorable.

168. The main subject of my statement was the fact
that while negotiations were going on and while everybody in the Council has called upon all of us, and
particularly on the two negotiators, to show goodwill
and a real endeavour to solve the Cyprus problem, a
series of permanent faits accomplis has been created
by Turkey and the Turkish Cypriot side which, if
allowed to continue, will not only make it impossible
to find a solution to the Cyprus problem, but in fact
may make it impossible to continue the process of
negotiation, on which so much value has been placed.

174. We have before us resolutions of the General
Assembly and of the Security Council calling for the
withdrawal of all foreign forces, calling for the return
of the refugees to their homes under. conditions of
safety; we have not had a single statement by the
representative of Turkey that there is any intention
of complying with those resolutions; we have not had a
single statement by Mr. Celik that there is any intention of complying with those resolutions. On the
contrary, there is evidence that there is no intention
at all to comply with those resolutions. And, in the
meantime, there is abundant evidence that by a series
of calculated acts an attempt is being made to create
a new situation in Cyprus in which Cyprus would be
colonized by Turks from the mainland.

169. What is the fait accompli we have witnessed
today? Under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of
procedure of the Security Council, my compatriot,
Mr. Celik, was called upon to speak. Rule 39 is very
clear and precise. It states:
“The Security Council may invite members of
the Secretariat or other persons, whom it considers
competent for the purpose, to supply it with information or to give other assistance in examining matters
within its competence.”
170. While negotiations were going on, a fait accompli was created unilaterally
by the Turkish side’s
declaration of a separate federated State in Cyprus.
This led to the interruption of those negotiations and
the Security Council, very properly, in its last resolution called upon all the parties concerned to desist
from any action that might create faits accomplis.

175. It is not onlv the referendum that has created
a fait accompli. In the meantime we have ‘a largescale emigration from Turkey to Cyprus; we have
populations
being established in areas formerly
inhabited by Greek Cypriots; we now have a new
example of the Greek sector of Famagusta being
systematically colonized by people from abroad-all
this during a period when negotiations are supposed to
be taking place to solve the Cypri:s problem. We have
an unbearable situation in so far as the Greeks in the
north are concerned. We have no freedom of movement for UNFICYP
in the north. And, what is worse,
we have a deterioration of the situation in that the
Secretary-General’s
report reminds us that further
stringent measures have been taken by the Turkish
forces in Cyprus with regard to Greek farmers, and
that they now are unable to cultivate their lands

171. During the second state of negotiations
at
Geneva, and while it was known to the Turkish side
that the negotiations had been fixed and that they
would last from a certain date to a certain date, the
Turkish side attempted to create another fait accompli
by holding a referendum.
172. Today,
in this chamber,
my compatriot
Mr. Celik, taking advantage of one of the provisional
rules of procedure which gave him permission to
speak before the Council, as an individual,
has
attempted to consummate the two previous faits
17

,

whereas before they could do so under escort by
UNFICYP.
The signs of a deteriorating situation are
all there.
176. The intention of not negotiating can be clearly
demonstrated by referring to the fact that during the
first talks at Vienna, which had been fmed some
time before they took place, Mr. Denktag came and
stated that he was not ready to explain his side’s position, and that he came there merely to hear Mr. Cleri’ des’ views. Suggestions were made with regard to the
implementation
of the Security Council resolution
concerning the return of refugees to their homes.
But although Mr. Denktas undertook to study these
suggestions and give his reply by June when we were
to meet again, he returned not unprepared, but
prepared to state that he would allow only as many
Greek refugees to go north behind the Turkish lines
as the Greek side would allow Turkish Cypriots to go
north. In other words, instead of implementation
of
the General Assembly resolution concerning the return
of the refugees, he came to make a proposal, and that
was for an exchange of population.
177. It is very important
to draw the Council’s
attention to the fact that had it not been for the great
skill, persistence and ability of the Secretary-General,
the negotiations at Vienna would not have taken place
or they would have been interrupted on the first day
because of the continual creation of faits accomplis
by Turkey. But the great skill of the Secretary-General,
his persistence and his devotion to seeking a peaceful
solution for the problem of Cyprus will not suflice to
sustain the negotiating process unless Turkey clearly
understands that we cannot negotiate and at the same
time accept faits. accomplis to establish the solution
that we want.

181. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I apologize to members
of the Council for speaking again. I shall take only a
few minutes, but I feel obliged to make a few points on
the last two statements. I shall not speak again this
evening.
182. In reply to the representative of Greece, I
should like to say, for future reference, that it has
never been and could never have been the purpose
of Turkey’s action to restore to his archiepiscopal
see, combined with the presidential palace, a man long
regarded by us as a usurper of legitimacy in Cyprus.
183. In reply to Mr. Clerides I would make the
following points. The main fait accompli in Cyprus
is, I submit, the very presence in this chamber of
Mr. Clerides as representative of Cyprus as a whole,
against the wishes-no longer hidden from anyone-of
the Turkish Cypriot community.
The main fait
accompli that preceded the one to which I have just
drawn attention was the occupation of power in
defiance of the only existing Constitution,
that of
1960, by the Greek Cypriots, under the leadership of
the Ethnarch.
184. If one is to talk of abuse of power, I believe that
only a moment ago Mr. Clerides very ably provided
us with another example. Is he the representative
of one of the communities, negotiating the status of his
country, or is he the representative of that country as
a whole? Personally I am amazed at-but not surprised
by-Mr.
Clerides’ strange gift of ubiquity.
185. 1 have not attended the Vienna talks. I am therefore not in a position to divulge any secrets about
them. The representative of the Turkish side who
has attended the Vienna talks is present, and, when the
time comes, he will be able to answer Mr. Clerides
with regard to the various developments he mentioned
as having occurred in the Turkish Federated State of
Cyprus.

178. It is important to inform the Council that even
since my arrival here new faits accomplis have been
prepared by Turkey. It has now been established
beyond doubt that a new communications
system is
being worked out and will shortly be put into use
whereby the Turkish sector will be communicating
with the outside world, through Turkey, both by
telephone and in every other way. This is again a
violation, in my opinion, of what has been agreed:
to desist from unilateral acts and to continue negotiating in good faith. And, what is more, only yesterday
Mr. Denktag made a new declaration: that the Turkish
forces would not leave Cyprus; that they would be
thinned out when a solution of the Cyprus problem
was found. That, again, is a statement contrary to the
letter and the spirit of the General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions. It shows that there is
really no intention to comply with those resolutions.

186. I would again say that I do not regard myself
as being in a position to answer the allegations made
by Mr. Clerides. I repeat that the Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus is represented here. I am sure,
Mr. President, that you will be kind enough to call
on Mr. Celik when he asks to be able to speak. I
suppose that that will have to be after Mr. Clerides has
made his statement, because what he has done today
is merely to give an uperp
of what he will say to us
at the next meeting--and, of course, all this is in a spirit
of understanding and goodwill vis-&is
the future
negotiations to take place, we hope, at Vienna. As
I have said, I am sure that Mr. Celik will be given
an opportunity to answer Mr. Clerides at the Council’s
next meeting.

179. In view of all that, we must re-examine the whole
situation in Cyprus. I shall’be addressing the Council
on these issues on 16 June, in some detail.
180. The PRESIDENT:
of Turkey.

187. The PRESIDENT:
of Cyprus.

I call on the representative

188. Mr. CLERIDES
(Cyprus): I shall be very brief;
I wish to answer only one remark made by the repre-

I call on the representative
18

:

sentative of Turkey, concerning my ability to act
in various capacities.
i89. Certainly I am, and have been for many years,
the representative of the Greek Cypriot community
in the talks. I have also been the President of the
House of Representatives during the same years, and
I have been addressed as ‘such by the Turkish side.
I have also been the Acting President of the Republic
of Cyprus on several occasions.

190: If that worries the representative of Turkey, Jet
me enumerate the various capacities in which
Mr. Denktag represents himself: He. attends the .talks
as the representative of the Turkish community. He
is referred to as the Vice-President of the Republic,

..

..

and he accepts that title, as may be seen in many
reports. And now he appears as the president of a
federated State. So the representative of Turkey should
not be so upset about the various capacities I have.
191. The Turkish representative’s remarks about
good faith and negotiating in a good spirit should not
be addressed to me. I have not created a single fait
accompli.
The mee?ing rose at 9.10 p.m.
Notes

’ see resolution 370(Em).
2 U&d Nations, Treaty Series,

vol.

2.82,

p. 3.

‘.

.

. .

hho

in United

Nations.

”

New York

owoo

,

r

._

‘*,.

_.

.,, .

82-61202-Novetnbcr

1983-2.200

.c

::-::

,

.
:,

_,

.

_.
