A /70/PV.45

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

45th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 3 November 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/70/L.6)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered agenda item 122 at its 29th and
30th plenary meetings, held on 12 October. Members
will also recall that under this item the Assembly
adopted resolution 70/3 at its 38th plenary meeting,
held on 23 October 2015.
During the debate on this item held on Monday,
12 October, the Assembly had before it identical
letters dated 17 June 2015 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly
and the President of the Security Council (A/70/95),
containing the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations, and a report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled “The future of United Nations peace
operations: implementation of the recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations”,
circulated in document A/70/357.
Following the deliberations on the topic that took
place on that day, as well as constructive informal
consultations subsequently held with the membership,
I submitted a draft resolution that is now contained in
document A/70/L.6. I would like to thank delegations
for their fruitful engagement during the consultation
process, which resulted in the proposal that is now
before the Assembly.

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/70/L.6, entitled “Strengthening of the
United Nations system”. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt it?
Draft resolution A/70/L.6 was adopted (resolution
70/6).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 122.
Agenda items 119 and 120
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
The President: I would like to begin with a few
remarks on the issue that is the subject of today’s debate.
In our recent celebrations of the seventieth
anniversary of the Organization, we reminded
ourselves about the values, purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. In order to advance
those purposes, however, the General Assembly’s
role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency must be
continually reviewed and enhanced.
Resolution 69/321, adopted in September, mandated
that the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly should continue its
work during the seventieth session. With that in mind, I
recently reappointed Ambassadors Vladimir Drobnjak
of Croatia and Wilfried Emvula of Namibia to continue
their work as Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-34703 (E)

*1534703*

A/70/PV.45

I commend their efforts to date, and I call on members
to extend to them their full support and cooperation.
During the sixty-ninth session, the Working Group
focused on four thematic clusters and identified ways to
enhance the Assembly in line with its mandate.
First, concerning the role and authority of the
General Assembly, resolution 69/321 encouraged
the implementation of resolutions and reaffirmed
the relationship between the principal organs of the
United Nations. I am working to increase cooperation,
coordination and exchanges of information between the
Presidents of the principal organs and the SecretaryGeneral. Indeed, only two weeks ago, I briefed the
Security Council during its open debate on working
methods (see S/PV.7539), an exercise that I feel was
beneficial to both bodies. As mandated, I will also
continue the practice of holding thematic debates, of
which there will be three next year, and I will do all I
can to ensure that they are focused on results.
Secondly, regarding the working methods of the
General Assembly, significant progress has been made
through the sharing among the Main Committees
of best practices and lessons learned. Since taking
office, I have met with the Chairs of each of the six
Main Committees, and so far we have had one meeting
with the General Committee, in which we discussed
issues of common interest, including streamlining the
General Assembly’s agenda in the light of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1)
and the need to manage time efficiently in the work
of the Committees. A further meeting will be held in
November. I have also met with the coordinators of the
regional groups, and in November I hope to meet with
them collectively to discuss ongoing business in the
General Assembly. Finally, during this session I will
convene an informal meeting on enhancing cooperation
between the Permanent Missions and the Secretariat.
The third cluster considered by the Ad Hoc Working
Group relates to the selection and appointment of the
next Secretary-General. Resolution 69/321 provides
clear guidance on the way forward on that crucial issue.
In that regard, the President of the Security Council and
I will circulate a joint letter to the membership inviting
the timely presentation of candidates and describing the
entire process. It is also envisaged that the names of
individuals submitted for consideration as candidates,
together with accompanying documents, including
curricula vitae, will be circulated on an ongoing basis

2/27

03/11/2015

and that the Assembly will conduct informal dialogues
or meetings with candidates. The resolution also
stresses the importance of ensuring that the position
of Secretary-General is filled by the best possible
candidate. In my view, the inclusion and consideration
of female candidates will go a long way to securing that
outcome.
The fourth cluster considered by the Ad Hoc
Working Group relates to the running of the Office of
the President of the General Assembly, a matter that has
taken on even greater significance given recent events
connected to the President of the Assembly at its sixtyeighth session. Last year, the Assembly recognized that
the activities of the President have increased markedly
in recent years, and over the past two months I have
already seen evidence of that. The primary role of
the President and his or her Office continues to be to
officiate at the meetings of the General Assembly, but
in reality, the work is much more extensive and includes
ensuring the fulfilment of mandates as laid down in
multiple Assembly resolutions.
The presidency is therefore not just a great honour
but a considerable responsibility, requiring an Office
that is adequately staffed and run in the most effective
manner possible, while adhering to the highest standards
of ethics and governance. As members are aware, the
Office of the President is subject to a series of checks
and balances, including through briefings to Member
States and audits of the regular budget and of the trust
fund for the Office of the President of the General
Assembly, as well as through reports submitted in the
context of the Assembly revitalization process, and so
forth. As with any institution, however, there is always
scope for improvement, and that, I believe, should be
considered in greater detail as a matter of priority by
the Ad Hoc Working Group.
I have also been informed that the SecretaryGeneral intends to establish an internal task force on
the issue as a whole that could also be of assistance.
Consideration could be given, for example, to matters
of disclosure, financial independence, staffing and
reporting. Engagement with external actors is another
important issue, although, given the emphasis on
partnership in the 2030 Agenda, it is perhaps relevant
to the broader Organization as well.
Transparency, however, is also a matter for each
and every President, and from the outset I have taken
a number of steps to support that objective, including

15-34703

03/11/2015

by holding regular press briefings and providing
information on the staffing of my Office. In addition, on
a new page on my website that is entitled “Commitment
to Transparency”, I am today making available an
information note on the Office of the President of
the General Assembly that builds on the President’s
handbook.
In order to strengthen confidence in the presidency,
I would also like to outline to members three principles
of conduct that my Office and I will adhere to during
my presidency.
The first is integrity and impartiality — representing
the Assembly in an impartial manner, trying to avoid
conflicts of interest and ensuring gender and geographic
balance in my Office. The second is transparency and
accountability — providing information about official
travel, finances and engagements, communicating
openly with the membership and external audiences and
complying with all relevant rules and procedures. And
the third is professionalism and effectiveness — running
my Office effectively and using its resources efficiently,
keeping appropriate records and ensuring a smooth
transition to the President of the next session, as the
President for the sixty-ninth did so effectively.
On this and on the other three clusters, there is
still significant scope for action, and I will be giving
close attention to the views of members on how best to
further revitalize the Assembly’s work, including the
comments I have already received this morning from
a number of ambassadors who have themselves been
discussing how to improve the ethics and transparency
of the work of the President of the General Assembly
and of the President’s Office.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Today I will be speaking
about a most serious matter that strikes at the prestige
and reputation of the General Assembly. I have already
expressed my shock at the very serious allegations that
have been made against the President of the Assembly
during its sixty-eighth session. I have also declared
unequivocally that we will not tolerate corruption at
the United Nations or in its name. The Assembly must
now draw the larger lessons from the incident and act
with resolve. In that effort, we can build on a tradition
of responding to problems with systemic solutions.

A/70/PV.45

As members are aware, the election of the President
of the General Assembly used to be held on the same
day that the new session opened. Then, in 2001, the
11 September terrorist attacks prevented the Assembly
from convening and electing a President. As a result,
there was a leadership vacuum and a crisis. At the time,
I was the Chef de Cabinet of the incoming President. We
realized that we had to prevent any such disruption in
the future, so we ended the 56-year tradition of holding
the election on the first day of the session. Starting
in 2002, the President of the General Assembly was
elected three months in advance. That protects against
a leadership vacuum and provides transition time for
the new President to prepare. I also take note of the
fact that the non-permanent members of the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council will now
be elected six months in advance of their terms.
It is critical to learn from unfortunate incidents
or terrible events. Member States must now improve
the functioning of the Office of the President of the
General Assembly in order to make its organization
more robust, and that includes strengthening the budget
that supports the President’s activities. We need greater
transparency and accountability. That is essential.
I welcome the work undertaken in that regard by the
Permanent Representatives of Croatia and Namibia,
who served as Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly during the previous session, and I welcome
their reappointment by you, Mr. President, for this
session. I will support them in every way possible.
Throughout my tenure, I have made it clear that
the United Nations should embody the highest level
of integrity and ethical standards. That is why I have
taken note of the intention of the United States Attorney
to get to the bottom of the very serious allegations
regarding the propriety of the conduct of the President
of the sixty-eighth session. As members are aware, I
have taken a number of specific steps to address, head
on, the important issues that have been raised. I have
requested an internal audit by the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS) of the interactions between
the United Nations and the entities mentioned in the
criminal complaint. I have also asked OIOS to audit any
funds received from those entities, as well as any funds
disbursed to them by the United Nations. I have also
requested that OIOS determine whether other matters
that might arise during the course of the audit merit
further audit.

15-347033/27

A/70/PV.45

Decisions on the functioning of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly are the purview of
the Assembly. But it is incumbent on all of us to help
get this right. That is why I have established an internal
task force, chaired by the Chef de Cabinet, to review
the arrangements for the financing and staffing of the
Office of the President of the General Assembly. The
task force will recommend ways to promote enhanced
transparency and accountability. I have also asked the
heads of the United Nations entities mentioned in the
criminal complaint that may have engaged with the
entities involved in the complaint to advise me about
what they are doing to look into the matter.
My Office, and I personally, will continue to
be in close contact with the Office of the President
of the General Assembly in order to ensure the
complementarity and coherence of those efforts. All of
us have a responsibility to work together to make sure
that this Organization and its officials comply fully
with all relevant rules and regulations, and to carry out
our duties in full transparency before the eyes of the
world.
I welcome the General Assembly’s initiatives
aimed at involving more stakeholders in its discussions
on issues of critical importance to the international
community. Informal interactive thematic debates now
include members of civil society and others, whose
voices and efforts can add great value to our work.
In the Assembly’s most recent resolution on
revitalizing its work (resolution 69/321), Member States
set out important measures concerning the process for
selecting and appointing the next Secretary-General, my
successor. They include a joint letter from the Presidents
of the General Assembly and the Security Council to
start the process of soliciting candidates, circulation of
the names of individuals that have been submitted for
consideration, and the convening by the Assembly of
informal dialogues or meetings with those candidates.
Those advances demonstrate the wide-ranging scope of
the agenda item on that topic, which encompasses the
role and authority of the General Assembly, its working
methods and the institutional memory of the Office of
the President of the Assembly.
I look forward to working with members and
supporting their efforts to revitalize the General
Assembly so that it can achieve our shared objectives.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

4/27

03/11/2015

Mr. Bessedik (Algeria): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
I would like to express our thanks to you,
Mr. President, for having convened this plenary meeting,
which is devoted specifically to engaging in a debate
to consider jointly agenda item 119, “Implementation
of the resolutions of the United Nations”, and agenda
item 120, “Revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly”.
At the outset, the Non-Aligned Movement would
like to congratulate Mr. Wilfried Emvula, Permanent
Representative of Namibia, and Mr. Vladimir
Drobnjak, Permanent Representative of Croatia, on
their reappointment as Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group of the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly and to wish them every success in
discharging their duties.
First, NAM stresses the importance of the
full implementation of resolution 69/321, entitled
“Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly”,
which the General Assembly adopted by consensus on
11 September, and recalls its flexible approach, which
led to that consensus adoption. It was also agreed to
continue examining the four clusters, among them the
selection and appointment of the Secretary-General
and other executive heads during the Assembly’s
current, seventieth session, as well as strengthening
the institutional memory of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly.
Secondly, NAM highlights the importance of giving
priority this year to the issue of the appointment of the
future Secretary-General, whose election is planned
to take place in 2016. In the light of paragraph 44 of
resolution 69/321, and in full compliance with Article 97
of the Charter of the United Nations, NAM calls on the
President of the General Assembly to play a proactive
role in the run-up to the selection and appointment of
the next Secretary-General, in order to enhance the
transparency and credibility of the selection process
and to make the latter more interactive and inclusive
at all stages.
In this regard, NAM believes that the current
practice of the appointment of the Secretary-General
is informal and flexible, having evolved over time.
Therefore, resolution 11 (I) was completed and amended
by the provisions of resolutions 51/241, 60/286, 64/301,
66/294, 68/307 and 69/321, in order to make this process

15-34703

03/11/2015

more transparent and democratic and inclusive of all
States Members of the United Nations.
While strongly expressing the importance of the
fact that the relevant provisions of the aforementioned
resolutions should be fully applied to the forthcoming
process of the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General, the Non-Aligned Movement has
noticed with regret that most of these provisions have
not yet been implemented, as reflected in the updated
inventory chart of General Assembly resolutions on the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
In this regard, NAM stresses the importance of the
full implementation of the aforementioned resolutions
to the immediately upcoming process of the selection
and appointment of the Secretary-General, in strict
compliance with rule 141 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, which provides for a vote
by secret ballot in a private meeting of the General
Assembly upon the relevant recommendation of the
Security Council.
In the light of the foregoing, NAM considers
that at this time of increased global challenges, from
climate change to armed conflict, terrorism and
pandemics, the urgent need for effective leadership and
international cooperation is greater than ever. In this
regard, we stress, on the one hand, the need to promote
more interaction between the Security Council and
the General Assembly, in particular through a more
analytical report of the Security Council, and, on the
other, the importance of improving the current process
of the appointment of the Secretary-General. The aim
is to make the way in which the Secretary-General
is chosen more transparent, credible and inclusive of
all Member States by making full use of the power of
appointment enshrined in the Charter.
To remedy this, NAM calls on the Security Council
to recommend more than one candidate endorsed by a
Member State for appointment as Secretary-General
for consideration by the General Assembly. The bestqualified candidates will possess and display, inter alia,
a commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter, extensive leadership and administrative and
diplomatic experience.
To start the process in an open and transparent
manner, NAM requests the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Security Council to circulate a joint
letter addressed to all Member States calling on all
States Members of the United Nations to submit formal

A/70/PV.45

candidatures for the post of Secretary-General. Such a
letter should include a description of the entire process
and specify a deadline for the candidatures.
NAM also calls on potential endorsed candidates to
send a letter to the President of the General Assembly
and the President of the Security Council notifying
them of their formal candidatures for the post of
Secretary-General, unlike under the current practice,
which is limited to informing formally only the Security
Council.
Furthermore, NAM calls on the President of the
General Assembly to hold timely hearings or meetings
of the Assembly for an exchange of views and a dialogue
or informal dialogues with candidates presented by a
Member State. The summary of the consultations would
then be forwarded to Member States and the Security
Council.
In the course of the identification and appointment
of the best candidates for the post of Secretary-General,
who should include women, due regard will continue
to be given to regional rotation and will also be given
to gender equality, as stipulated in paragraph 59 of
resolution 51/241.
We also believe, as suggested in the Joint Inspection
Unit report for 2011, that prevailing practices in the
election of executive heads in other United Nations
system bodies could also be suitable for the appointment
of the Secretary-General. Therefore, we recommend
considering existing practices.
Moreover, NAM would like to emphasize the issue
of promises made by candidates in exchange for the
support of the permanent members of the Security
Council, which is described in the aforementioned
report of the Joint Inspection Unit. We consider that
there is no position reserved for any Member State.
It is therefore important that candidates not be under
pressure, either before or after being appointed, to
give posts in the Secretariat to people of any particular
nationality in return for political support, since this
is clearly contrary to the spirit of the United Nations
Charter.
Thirdly, NAM believes that there is a need to balance
the part allocated in the Ad Hoc Working Group to the
general debate and the part devoted to negotiations
on the resolution. Delegations must also have enough
time to revert to their capitals on those matters. In that
context, we kindly request the co-Chairs to present a

15-347035/27

A/70/PV.45

draft work programme of the Ad-Hoc Working Group
on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly, which should be balanced and concise and
have a clear time frame.
Once again, the Non-Aligned Movement supports
an effective, genuine strengthening of the institutional
memory of the Office of the President of the General
Assembly and of the role and authority of the General
Assembly, including in questions related to international
peace and security, bearing in mind the Assembly’s
intergovernmental, inclusive and democratic character,
which have immensely contributed to the promotion of
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and its goals. At the same time, NAM reiterates
the validity and relevance of its principled position on
working methods. In that context, NAM emphasizes
the need to continue examining pending issues related
to the four clusters.
To conclude, the Non-Aligned Movement underlines
the importance of the political will of Member States
and of the role to be played by the President of the
General Assembly during this session in the process of
selecting and appointing the next Secretary-General, a
process that must be conducted in accordance with the
aforementioned resolutions.
The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its commitment
to contributing effectively and constructively to the
upcoming meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly and
to the discussions on each of the clusters. We are ready
to cooperate and engage in fruitful and constructive
discussions with all the delegations in a comprehensive,
thorough and transparent manner.
The President: I give the floor to the observer of
the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Armenia, align themselves with this
statement.
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
plenary meeting and for your engagement in the
revitalization process of the General Assembly. I would

6/27

03/11/2015

like to congratulate the Permanent Representatives
of Croatia and Namibia on their reappointment as
co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly.
That reappointment is a testament to their excellent
work in the Ad Hoc Working Group during previous
session of the General Assembly and the significant
progress achieved in relation to resolution 69/321 on the
topic. We wish the co-Chairs success also during this
session and express our support for the upcoming work.
The European Union and its member States are
strong proponents of effective multilateralism, with the
United Nations at its core. Our top priorities remain the
strengthening of the United Nations, based on effective
and sustainable funding, in line with real capacity to
pay, and increasing the efficiency of its functioning
where there is scope to do more. In that context,
we remain committed to the revitalization process
and to supporting efforts aimed at strengthening
the role and authority of the General Assembly in
line with the Charter of the United Nations and the
relevant resolutions. Indeed, we wish that the General
Assembly — as the only intergovernmental body with
universal membership and a broad mandate with farreaching responsibilities — would take up the challenge
of reconciling legitimacy and efficiency in the context
of the emerging global challenges.
At the same time, we wish to reiterate the
importance of taking concrete steps, at all levels,
aimed at spending more judiciously, delivering in new
ways and ensuring that the Organization lives within
the agreed budget levels. That applies to all United
Nations activities, from peacekeeping to construction
and the regular budget. For a more effective delivery of
mandates and the sustainable use of resources to occur,
an unceasing effort to find new, creative working
methods is essential. We believe that only when the
General Assembly takes relevant action on issues of
common concern to the international community and
produces results can revitalization be ensured. By
doing so, it lives up to its role as one of the principal
organs of the United Nations.
The EU and its member States welcome the adoption
of resolution 69/321, which contains significant new
ideas. The flexibility of all States Members of the United
Nations engaged in the intergovernmental negotiations
made its adoption possible. It can be seen as a milestone
in enhancing the transparency and inclusivity of the
selection process for the next Secretary-General. We

15-34703

03/11/2015

call on the President to ensure the necessary follow-up,
including the sending of the joint letter envisaged in
resolution 69/321. The holding of informal dialogues or
meetings with candidates for the position of SecretaryGeneral is particularly noteworthy in that regard.
The General Assembly revitalization process has
also led to other positive developments, for example,
the thematic debates, which facilitate more in-depth
discussions on current issues of critical importance to
the international community. The EU and its member
States especially value the interactive character of the
thematic debates, which enable the General Assembly
to be more closely engaged with other stakeholders,
international and regional organizations and groups
outside the United Nations system. We look forward to
the continuation of that practice and invite the President
to consult with Member States on the possibilities,
where appropriate and in the spirit of partnerships, of
engaging a broad range of stakeholders and achieving
result-oriented outcomes in such debates. We also
recognize the importance of interaction between
the General Assembly and international or regional
forums and organizations dealing with global matters
of concern to the international community, and the
benefits that such interaction yields.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s continued
practice of holding periodic informal briefings on his
priorities, travels and most recent activities, including
his participation in international meetings and events
organized outside the United Nations, and encourage
him to continue that practice.
As to the relationship of the General Assembly to
the other principal organs of the United Nations, the EU
and its member States believe that the strengthening of
transparency and cooperation remains an important
goal. The General Assembly should benefit from
information about the meetings between the Presidents
of the General Assembly, the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council and the Chairs of
subsidiary bodies.
On the issue of working methods, we wish to
recall the need to consider and take steps aimed at
rationalizing the agenda of the General Assembly and
of the Economic and Social Council with a view to
eliminating duplication and overlap, and promoting
complementarity in the consideration and negotiation
of similar and related issues. In that context, it is
important to recall resolution 68/1. We believe that the

A/70/PV.45

biennialization and triennialization of items should
be further examined, as well as their clustering or
elimination, including through the introduction of a
sunset clause, with the clear consent of the sponsoring
State or States. In that regard, the leadership shown by
the Chairs and the Bureaus of the Main Committees is
of great importance. Let me highlight, in particular, the
efforts of the Chairs of the Main Committees during
the sixty-ninth session to improve working methods
in the Committees. Their joint letter, dated 13 April,
with specific proposals to streamline working methods
proved most helpful in making further progress in
that area. We look forward to continuing that very
constructive work with the Main Committee Chairs
during the seventieth session, and look forward to their
briefings to the Ad Hoc Working Group in the spring.
We note with appreciation the constructive debate
on the working methods of the Second Committee,
which was held on 9 October. We are encouraged by
the general recognition of the need for the Second
Committee to respond comprehensively and coherently
to the proposals in the recently adopted 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1). We fully
support the ongoing efforts of the Chairs to collect
ideas and propose ways forward in that endeavour, in
line with resolution 69/321 on the revitalization of the
work of the Assembly. We welcome similar initiatives
by the Chair of the Third Committee during the present
session.
Although each Main Committee has its own
authority over its rules of procedure, we believe that
streamlining and standardizing the rules would lead to
more efficient work on the part of the Committees. We
would like to stress as well the importance of making
full use of e-services provided by the Secretariat. The
widespread use by Main Committees and Member States
alike of such e-services, including the PaperSmart
portal, has had a positive impact on the work of the
General Assembly during its main session, while it has
also saved considerable amount of resources, energy
and paper. We have to continue to work in that direction.
We look forward to the active roles of the SecretaryGeneral, the President — including in his role as Chair
of the General Committee — and the Chairs of the
Main Committees, in consultation with Member States,
to enhance the coordination of the scheduling of highlevel meetings with a view to optimizing their number
and distribution throughout the year, while bearing in
mind the need to preserve the integrity of the general

15-347037/27

A/70/PV.45

debate. We believe that the General Committee could
play a useful role in that process.
We would also like to stress the importance of
implementing all General Assembly resolutions,
including those on the revitalization of the Assembly’s
work. The implementation of the resolutions will have
a positive impact on the Assembly’s authority and
efficiency. The revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly is clearly interlinked with overall United
Nations reform.
With regard to the functions of the Office of the
President, efforts to strengthen the institutional memory
of the Office remain of great importance and benefit
us all. To that end, efforts to encourage cooperation
between incumbent and incoming Presidents of the
General Assembly could prove most useful. Given
the evolving work load of the General Assembly, the
EU and its member States are firmly committed to
identifying and implementing possible rationalization
and improvements in the definition of the President’s
role. That would be in support of the work of the General
Assembly and the effective and efficient functioning of
the Office. Strengthening the role and authority of the
President also requires practical steps to strengthen the
Office’s resources and ability to effectively accomplish
its tasks. In that regard, we would welcome innovative
ideas that correspond with the need for budgetary
restraint and transparency.
Resolution 69/321 encourages the President of
the General Assembly to continue the practice of
periodically briefing Member States on his or her
activities, including official travel. We see that as both
a valuable source of information and an important
act of transparency for the Member States. The
President of the General Assembly presides over the
principal United Nations organ, with its universal
membership, and his Office must embody transparency
and accountability for all stakeholders, especially as
the President represents all Member States at official
meetings and during official travel.
Finally, let me emphasize the important role played
by the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization
of the Work of General Assembly. I would like to
assure everyone that the EU and its member States
will continue to engage constructively in the Ad Hoc
Working Group’s proceedings. We look forward to
receiving a work plan soon.

8/27

03/11/2015

Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), comprising 10 member States,
namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Vietnam and my own
country, Malaysia. ASEAN also aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Algeria on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
At the outset, let me congratulate Mr. Vladimir
Drobnjak, Permanent Representative of Croatia, and
Mr. Wilfried Emvula, Permanent Representative of
Namibia, on their re-appointment as the Co-Chairs of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly during the seventieth
session. We would also like to express our appreciation
for their stewardship in facilitating the Ad Hoc
Working Group’s work during the previous session.
ASEAN is pleased with the progress made during
their co-chairmanship, particularly resolution 69/321,
which was adopted on 11 September. We also commend
Mr. Sam Kutesa, the President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-ninth session, for his commitment to moving
the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
forward.
The recent seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations provided an opportunity to further reinvigorate
and revitalize the United Nations. A revitalized United
Nations will make the Organization more effective,
transparent and inclusive. The United Nations will
then be better equipped to respond to the needs of
Member States. We should all work together to ensure
that the General Assembly plays its role as the chief
deliberative, policy-making and representative organ of
the United Nations. I will highlight several keys issues
that deserve special consideration during the seventieth
session.
First, we welcome the reaffirmation in resolution
69/321 of the importance and benefits of continuing the
interaction between the United Nations and regional
forums, particularly the political declaration on
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations of 5 May
2015 (resolution 69/277).
ASEAN has made great strides as a regional
organization. This year is particularly significant, as the
ASEAN Economic Community will be established at
the end of the year. ASEAN looks forward to enhancing

15-34703

03/11/2015

its interaction and cooperation with the United Nations
aimed at addressing issues of common interest and
concern. We hope that follow-up on concrete measures
or actions will continue in that important direction set
by the General Assembly.
Secondly, ASEAN welcomes the General
Assembly’s adoption of resolution 68/307 in 2014,
on the conduct of the elections of the non-permanent
members of the Security Council and the members of
the Economic and Social Council about six months
before the newly elected members assume their
responsibilities. We support the current practice of the
Security Council of inviting its newly elected members
to observe some of its meetings and activities prior
to assuming their responsibilities. That will certainly
provide appropriate opportunities for newly elected
non-permanent members to prepare for their tenure in
the Council.
Thirdly, with regard to the selection and appointment
of the Secretary-General, ASEAN believes that the
agreement reached in resolution 69/321 should be
implemented faithfully in order to ensure a transparent
and inclusive selection process. In that regard, we join
other Member States in requesting the Presidents of both
the General Assembly and the Security Council to start
the process of soliciting candidates for the position of
Secretary-General through a joint letter addressed to all
Member States, requesting that candidates be presented
in a timely manner. As we work towards the election
and appointment of the next Secretary-General in 2016,
ASEAN looks forward to receiving a clear description
of the entire process, including a clear time line for
the selection process and the schedule for informal
dialogues between Member States and the candidates.
We request that the Presidents of the General Assembly
and the Security Council jointly circulate the names of
individuals who have been nominated as candidates for
Secretary-General on an ongoing basis to all Member
States.
To further enhance accountability and transparency,
we also encourage open Security Council meetings,
including Arria-formula meetings, with the shortlisted candidates, and regular briefings by the Security
Council on the progress of the nomination process.
Last but not least, we look forward to strengthening
the institutional memory of the Office of the President.
We are pleased that resolution 69/321 has emphasized
the need to ensure, from within agreed resources,

A/70/PV.45

that the Office of the President is allocated dedicated
Secretariat staff. The staff will be responsible for
coordinating the transition between Presidents,
managing interaction between the President and the
Secretary-General and preserving the institutional
memory in a timely manner.
We also welcome Member States that have seconded
members of their staffs from their respective Missions
to assist and strengthen the Office of the President in
discharging its mandates. ASEAN joins other Member
States in encouraging frequent engagement between
the President-elect of the General Assembly and
the Council of Presidents. The Presidents-elect may
benefit from the experiences of former Presidents in
terms of best practices and lessons learned. In further
strengthening institutional memory, we encourage the
outgoing Presidents of the General Assembly to transmit
a summary of their work during their terms of office
to their successors. We also encourage the holding of
a structured and constructive exchange of experiences
between them during the three-month transition period.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the continuing
commitment of ASEAN to engage constructively with
other Member States in the deliberations of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly during the Assembly’s seventieth
session. We are confident that, with the political will of
all Member States, we will be able to reach consensus
and a concrete outcome.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group. The cross-regional ACT
group is comprised of 25 small and mid-size countries
working together to improve the working methods of
the Security Council.
The ACT group would like commend all Member
States for their commitment to the negotiation process
and for the spirit of compromise and flexibility exhibited
during the negotiations on resolution 69/321, and we
wish, in that connection, to thank the Co-Chairs of the
Ad Hoc Working Group, the Ambassadors of Croatia
and Namibia, for their excellent work and dedication.
We wish to stress the importance of the effective and
substantiated communication between the permanent
members of the Security Council and the wider
membership during the negotiations on the resolution on
the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
The ACT group is pleased with the outcome and the

15-347039/27

A/70/PV.45

consensual adoption of that resolution on 11 September,
which has also established a structured process for the
selection of the next Secretary-General.
Of course, as mentioned by the previous President of
the General Assembly at the adoption of the resolution,
implementation is the key. Over the years, we have
seen many resolutions passed and not implemented on
the issue of selecting the next Secretary-General. We
must change that. As a first step, a joint letter by the
Presidents of the General Assembly and the Security
Council should be sent to all Member States calling for
nominations. We would hope to receive such a letter in
the coming weeks in order to kick off the whole process
before the end of the year. The President of the General
Assembly has received a very strong mandate from
resolution 69/321 on revitalization, and the elements of
the letter are also outlined therein. Now we are looking
forward to the Council’s doing its part. In that regard,
we were pleased to hear about the informal discussion
that the Security Council had under the New Zealand
presidency in July and are hopeful that preparations to
send out the letter are being made as we speak.
Within a much wider picture, our main concern
should be to ensure that the best candidates will come
forward and be considered based on specific selection
criteria. In 1945-1946, the Preparatory Commission
of the United Nations said that the Secretary-General,
more than anyone else, would stand for the United
Nations as a whole. We would like to ensure that all
Members States, as well as the wider international
community, have the possibility to hear the candidates’
visions and to interact with them.
In addition, we believe that, after 70 years, the time
has come to be even more innovative. We are, therefore,
of the opinion that, in making the final decision, due
regard should be given to equal and fair geographical
and gender balance. We are also looking forward to a
thorough discussion during this session on the duration
of the term in office of the Secretary-General, including
the option of a single, non-renewable term.
Mr. Yadav (India): I am honoured to address the
General Assembly on behalf of India at today’s debate.
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting.
At the outset, allow me to align myself with the
statement made by the representative of Algeria on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

10/27

03/11/2015

I would like to congratulate Mr. Wilfred Emvula,
the Permanent Representative of Namibia, and
Mr. Vladimir Drobnjak, Permanent Representative
of Croatia, upon their reappointments as co-Chairs of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly and to wish them
success in that endeavour. They also deserve our deep
appreciation for the good work they did during the
previous session.
As we mark the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations, the issue of United Nations reform, including
the revitalization of the General Assembly and the
reform of the Security Council, has assumed particular
significance. We must heed the call for United Nations
reform made by a large number of world leaders during
the recent general debate held at the beginning of the
seventieth session of the Assembly.
In his statement at the Security Council’s annual
debate on working methods on 20 October, the President
of the General Assembly said,
“[i]t would be remiss of me to conclude without
addressing the issue of Security Council
reform — arguably one of the most discussed issues
within the United Nations and beyond, over many
decades. As was underlined by a large number of
world leaders during this session’s general debate,
this topic is of central importance to a large majority
of the membership.” (S/PV.7539, p. 5)
We note with regret that an ineffective Security
Council has led to huge human costs in terms of wars and
conflicts, which the international community cannot
justify. The figures speak for themselves, especially the
huge figure of more than 60 million people affected by
the malfunctioning of the Security Council.
It is our firm believe that urgent and comprehensive
reform of the United Nations is imperative in order
to make the Organization reflective of the current
geopolitical realities and enhance its capability to meet
the increasingly complex and pressing transnational
challenges of our time. While we are happy that
resolution 69/321, adopted on 11 September, has
highlighted some of the important steps required on
our collective journey towards a revitalized General
Assembly, we firmly believe that we still have a great
distance to cover. Meanwhile, the full implementation
of that resolution is imperative.

15-34703

03/11/2015

We believe that the General Assembly will not be
empowered merely by strengthening procedures and
streamlining working methods. It will be empowered
only if its position as the chief deliberative, policymaking and representative organ of the United Nations
under Article 10 of the Charter is respected in letter and
spirit. That requires that the General Assembly should
take the lead in setting the global agenda and restoring
the centrality of the United Nations in formulating
multilateral approaches to resolving transnational
issues. In particular, revitalization must restore the
primacy of the United Nations in development matters.
We would like to make three points in that regard.
First of all, it is critical that the issue of preventing
encroachment upon the mandate of the General
Assembly and making the Security Council more
respectful of the mandates of other bodies be addressed.
The encroachment by the Security Council on issues
that traditionally fall within the purview of the General
Assembly are of particular concern. Moreover, the
holding of thematic debates on issues that frequently
fall within the purview of the General Assembly or the
Economic and Social Council also remains an area of
concern. The balance between the principal organs of
the United Nations, as stipulated by the Charter, must
be respected and maintained.
Secondly, one of the more important issues before
the United Nations in the coming year will be the
selection of the next Secretary-General. There is a
great deal of debate on the prerogatives of the Security
Council and the General Assembly in that matter. At
the heart of the debate, however, is the question of the
prerogatives of the P-5, as opposed to those of the rest
of the membership of the United Nations. And that, to a
large extent, is determined by something as seemingly
innocuous as the working methods of the Council.
My delegation has advocated strongly for the
Security Council to recommend the names of two
or more candidates to the General Assembly. While
the pronouncements of the General Assembly do not
specifically provide for that, there is, in our view,
no legal impediment that would prevent the Security
Council from taking such an action. The General
Assembly, as the voice of the international community,
must be given greater say in the selection of the next
Secretary-General. That is in the interests of the United
Nations system in general and of the Assembly’s
prerogatives in particular. It is in our collective interest
to select the most appropriate next chief executive of the

A/70/PV.45

United Nations as we begin to implement the ambitious
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1).
Thirdly, the Assembly and the other entities that
form part of the United Nations system must reflect
best practices in their day-to-day functioning. That
will require a review of the way in which the Assembly
conducts its business and the adoption of best practices.
In our view, the primacy of the Assembly flows from
the universality of its membership as well as from the
diligent application of the principle of sovereign equality
of all its members. Ownership of the Assembly’s
decisions and activities is, therefore, reflected in the
degree of participation by Member States. Member
States must, therefore, have the political will to take
concrete measures to reinforce the role and authority of
the Assembly.
In conclusion, let me re-emphasize the need to
discuss substantive measures that would strengthen
the role of the General Assembly as the chief
deliberative, policy-making and representative body
of the international community. You can count on my
delegation’s constructive support and participation in
those efforts.
Mrs. Dieguez Lao (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): The
Cuban delegation aligns itself with the comprehensive
statement made by the representative of Algeria on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, but
I would like nonetheless to make a few remarks in my
national capacity.
First of all, we are grateful to the co-Chairs of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly for drafting their report
on the issues and the efforts undertaken to further the
process of revitalization during the previous session of
the Assembly. We would also like to congratulate them
on their re-election to lead the Working Group.
There will never be a genuine reform of the
United Nations without far-reaching revitalization
of the General Assembly, and that, in our view,
will be possible only by bolstering the democratic,
participatory character of the body through the full
exercise by the 193 Member States of the powers
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. The
Assembly must recover and strengthen its deliberative,
normative and policy-making functions in accordance
with the powers stipulated by the Charter and in the
multiple resolutions and declarations agreed on in the

15-3470311/27

A/70/PV.45

United Nations. In order to guarantee the ongoing trust
of the international community in the United Nations,
as well as its legitimacy, the Organization must truly
respond to the collective interests of its Member States.
The main problem of the Organization lies in the
failure to implement many of the numerous resolutions
of the General Assembly, which constitute an important
normative corpus that remains largely inert, because the
implementation of resolutions depends on the political
will of States with the political, military and economic
power to apply them. The resolutions on the topic that
concerns us today have unfortunately not escaped that
fate. Their level of implementation remains extremely
limited.
Cuba stresses the need for an appropriate balance
among the major organs of the United Nations, in
accordance with the Charter, and calls for a halt to
the growing and dangerous tendency of the Security
Council to encroach on the Assembly’s sphere of action.
Revitalizing the General Assembly cannot be
a bureaucratic process. In the wise words of Father
Miguel d’Escoto, of the sister Republic of Nicaragua,
in his farewell address as President of the General
Assembly at the sixty-third session, “Revitalization is
a political rather than a technical issue” (A/63/PV.105,
p. 29). We hope that the revitalization process will
enhance the interaction between the Secretariat and the
General Assembly so that the Secretariat can respond
in a more effective manner to the mandates that are
determined by the Member States. We also hope that
the process will strengthen the Office of the President
of the General Assembly and wish to convey our full
support to the President.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
As part of its work, the Ad Hoc Working Group on
the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly
must exercise strict control over the implementation of
the relevant General Assembly resolutions, continually
overseeing and updating the inventory chart of all the
resolutions relating to the revitalization of the work of
the General Assembly. We now have a large body of
legislation on the revitalization of this principal organ.
We recognize the advances that have been made, but
much remains to be done.
We will not have an Organization that responds
effectively to the system of contemporary international

12/27

03/11/2015

relations unless we reform the Security Council and
make the General Assembly the centre of multilateral
discussion and work.
Cuba wishes to reaffirm its commitment to
continuing to participate constructively in the
upcoming meetings of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): Pakistan aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of Algeria
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We congratulate Ambassadors Emvula and Drobnjak
on their reappointment as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of
the General Assembly. It is a fitting recognition of their
success during the sixty-ninth session.
The General Assembly has been working diligently
on its mandated tasks. It played a landmark and seminal
role in the design and development of the post-2015
development agenda. The implementation of the new
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development will put the
General Assembly at the centre of decision-making.
The roles and mandates of the General Assembly and
the Security Council have been defined clearly by the
Charter of the United Nations. Encroachment by any
Charter body on the role of another must be avoided. The
Charter provides the General Assembly with enormous
space for playing its role. The General Assembly should
use that space optimally. It has a leadership role to play,
for example, on peacekeeping, by using the full potential
of its Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
In addition, it has undertaken ground-breaking work in
a number of fields from human rights to development
to international law. Resorting to the Uniting for Peace
mechanism, when necessary, enables the Assembly to
leave an indelible imprint on international peace and
security.
Two-way communication between the Council
and the Assembly should not remain merely symbolic
and cosmetic but should become substantive and
consequential. We have proposed a number of small
steps that could improve that communication. First, the
Presidents of the Assembly and the Council should add
substance to their largely pro forma monthly meetings
by discussing collaboration between them, based on the
agendas of the two bodies. Secondly, the annual reports
of the Council to the Assembly should be made more
analytical, and the General Assembly’s views should
feed back into the Council’s work. Last year’s letter from

15-34703

03/11/2015

the President of the Assembly in response to the report
of the Security Council was a beginning. Thirdly there
should be better scrutiny and evaluation of the Council’s
work by the general membership. Finally, the Ad Hoc
Working Group, the intergovernmental negotiations
for Security Council reform and the General Assembly
itself should work with the Security Council and its
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions to refine and improve the Security
Council’s working methods to make it more accountable
and transparent for the general membership.
Security Council reform provides us with an
opportunity to enhance the relationship between the
General Assembly and the Security Council. The
Security Council undertakes the responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
on behalf of all the Member States, not in lieu of
them. Therefore, the Council should be accountable
to the wider membership of the General Assembly.
The only way in which this accountability can
be strengthened is through increasing the elected
membership of the Council. Moreover, in that process,
the General Assembly also needs to focus on increasing
representation as well as on other equally important
matters such as the veto, the size and working methods
of the Council, and regional representation. Adding
more permanent members to the Council will only
undermine its representative character and the principle
of accountability through democracy. We should pursue
the principle of the greatest good of the greatest number
by ensuring that all Member States — small, medium
and large — are adequately and equitably represented
in the reformed Council on the basis of fixed terms and
rotation. Council reform should reflect the aspirations
and interests of all, not the ambitions of a few.
The process of selecting and appointing the
new Secretary General has assumed even greater
significance this year. Transparency, inclusivity and
providing a say to the General Assembly would enhance
the legitimacy of the process as well as the office. We
made good progress on the issue last year and need to
continue on that path.
The implementation of resolutions is critical. And
this requires the political will of Member States as well
as adequate resources. The selective implementation of
resolutions, by design or by default, must be avoided. As
spelled out in resolution 69/231, Member States should
be briefed by the Secretary-General about the status of
implementation. Updating the inventory of resolutions

A/70/PV.45

should be further improved by including information
on reasons for non-implementation and delays.
The revitalization of the General Assembly and the
faithful implementation of its decisions would act as
a force multiplier in empowering the United Nations
to resolve difficult issues of peace and security,
development and human rights. We look forward to a
substantive and constructive debate on the subject and
assure the co-Chairs of our cooperation and support.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would 1ike to start
by thanking the President for his initiative on the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
Both in his acceptance statement (see A/69/PV.94) and
in his statement at the opening of the seventieth session
of the Assembly (see A/70/PV.1), he emphasized the
importance of revitalizing the General Assembly. Japan
completely shares his views.
Seventy years have now elapsed since the
establishment of the United Nations. In addition to
Security Council reform, to which Japan attaches high
priority, revitalizing the General Assembly is a crucial
component of the reform agenda. We must make steady
progress towards achievable and realistic results on this
item.
We learned with deep shock and sadness the news
that the President of the General Assembly at the sixtyeighth session was arrested in early October by United
States authorities. According to media reports, Mr. Ashe
took payments from a developer based in Macau using
his official position. These unprecedented and serious
allegations have severely damaged the prestige and
reputation of the United Nations worldwide. I say it with
regret because Mr. Ashe was a very active president. He
made efforts to advance such issues as climate change
and sustainable development.
As the President stated at the press conference on
6 October, corruption has no place at the United Nations
or anywhere else. I am very encouraged that he, as
President of the General Assembly and coming from
Denmark, which is consistently ranked as the most
transparent country in the world, is fully committed
to restoring the integrity and credibility of the United
Nations. Before coming here today, I wanted to ask
him to share with us some of the measures that may be
considered on this matter. I was therefore very pleased
and encouraged to hear that he has already taken
concrete steps on the code of conduct for the President.

15-3470313/27

A/70/PV.45

On 8 October, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
reiterated a similar message on corruption and
requested that the Office of Internal Oversight Services
(OIOS) undertake an investigation. We welcome his
quick action and hope that the OIOS report will be
issued at the earliest possible date. I also wish to thank
the Secretary-General for the very strong message he
delivered this morning on this matter. Based on the
President’s proposals and on input from the SecretaryGeneral, I would like the Working Group, in coming
sessions, to consider how the Office of the President of
the General Assembly is run.
This case reminded us that the flow of money from
and into the Office of the President of the General
Assembly is not fully transparent. In particular, we
have no information about how voluntary contributions
from Member States and private sources are used. The
transparency of the money flow should be one of the
points considered by the Working Group.
With regard to the revitalization of the work of
the General Assembly, Japan welcomes the adoption
of resolution 69/321, which was the fruit of long and
difficult negotiations. I would like to express my sincere
gratitude to the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group during the previous session — the Permanent
Representatives of Croatia and Namibia — for their
chairmanship. We welcome their reappointment as
co-Chairs of the Working Group for the current session
and are looking forward to closely collaborating with
them again.
We achieved a lot in the previous session and, at
this juncture, can concentrate on steadily implementing
this cornerstone resolution and addressing the issues
that were postponed to the current session. With regard
to the selection of the Secretary-General, the resolution
requests the Presidents of the General Assembly and the
Security Council to circulate a joint letter containing a
description of the entire process and inviting candidates
to be presented in a timely manner. We hope that the
letter will be issued as soon as possible.
At the previous session, the idea of changing the
current method of selecting the Secretary-General
by encouraging the Security Council to recommend
more than one candidate to the General Assembly was
proposed and intensely debated. From the viewpoint
of transparency, we believe that the most important
point is to ensure the accountability of the Security
Council in its choice of a candidate. We have to choose

14/27

03/11/2015

as Secretary-General the best candidate, the one who
meets the highest standards of efficiency, competence
and integrity. It is desirable that we have as wide a
range of candidates as possible, including women. In
this regard, Japan supports paragraph 38 of resolution
69/321, which invites Member States to consider
presenting women as candidates for the position of
Secretary-General.
In October, Japan was elected to the Security
Council as a non-permanent member, supported by an
overwhelming majority of Member States. I thank them
once again for their support. Since being elected, we
have two and half months before we join the Council
on 1 January. Although it will be the eleventh time that
Japan has the honour to serve on the Council and, for
myself, the second time, I feel that two and a half months
is a very short time in which to prepare for Council
membership. I believe that the decision contained in
resolution 68/307 to move the dates for electing new
members of the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council to June will achieve the intended goal
of giving new members more time to prepare for their
membership.
This year the General Assembly has 173 agenda
items to consider. I think it is clear that streamlining
the agenda has become an urgent issue. In order to
avoid duplication, some agenda items — of the Second
Committee, for example — could be reviewed and
integrated in the light of the holistic nature of the new
2030 Sustainable Development Agenda (resolution
70/1). Japan has already submitted such a proposal to
the bureau of the Second Committee. Furthermore,
enhancing discipline and fairness in the management
of this body remains an important topic for discussion.
In this context, I have one point to make: I believe that
when the representative of a member State delivers a
statement on behalf of a group, the representatives of
member States belonging to that group and wishing
to speak in their national capacity should do so, in
principle, after all others with national statements
whose countries are not associated with a group have
spoken.
I would like to conclude my statement by reaffirming
that Japan stands ready to support the President of the
General Assembly and contribute in a constructive
manner to the discussions on the revitalization of the
work of the General Assembly, with a view to further
enhancing the effectiveness and transparency of the
United Nations.

15-34703

03/11/2015

Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): My delegation joins
others in thanking the President of the General
Assembly for convening today’s important joint
debate and in congratulating Ambassador Drobnjak of
Croatia and Ambassador Emvula of Namibia for their
reappointment as Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group for the seventieth session.
Indonesia associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Algeria and Malaysia
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, respectively.
There has been progress on numerous fronts
since a dedicated agenda item on the revitalization of
the work of the General Assembly was first included
in the agenda, which was at the forty-sixth session
of the Assembly, in 1991. Deliberations on this issue
have led to the introduction of a number of practices
in the Assembly aimed at enhancing the Assembly’s
effectiveness in performing its role and in fulfilling its
mandate.
The streamlining and reorganization of the
Assembly’s agenda under thematic headings has
given it greater focus. Improved working methods, the
earlier election of the non-permanent members of the
Security Council and the members of the Economic
and Social Council and the strengthening of the Office
of the President of the General Assembly are among
the deliberations’ outcomes that have enabled the
Assembly to achieve higher prominence. The practice
of convening the members of the General Assembly for
high-level debates on crucial global peace, security and
development challenges have demonstrated how the
Assembly can cultivate greater common understanding
on shared challenges and how Member States can
deploy their collective wisdom and experience for the
greater good of humankind. That has enhanced the
Assembly’s relevance.
The latest resolution on revitalizing the work of the
General Assembly, resolution 69/321, has once again
taken the work of revitalizing the work of the Assembly
to a higher level. It further paves the way for a closer
collaboration between the Assembly and the Council, in
particular on the selection and appointment of the next
Secretary-General. My delegation, however, strongly
feels that more needs to be done to enable the Assembly
to fulfil its role and responsibility, as envisaged under
the Charter of the United Nations.

A/70/PV.45

In that context, my delegation would like to suggest
the following additional points by way of strengthening
our common endeavour of makinge the Assembly more
robust. First, the full implementation of resolution 69/321
must be ensured, with sharper focus on the selection
and appointment process of the next Secretary-General.
Collaboration between the Assembly and the Council
needs to be further strengthened in dealing with that
issue and to be expanded to other relevant areas in a
more meaningful way, according to the respective
areas of competence of those two principal organs of
the United Nations.
Secondly, the upcoming deliberations should focus
more intently on strengthening consultations between
the Assembly and the regional organizations on issues
of common interest, including in the fields of peace and
security, human rights and development. The Charter
rightly recognizes the role of the regional organizations.
They can provide useful regional perspectives, wisdom
and insights, as well as contribute positively to the work
of the Assembly and of the United Nations as a whole.
A more effective mechanism for consultations between
the Assembly and the regional organizations needs to
be further explored.
Thirdly, the role of the General Assembly in the area
of international peace and security should be reinforced
in keeping with its functions and competence. It should
take the lead in addressing issues of conflict prevention,
advancing the peaceful settlement of disputes and
searching for political solutions to conflicts, including
by improving peacekeeping and peacebuilding
architecture. We also believe that, having made a
commendable beginning, the Assembly can do much
more in such areas as terrorism by non-State actors,
human displacement, intercultural dialogue, promoting
coexistence between peoples and advancing democratic
traditions and practices.
Indonesia, for its part, will continue to suggest and
support practical ways of revitalizing the Assembly
so that, as the chief deliberative, policymaking and
representative United Nations organ, it can better meet
the expectations of the global citizenry today.
Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of Ecuador would like to
begin by expressing its gratitude to the Permanent
Representatives of Croatia and Namibia, Ambassadors
Emvula and Drobnjak, respectively, and to their
teams for the very wise, efficient and patient manner

15-3470315/27

A/70/PV.45

03/11/2015

in which they have been leading the work of the Ad
Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly. We would also like to
congratulate the President on his decision to reappoint
Ambassadors Emvula and Drobnjak as co-Chairs of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly. That will ensure
the continuity of our discussions and debates from the
previous session.

administrative officer of the Secretariat. We have also
introduced components favouring transparency in the
selection and appointment process of the SecretaryGeneral. They include coordination between the
Presidents of the General Assembly and the Security
Council at the time that the list of candidates is presented
and keeping Member States informed of who is on that
list. Moreover, informal meetings have been planned
between the General Assembly and these candidates.

Undoubtedly, with the adoption by consensus
of resolution 69/321 in September, we have been
able to make significant progress with respect to the
revitalization of the work of General Assembly. We have
once again acknowledged the work of the permanent
missions in the context of the effectiveness of the
General Assembly, and we have revisited the question
of holding an informal meeting of the Assembly to
analyse ways of improving the coordination between
those missions and the Secretariat. We are convinced
that in the coming months, we will be able to hold that
important meeting.

My delegation wishes to draw attention to
paragraph 38 of resolution 69/321, which invites
Member States to consider presenting women as
candidates for the position of Secretary-General. Given
that a number of countries have or have had women
as their Heads of State or Government, it is high time
for the United Nations to join them by appointing a
women to the post of Secretary-General. The important
measures involving transparency must be accompanied
by others aimed at reaffirming the active role that
the General Assembly must play in the process of
the selection and appointment of the next SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with Article 97 of the Charter.
It is particularly important for my delegation, therefore,
that pursuant to paragraph 44 of resolution 69/321,
we continue during the current session to discuss
and decide on several issues including, for example,
the optimal number of candidates that the General
Assembly should submit to the Security Council or the
duration of Secretary-General’s term.

We have also opened a channel for the Secretariat
to familiarize itself with the obstacles that States
encounter when implementing resolutions involving
the Secretariat. We have encouraged the Chairs and
Bureau members of the Main Committees to improve
their consultations with member States with the aim
of improving their work and have also stressed the
importance of respecting the predetermined date for
the opening of the annual general debate, in accordance
with the norms that the Assembly itself has established.
We have also requested a report from the SecretaryGeneral regarding the gender distribution and the
regional backgrounds of the executive heads and the
members of the Senior Management Group of the
Organization. This is a subject of particular importance
for my delegation, and we are waiting for the report to be
issued and intend to study it with a view to submitting
specific proposals.
Certainly, the question that has raised the most
interest, for obvious reasons, concerns the selection
and appointment of the next Secretary-General. In
the aforementioned resolution, resolution 69/321, we
reaffirmed the necessity of the full application of rule
141 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly
when appointing the Secretary-General, as this will
enable us to avoid any kind of automaticity when the
General Assembly exercises its exclusive prerogative,
pursuant to the Charter, of appointing the chief

16/27

Of course, we are committed to discussing and
exchanging views on those questions, with a view
to determining ways of democratizing the process
of selecting and appointing the Secretary-General,
including the next Secretary-General of the United
Nations, who will preferably be a woman. The aim of
our delegation, while serving on the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly, has been and still is to reaffirm the rights and
prerogatives of the General Assembly, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter, it being the
universal and most representative organ of the United
Nations, on which all Members States are represented
on an equal footing. We will maintain that position,
bearing in mind that we have a long road ahead of us
before we attain the objectives outlined. Our delegation
stands ready to continue to provide its support to the
President of the General Assembly.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): This
year marks the seventieth anniversary of the United

15-34703

03/11/2015

Nations. For the past 70 years, the United Nations has
consistently made efforts to maintain international
peace and security, to advance world development
and prosperity, and to promote coordination and
cooperation among all countries. For the past 70 years,
the United Nations has witnessed the exploratory and
practical efforts of Member States to safeguard peace,
build a homeland and seek cooperation. At this new
historic starting point, we should further reflect on
how the United Nations can play a bigger role in the
advancement of humankind in the twenty-first century,
so that the United Nations can better serve the people
of the United Nations.
The General Assembly comprises 193 Member
States and is the most universal and representative
Charter organ of the United Nations. It is also the main
organ for deliberating policy. The seventieth session
of the General Assembly is a session at which we can
build on the past and prepare for the future. It is of great
significance. It represents an important opportunity
for the United Nations to reposition itself and make
a fresh start. Member countries should work together
to revitalize the General Assembly by injecting a new
dynamism into its proceedings during this session,
with a view to further promoting and improving United
Nations efficiency and effectiveness. In that regard, I
wish to emphasize the following.
First, we should comprehensively implement the
outcomes of the United Nations summits with a view
to promoting progress in all areas of the work of the
General Assembly. The United Nations has held a
series of summits in the areas of development, of peace
and security and of women. All the summits have
achieved positive outcomes. This session of the General
Assembly should focus on the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1) and push the General Assembly to a higher level
of achievement.
Secondly, we should fully discharge the General
Assembly function of policy deliberation and continue
to improve the work of the General Assembly. The
Charter of the United Nations provides that the
General Assembly may discuss any questions or any
matters within the scope of the Charter and make
recommendations. The General Assembly should,
pursuant to the provisions of the Charter, improve its
division of labour and coordination with the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, with
each continuing to maximize its own advantages in their

A/70/PV.45

respective fields, while at the same time strengthening
coordination and cooperation to form a synergy.
The revitalization of the General Assembly is
in the common interest of all Member States and an
effort that China staunchly supports. China has taken
note of the efforts by the Ad Hoc Working Group
on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly to strengthen the role and the authority of the
General Assembly and improve its working methods.
China welcomes the reappointment of the Permanent
Representatives of Croatia and Namibia to co-chair
the Ad Hoc Working Group. We hope that, within the
framework of the Working Group, all parties will follow
the principles of democratic consultation and gradually
progress from easier issues to more difficult ones,
so as to steadily push forward the implementation of
resolution 69/321. China will work with other countries
in joint efforts to push for positive progress on the
important question of the revitalization of the work of
the General Assembly.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): The United
States would like to thank the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of
the General Assembly, the Permanent Representative
of Croatia, Ambassador Vladimir Drobnjak, and the
Permanent Representative of Namibia, Ambassador
Wilfried Emvula. Their significant contributions
to the General Assembly’s revitalization and their
even-handed management of the Working Group’s
negotiations over the past year allowed Member States
to reach consensus on a resolution with wide-ranging
positive implications for the Assembly’s work. We are
very pleased that they are returning to the helm this
year.
During the sixty-ninth session, the Working Group
discussed many issues of paramount importance to the
efficacy of the General Assembly with the process for
selecting the Secretary-General, a clear priority for
many Member States. The United States welcomed the
opportunity to work constructively with other members
towards increasing engagement and communication on
the process. In the past year, we achieved consensus
on resolution 69/321. That consensus will serve as a
strong basis for revitalization and includes significant,
concrete outcomes, particularly on the selection
process.
The selection of a new Secretary-General is always
an exciting time for the Organization. In our view,

15-3470317/27

A/70/PV.45

resolution 69/321 reflects the efforts of Member States
to work together constructively to address the selection
process, consistent with the clear and straightforward
directive set forth in Article 97 of the Charter of
the United Nations. We look forward to carefully
considering all candidates over the coming months.
Moving forward, the United States believes we
must refocus our efforts to increase the Assembly’s
efficiency, effectiveness and transparency. We must
streamline and prioritize the agenda with an eye to
removing outdated topics to allow more time to address
the pressing issues most in need of our attention.
We should also look to improve the practices
and working methods of the Main Committees.
These should be among the Working Group’s highest
priorities — tangible aspects of revitalization that will
result in real improvements for the work of the General
Assembly. We recognize that attention is also being
given to other aspects of the Organization’s work, such
as the working methods of the Security Council. These
are important topics, but we do not believe that they
should be the primary focus of the Working Group’s
efforts, particularly the working methods and other
issues within the Council’s remit. The Charter of the
United Nations makes clear the coequal relationship
between the two organs, which should be respected.
The United States is fully committed to multilateral
engagement and a strong United Nations system. We
look forward to working with all Members as we
continue to consider the best options for revitalizing
the General Assembly.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the convening of today’s meeting
of the General Assembly on revitalizing its work. I
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the
Permanent Representatives of Croatia and Namibia on
their reappointment to the posts of co-Chairs of the
Ad Hoc Working Group. We noted their work in those
positions during the sixty-ninth session.
We support realistic initiatives aimed at increasing
the effectiveness of the work of the General Assembly,
which to a large extent can be achieved by improving
the working methods of the General Assembly
and by reorganizing its agenda, which is currently
overburdened. We believe it is necessary to continue to
biennialize and triennialize some agenda items and to
delete those that are no longer relevant.

18/27

03/11/2015

We support the proposal to move the high-level
week of the general debate, because the Heads of State
and Government and the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
who are present in New York already have a busy diary
of bilateral events. During that period we should limit
the number of high-level events, and the rest should
be spread evenly over the whole period of the General
Assembly session. In that regard, we welcome the plan
of the President of the General Assembly to hold several
high-level thematic debates on important agenda items
next May. Of course, any reform initiative must be
based on strict respect for the relevant prerogatives of
the principal organs of the United Nations, as set out in
the Charter of the United Nations.
The election of the new Secretary-General is
approaching, and we hope that it will be conducted in
strict compliance with the provisions of the Charter,
according to which the Secretary-General is appointed
by the General Assembly on the recommendation of
the Security Council. It remains to be seen how the
platform of the General Assembly will be used during
the election campaign by the candidates for the post
of Secretary-General. We believe that the process
should not eclipse the substantive work of the General
Assembly. The best format for interaction between
candidates and Member States is still through regional
groupings.
And there is another aspect. We all recall that in
one of the resolutions of the General Assembly there is
a request that the Security Council should submit the
name of only one candidate to the General Assembly.
However, Russia does not exclude the possibility that the
Council may recommend more than one such candidate.
Such a variant should not present any difficulties for
the work that the members of the Security Council must
undertake.
In discussing issues that concern the revitalization
of the General Assembly, we have heard the Security
Council criticized for allegedly encroaching on the
prerogatives of other United Nations organs. We
share that concern. Our colleagues in the Security
Council well know that we show restraint with respect
to initiatives that draw the Security Council into
addressing issues of a general nature. We believe that
the Council should restrict itself to the country-based
issues and areas in which it can and must take practical
decisions. In fact, we have just prevented attempts
within the Security Council to discuss one of the
sustainable development agenda issues, as we believe

15-34703

03/11/2015

that to do so would be a clear example of encroaching
on the mandates of the Economic and Social Council
and the General Assembly. We believe that in such
cases the President of the General Assembly should
exercise the prerogatives of that body.
We note that the Security Council often holds open
debates that are of interest to many Member States and
that do not address issues of maintaining international
peace and security. We often have the impression that
the General Assembly has merged into the Security
Council. We believe that debates on such issues should
take place in the General Assembly, where all States
Members of the United Nations can speak on an equal
basis, giving greater impetus to the revitalization of the
General Assembly.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the President for his leadership
and to congratulate the Permanent Representatives of
Croatia and Namibia for the historic advance in the
recent resolution on the revitalization of the work of
the General Assembly. Their confirmation as co-Chairs
reaffirms our belief in the possibility of the concrete
and significant progress that remains to be achieved
and the certainty that positive results can be obtained
when Member States work with the shared goal of
improving this Organization with effectiveness, ethics
and transparency.
Colombia aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Algeria on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Resolution 69/321 strengthens four key elements
concerning the principal deliberative organ of the
United Nations: its role, its authority, its efficiency and
its effectiveness. In that regard, I would like to stress
the work of the General Assembly with respect to the
nomination, selection and designation of the person
who will succeed Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon at
the end of 2016 in a transparent and inclusive manner,
with changes that include, first, the circulation of a joint
letter from the Presidents of the General Assembly and
the Security Council, on which many delegations have
insisted; secondly, a timetable for the process; thirdly, a
list with the names of the candidates and their curricula
vitae that will enable all Member States to analyse the
experience and qualities of each; and, fourthly, the
holding of hearings, both formal and informal, in the
General Assembly such that all Member States without
exception, large and small, can interact with the

A/70/PV.45

candidates and experience the traditional trappings of a
democratic process, which have now been incorporated
into the election process of the United Nations.
A fifth element of immense importance to my
delegation is the inclusion, for the first time in the
Organization’s 70 years of existence, of a call to present
women as candidates for the highest post of global
diplomacy, which represents a genuine contribution by
the United Nations to the highest principles for which
it has fought in recent years, as President Lykketoft
himself noted in his statement this morning. In that
regard, I would like to recall the initiative, so far joined
by 50 countries, to create a group of friends in favour
of a woman candidate to be the next Secretary-General,
prompted by the conviction that in 11 months we will
be making history.
Achievements such as those set out in the recently
adopted resolution 69/321, on the revitalization of the
work of theGeneral Assembly, are certainly important,
but they do not imply that the work of strengthening
the principal deliberative organ of the United Nations
has been fully realized. As both the President and
the Secretary-General have stressed, tasks still to be
accomplished and on which we should make headway
during this session include increasing cooperation
and integration among organs and maximizing the
efficient use of resources. There needs to be equitable
representation and geographical distribution within
the United Nations, and both working methods and
accountability need to be improved across the diverse
structures that form the system to make them more
efficient, but also more transparent, credible and
legitimate, in order to respond to the challenges in the
agendas on development, security and human rights.
Colombia firmly believes that such steps will
enable us to achieve a revitalized General Assembly
that will be more capable of fulfilling the mandate that
Member States have entrusted to it of promoting among
nations, on the basis of respect, the principle of equal
rights and universal peace.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): Egypt fully associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Algeria on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
I thank the President for convening this important
meeting on agenda items 119 and 120. I am also pleased
by the reappointment of the Permanent Representatives
of Croatia and Namibia as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of

15-3470319/27

A/70/PV.45

the General Assembly. I congratulate them on their
remarkable achievements during the past session,
and I assure them of my delegation’s full support and
cooperation in addressing the important tasks ahead of
us this year.
Given the central role of the General Assembly as
the chief deliberative, policymaking and representative
organ of the United Nations, Egypt believes that the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
is an integral part of the broader efforts aimed at
strengthening the entire Organization. Improving the
efficiency and effectiveness of the Assembly is indeed
an essential step towards creating an Organization that
is more democratic, inclusive and capable of effectively
undertaking its responsibilities, as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. Ensuring the
implementation of its resolutions, including those
related to revitalization, is critical to enhancing the role
and authority of the General Assembly. In this context,
Egypt welcomes the adoption of resolution 69/321 and
stresses the importance of fully implementing all its
provisions.
Thanks to the diligent efforts of the Working Group,
important improvements have been introduced to the
working methods of the General Assembly, notably the
early election of the members of the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council, six months prior
to their assumption of responsibilities. This is in effect
in the current session of the General Assembly, with
the aim of enabling them to prepare sufficiently for
their new tasks. There is a need to continue improving
the working methods of the General Assembly,
and particularly its Main Committees, to ensure an
efficient management and effective conduct of their
steadily increasing workloads, and first and foremost
to sufficiently empower the office of the President with
the resources and staffing to enable it to implement its
challenging task.
The challenges facing the United Nations
today — from combating terrorism and maintaining
peace to achieving sustainable development and
addressing the root causes of conflicts — are daunting.
Meeting them requires enhanced cooperation among
the principal organs of the United Nations in a mutually
reinforcing and complementary relationship, while
respecting the balance among their respective functions
and mandates, as enshrined in the Charter.

20/27

03/11/2015

The open debate on the working methods of the
Security Council held on 20 October (see S/PV.7539), in
the presence and with the contribution of the Presidents
of the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, demonstrated the desire of the wider
membership for enhanced cooperation among these
bodies to ensure a more holistic approach to sustaining
peace and to forge stronger linkages among the three
pillars of the work of the United Nations. In that regard,
Egypt welcomes the Security Council’s adoption of
its first-ever presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/19)
focused entirely on its working methods, in which
the Council underscored the importance of increased
coordination, cooperation and interaction among the
principal organs of the United Nations.
Lastly, I wish to address the issue of the appointment
of the new Secretary-General. Egypt believes that the
landmark resolution 69/321, which was adopted by
consensus in September, paves the way for a predictable,
transparent and merit-based selection process. The
resolution addresses some of the multiple imperfections
that have negatively impacted the selection process for
the past 70 years. Our collective responsibility now is
to ensure its timely and effective implementation. We
are mindful that some very important aspects of this
process remain subject to further consideration during
the current session. We are hopeful that the same spirit
of understanding and accommodation that led to the
adoption of resolution 69/321 by consensus will guide
the next phase of our work.
As an elected member of the Security Council,
and through its membership of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly, Egypt will exert its utmost efforts to
guarantee that the process will be inclusive, open and
democratic, and that the voices of all Members will be
heard and duly considered throughout the process.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): My delegation fully
associates itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Algeria on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Allow me to congratulate the co-Chairs of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly on the four thematic
issues during this seventieth session. We welcome the
reappointment of the Ambassadors of Namibia and
Croatia to steer the ship.

15-34703

03/11/2015

My delegation wishes to reiterate its strong
belief that the General Assembly remains the main
deliberative, policymaking and representative organ
of the United Nations, and that it is our responsibility
as Member States to ensure that the Assembly remains
relevant and responsive to the needs of the populations
we serve. It is therefore appropriate that during this
seventieth session the General Assembly, through
the Ad Hoc Working Group, should again discuss the
critical issue of the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General and other executive heads with
renewed vigour.
South Africa fully endorses the urgent, near
universal call of the membership, as voiced by several
groups, including the Non-Aligned Movement, for the
appointment process for the next Secretary-General
finally breaks from the antiquated process established
by resolution 11 (I) of 1946. It is time for the most
representative Organization in the world to appoint
its chief administrative officer through a transparent
and inclusive process, with due consideration for
pre-established selection criteria, gender equality and
geographic representation. That can be achieved only if
the process of selecting and appointing the SecretaryGeneral becomes more structured and starts with a call
for applications.
In this modern day and age, such appointment
stipulations are critical to ensuring that the best
candidate for the position is selected and that the
Secretary-General can be held accountable to the
General Assembly and not only to a select few. To
that end, we call for a joint letter by the Presidents
of the General Assembly and the Security Council to
officially launch the selection process by describing
the process and inviting candidates to be presented in a
timely manner. A list of the selection criteria, including
proven leadership and managerial abilities, extensive
experience in international relations and strong
diplomatic, communication and multilingual skills, is
a prerequisite.
We request that the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Security Council continuously
update the curricula vitae of prospective candidates
and that they avail themselves of the opportunity for
informal dialogue with the broader membership of the
Organization. There is above all a strong need for the
appointment of a Secretary-General who embodies the
highest standards of efficiency, competency, integrity
and a strong commitment to the principles and purposes

A/70/PV.45

of the Charter of the United Nations, together with the
values and objectives of the Organization.
This year, which marks the seventieth anniversary
of the establishment of the United Nations, provides a
seminal opportunity for Member States to reinvigorate
the Organization as a whole and to continue our
efforts for the revitalization of the General Assembly.
The General Assembly’s role, authority and working
methods must be strengthened to restore its rightful
place at the centre of the global governance system.
In addition to emphasizing the issues of greater
transparency and inclusiveness, South Africa shares
the view strongly held by many Member States that
the General Assembly should be given a prominent
role on all critical issues, including the selection and
appointment processes for the new Secretary-General,
that goes beyond merely rubber-stamping the choice of
a select few Members of the United Nations.
We do not share the view expressed by a small
minority of States that it is premature at this stage
to discuss the selection and appointment of the next
Secretary-General. In that regard, South Africa
expresses its hope that the Council’s discussion will
result in full engagement with the General Assembly.
The broad interest in the issue and the fervour with
which the important matter has repeatedly been raised
in the Ad Hoc Working Group in recent years attests
to the fact that the matter is urgent. We trust that the
urgency of our discussions will translate into a more
democratic process. Such a democratic process needs to
include a thorough consideration of the nomination of
multiple candidates for the post of Secretary-General,
as well as that of seriously considering a single term
limit for the next appointee.
In closing, my delegation looks forward to continued
rich discussion during this session on the issue and on
the other three core thematic issues: enhancing the role
and authority of the General Assembly, improving the
working methods of the Assembly, and strengthening
the institutional memory of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to express its immense gratitude to
the Permanent Representatives of Croatia and Namibia
for their effective conduct of the work of the Ad Hoc
Working Group during the past session. We assure
them of our full support in their future endeavours at
the current session.

15-3470321/27

A/70/PV.45

The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations
calls for a highly effective General Assembly as the key
deliberative, representative and policymaking organ
of the United Nations. We are facing new issues and
priorities that demand efficient working methods and
new approaches. Today more than ever, the General
Assembly must address the needs and interests of all
States, particularly those in vulnerable groups, such as
the least developed countries, small island developing
States and landlocked countries. My delegation would
like to present a few points for consideration.
The General Assembly, due to its comprehensive
membership, should be able to bring new, enhanced
perspectives to the issues of peace and security that
could add value to the Security Council’s work, with
the two organs working in close cooperation so that
they do not compete but rather complement each other.
Even though the General Assembly’s decisions are
not binding, it could facilitate speedy and sufficient
responses to challenges.
A revitalized General Assembly should be able
to meet the acute contemporary challenges of wars
and conflicts. Our central task in the twenty-first
century should be to implement a strategy that would
completely eliminate wars, their threats and causes.
For that purpose, President Nursultan Nazarbayev
of Kazakhstan proposed in the general debate of the
seventieth session (see A/70/PV.13) that by the United
Nations centenary in 2045, a global strategic initiative
plan should be agreed to pave the way for a world
totally free of conflicts, provide fair conditions for all
nations to have equal access to world infrastructure,
resources and markets, and maintain comprehensive
accountability for human development.
With peace, security, sustainable development,
human rights and gender equality becoming paramount
imperatives today, the General Assembly agenda will
have to be well conceived, structured and sequenced to
obtain optimal outcomes. Such clear delineation would
also strengthen the General Assembly’s authority and
standing. While trying to preserve the principle of
consensus, we should avoid weak resolutions and focus
debates on the substance rather than on the process.
In our striving for inclusion and integration, we must
ensure that results take us to a new level each time.
All General Assembly resolutions must be given due
attention so that they are implemented in a proper,
timely and inclusive manner.

22/27

03/11/2015

In addition, the General Assembly’s agenda should
be streamlined so as to avoid duplication and allow us
to concentrate on properly applying our time, efforts
and resources to core problems. It is therefore obvious
that the process of biennializing and triennializing
resolution cycles and the periodicity of agenda items
should be undertaken in an appropriate and balanced
way.
My delegation wants to underline the importance
of the General Assembly’s close collaboration with the
Secretariat for the purposes of internal coordination,
greater rationalization and streamlining the agenda
to avoid duplication with other bodies in the United
Nations system. Furthermore, serious consideration
must be given to the scheduling of high-level events,
both in terms of number and distribution throughout the
year, so as to ensure the highest level of participation,
the review of proposals and the monitoring of their
results and success.
My delegation wants to underline the importance of
the comprehensive institutional memory of the General
Assembly. In that regard, we strongly believe that the
General Assembly’s efficiency and the President’s
abilities and capacity should in no way be confined by
financial constraints. That is why my delegation joins
the call for the greater allocation of funds from the
United Nations regular budget to provide the President
with wider support from the Secretariat.
We believe that the reform process should encompass
all the main organs of the United Nations. Along with our
joint efforts to increase the effectiveness of the General
Assembly, the optimization of other United Nations
entities is equally important. To that end, the President
of Kazakhstan has also proposed to transform the
Economic and Social Council into a global development
council, thereby uniting States Members of the United
Nations and other United Nations specialized agencies,
including the International Monetary Fund, tasked to
become a global economic regulator.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my country’s
interest in and readiness to support new efforts and to
engage in the work on the revitalization of the General
Assembly.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): We very much welcome
the 19 October 2015 letter of the President of the
General Assembly informing Member States of the
reappointment of the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the revitalization of the work of the General

15-34703

03/11/2015

Assembly. We believe that it serves as recognition of their
excellent during the previous session, which culminated
in the adoption of the cornerstone resolution 69/321. It
is also a clear indication of the strong commitment of
the President of the General Assembly to promoting
further concrete positive developments on the matter.
It gives me great pleasure to congratulate Ambassador
Vladimir Drobnjak, Permanent Representative of
Croatia, and Ambassador Wilfried Emvula, Permanent
Representative of Namibia, on their reappointment.
I wish to assure them of my delegation’s complete
cooperation.
It goes without saying that Romania aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I wish now to make a few brief
remarks in my national capacity.
We highly appreciate the call of President of the
General Assembly for two important annual debates, to
be held in conjunction. As we heard in many statements
delivered on Friday under agenda item 121, concerning
reform of the Security Council and related matters, the
two processes are to be considered as complementary
and mutually reinforcing. We share the view that the
adaptation process of United Nations bodies must
ensure that the entire system becomes fit for purpose
and committed to action, pursuant to the recently
adopted 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1, annex).
Today, I would like to refer to two concrete aspects
being discussed under those agenda items: working
methods and the selection and appointment of the new
Secretary-General. Over the past couple of years, we
have seen much progress in making the activities of
the General Assembly more efficient and in line with
recent developments. Nevertheless, we believe that
a lot more remains to be done in order to continue
rationalizing the agenda. In that context, my delegation
expresses its appreciation for the work and proposal of
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.
Along the lines of the European Union’s call for
further examination of the possibility of discussing
items or introducing resolutions over a longer period,
I would like to draw attention to the fact that Romania
and Germany have already proceeded in that matter,
including on the First Committee draft resolution
entitled “Objective information on military matters,
including transparency of military expenditures”
(A/C.1/70/L.17). We invite other States to also

A/70/PV.45

contemplate that possibility, especially as it will have
been noticed that many new issues are emerging from
Agenda 2030.
The second aspect that I would like to underline is
the importance Romania attaches to the process — which
we hope will begin soon — for the selection of the
next Secretary-General. We were pleased to see the
constructive way in which delegations worked together
to adopt resolution 69/321 by consensus, especially
the specific and concrete provisions on that matter.
We strongly hope that all of them will be implemented
so that the process will become more transparent,
predictable and inclusive. We look forward to further
steps, such as the joint letter of the Presidents of
the General Assembly and the Security Council, a
permanent update of the list of candidates, and the
organization of meetings with the candidates, while of
course fully observing the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations.
At the same time, we call on all United Nations
States Members to pay special attention to the fact that,
during its 70 years of existence, the Organization has
never had a representative from Eastern Europe at its
helm. We believe that it is high time to correct that
historical injustice. Member States from the Group of
Eastern European States have the same great potential
to successfully fulfil the challenging mandate of
Secretary-General as the representatives of all other
geographic groups entrusted with that honour and
responsibility.
Mr. Mwinyi (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation would like to thank the President of the
General Assembly for convening this important annual
joint debate on agenda items 119 and 120. We thank
and commend the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly for their dedication and continued leadership,
which facilitated the adoption of resolution 69/321,
whose celebrated provisions will be implemented
during the current session.
We align ourselves fully with the statement
delivered by the representative of Algeria on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, and would like to make
some additional remarks in our national capacity.
First, we wish to reiterate our keen interest in the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
This chief deliberative policymaking and representative
organ of the United Nations has tremendous potential

15-3470323/27

A/70/PV.45

and an even greater role to play in its seventieth year
of existence. As such, our work towards bolstering its
role, authority and working methods must be part of the
overall reform of the United Nations.
Secondly, we welcome the unfading spirit
of multilateralism that is manifested through the
adoption of the resolutions of this organ and its Main
Committees. While welcoming those outcomes, some
of which have undergone a strenuous process, we wish
to underline the importance of timely implementation
by all concerned. We note that a lack of implementation
only serves to undermine the authority and credibility
of this important organ and its member States. It
is imperative, therefore, that we strive for quality,
not quantity; foster a culture of accountability, not
impunity; and find effective ways to rationalize and
monitor the implementation of those resolutions.
Thirdly, we wish to underline the importance of
cooperation among the principal organs of the United
Nations in a complementary and mutually reinforcing
manner, while adhering to their respective mandates,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
We welcome the continued interactions with and
submission of annual reports by the Security Council,
the Economic and Social Council and the Secretariat
to the General Assembly. We would like to see a
qualitative improvement of those reports, especially
their analytical aspects. We note with great satisfaction
the continuing interaction between the General
Assembly and international and regional forums and
organizations, as well as civil society, as appropriate.
The consultation with stakeholders held prior to
intergovernmental processes is truly commendable and
illustrative of the partnerships that we must forge to
overcome the complex challenges of our time.
Fourthly, we welcome the instructive provisions
of resolution 69/321 pertaining to the selection of the
next Secretary-General in respect of the issuance of
the joint letter from the Presidents of the Assembly and
the Security Council soliciting candidates for this post;
the publishing of the list of candidates; and the holding
of informal meetings with interested candidates. We
believe that, after two decades of championing for gender
equality and female empowerment, we will witness
the participation of competent female candidates and,
we hope, the election of the first woman SecretaryGeneral. For Tanzania, such a development would be
an achievement commensurate with the seventieth
anniversary of the Organization, and could serve as a

24/27

03/11/2015

precursor for achieving further reform, including of the
Security Council.
Last but not least, we second the calls for
strengthening the Office of the President of the General
Assembly. We certainly can do more to enhance the
institutional memory of the Office, including by
exploring the option of allocating dedicated Secretariat
staff to complement and reinforce staffing from
Member States, which is a costly endeavour that many
developing countries cannot shoulder. In that regard,
we must review the budget allocation to the Office of
the President with a view to ensuring adequate and
predictable resources to the Office. Failure is not an
option. The stakes are too enormous. We must strive to
preserve the authority, credibility and integrity of the
Office of the President.
Mr. Adamov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of the Republic of Belarus aligns itself with
the statement made by the representative of Algeria
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We take this
opportunity to express our gratitude to Algeria for its
systemic and consistent formulation and promotion of
the positions of the Movement as one of the key players
in the process of revitalizing the work of the General
Assembly.
Our delegation fully supports the decision of the
President of the General Assembly at its seventieth
session to extend the co-chairmanships of the Permanent
Representatives of Namibia and Croatia of the Ad Hoc
Working Group. We note that resolution 69/321, which
was formulated under their chairmanship, contains
many important and timely elements, including making
the possibility of reaching a decision on other issues at
this session. Belarus firmly believes that the valuable
experience the co-Chairs have accumulated over
the past year will enable them to achieve even more
impressive success.
In our view, the joint debate on the two agenda
items — “Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations” and “Revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly” — is symbolic. However carefully
resolution 69/321 may be worded, it is entirely up to us,
the States Members of the United Nations, to determine
whether the resolution will serve as a catalyst for the
urgent changes needed in the work of the Organization
or join the remarkable list of unfulfilled General
Assembly resolutions.

15-34703

03/11/2015

We commend the efforts to restore the procedures
for the election of the Secretary-General as envisaged
in the General Assembly’s rules of procedure. The
Belarusian delegation believes that it is crucial to ensure
that, for the first time in many years, no State large
or small is denied a genuine opportunity to express its
opinion about the candidacies for Secretary-General.
My delegation also hopes to see a substantive and
open dialogue with the leadership of the Secretariat on
issues related to the daily work of the Organization. The
number of outstanding issues and the organization of the
work needed to address them require action to be taken
by the General Assembly, as provided for by resolution
69/321. That may seem insignificant considering the
challenges and problems facing our Organization, but
it is precisely on such details that the general context
and organization of our collective work and, ultimately,
its effectiveness, depend on. We intend to continue our
focused and constructive efforts to revitalize the work
of the General Assembly in the future.
Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): I would like to thank
the President for convening today’s joint debate, which
gives us an opportunity to discuss issues directly
related to the proper functioning and legitimacy of our
Organization. We are grateful for his initial comments
on the items on the Assembly’s agenda today and for
the statement by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. I
would also like to commend the reappointment for
the Assembly’s seventieth session of Ambassador
Vladimir Drobnjak, Permanent Representative of
Croatia, and Ambassador Wilfried Emvula, Permanent
Representative of Namibia, as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly.
We support efforts to streamline the agenda and
working methods of the General Assembly and its
Main Committees. We also support strengthening
the Office of the President of the General Assembly,
which should be provided with adequate resources
from the Organization’s regular budget. We welcome
the President’s presentation today of his code of
conduct for integrity, impartiality, transparency,
accountability, professionalism and effectiveness
aimed at strengthening our institutional memory.
The consideration of General Assembly resolutions is
particularly important. It is essential that we identify
and eliminate constraints on their implementation. In
that regard, we encourage the Ad Hoc Working Group

A/70/PV.45

to continue to review and update the inventory of
Assembly resolutions on revitalization.
There is a broad consensus that the selection of the
next Secretary-General should be more transparent,
inclusive and democratic. Member States and civil
society share that view. Important organizations, such
as The Elders and 1 for 7 Billion, have recently launched
successful awareness campaigns about the issue.
Resolution 69/321 introduced significant improvements
into the selection process. It will start with a joint letter
from the Presidents of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, addressed to all Member States,
soliciting candidates for the position, and we look
forward to that letter’s speedy issuance. Candidates
are expected to take part in informal dialogues and
meetings with Member States; objective criteria and
qualifications will be required; and Member States will
consider presenting women as candidates.
Among those changes, the most transformative is
the organization of informal dialogues and meetings
providing all Member States with the opportunity to
interact with candidates and hear their proposals. The
invitation to present women as candidates is another
important step forward. Other ways to address the
gender issue can be considered as well. One would
be to ensure that the Secretary-General and Deputy
Secretary-General are of different genders. Another
would be to make sure that the next Secretary-General
is fully committed to the empowerment of women. The
aforementioned meetings with Member States could
be an interesting occasion for testing the candidates’
credentials on the issue.
We must bear in mind that in order to select the
best candidate, it is also necessary to consider the times
we live in and the specific moment being experienced
by the United Nations. Of the three pillars of this
Organization — peace and security, development and
human rights — that of peace and security is probably
generating the most visible credibility deficit for the
United Nations. The creation of the Human Rights
Council and the establishment of the Sustainable
Development Goals have provided us with a road map
for the other two pillars. That of peace and security,
however, is facing vital challenges, both substantive
and with regard to governance. The next SecretaryGeneral should be able to provide leadership in that
area. In addition, he or she should be supportive of
more democratic and participatory ways to address

15-3470325/27

A/70/PV.45

peace and security so as to increase the efficiency of
United Nations efforts in that regard.
Although resolution 69/321 will be fundamental
to strengthening the role of the General Assembly in
the selection of the next Secretary-General, it could
have touched on other aspects of the process that will
continue to warrant our attention. The first concerns
the possibility of the Security Council sending more
than one name for consideration by the Assembly. The
selection would be more democratic if the General
Assembly had more options than either approving or
rejecting a single candidate. As suggested by former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, the Security Council
could send a list of three candidates to be considered
by the Assembly.
Secondly, another important item discussed in
the framework of the revitalization of the General
Assembly is the process of appointing the other
executive heads of the Organization, including the
Deputy Secretary-General and the Under-SecretaryGenerals, which should also be conducted with more
transparency and inclusivity. The practice of reserving
certain positions for specific countries raises legitimate
questions. Article 101 of the Charter of the United
Nations clearly states that the paramount consideration
in the employment of the staff of the Secretariat should
be the necessity of securing the highest standards of
efficiency, competence and integrity. The same Article
states that the Secretary-General should appoint
members of the Secretariat according to regulations
established by the General Assembly. The General
Assembly should exercise that prerogative to ensure
that these appointments are subject to more transparent
criteria and made on the basis of merit.
There is a growing demand on the part of Member
States and civil society for more transparency and
accountability within the United Nations. The same
impetus that prompts Member States to intensify their
efforts for decisive action on Security Council reform
during the seventieth session is now expressing itself in
the widespread support for a democratic, inclusive and
revitalized General Assembly that will fully exercise
its role, including on such questions as the selection of
the Secretary-General.
Mr. Niyazaliev (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
This year marks the seventieth anniversary of
the United Nations. This special event provides a
unique opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to

26/27

03/11/2015

strengthening the role of General Assembly as the
chief deliberative, policymaking and representative
organ of the United Nations system. We must sieze
this opportunity not only to note the shortcomings and
successes of the work of the General Assembly over the
past 70 years, but also to draft new decisions aimed at
enhancing its role and authority in line with the Charter
of the United Nations and relevant General Assembly
resolutions.
The Kyrgyz Republic believes that the General
Assembly, as the principal deliberative and
representative organ of the United Nations system,
should play a lead role in resolving issues of peace and
security; discussing and designing recommendations
on socioeconomic, cultural, humanitarian and
environmental problems; promoting and protecting
human rights; and bolstering friendly relations among
States. In that regard, the Kyrgyz Republic advocates
the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
and enhancing its role, authority, effectiveness and
actities.
The Kyrgyz Republic welcomes the efforts
undertaken during the sixty-ninth session to improve the
work of the General Assembly. Above all, we welcome
the unanimous adoption on 11 September of resolution
69/321, entitled “Revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly.” We support the report of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly (A/69/1007). I take this opportunity
to thank the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group,
the Permanent Representatives of Croatia and Namibia,
for their active and fruitful work during the sixty-ninth
session, and congratulate them on their reappointment
to those positions for the current session. Under their
leadership, we will discuss four main issues: the role
and authority of the General Assembly; the working
methods of the General Assembly; the selection and
appointment of the Secretary-General and other
executive heads of agencies within the United Nations
system; and enhancing the institutional memory of the
Office of the President of the General Assembly.
The creation of multilingual web pages devoted
to this subject on the website of the United Nations
in all official languages was very useful and timely.
Particular attention should be given to the proposals to
improve the working methods of the Main Committees
of the General Assembly, submitted by the Chairs of the
Main Committees at a thematic meeting of the Ad Hoc

15-34703

03/11/2015

A/70/PV.45

Working Group on the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly, held on 14 April.

to adhere to the principles of gender equality and the
criterion of regional rotation in that regard.

In recent years, much has been done to improve the
work of the General Assembly, but much remains to be
done. As asserted in resolution 69/321, it is important
to enhance cooperation between the General Assembly
and the international and regional organizations in
addressing contemporary global problems. In addition,
the agenda of the General Assembly grows longer every
year and the number of resolutions continues to grow.
We believe that particular attention must be given to
streamlining the agenda of the General Assembly and
enhancing the institutional memory of the Office of
the President of the General Assembly. We support the
proposal to move some agenda items to a biennial and
triennial basis, and to merge or exclude certain items.

When Article 97 of the Charter of the United
Nations was drafted, our predecessors were aware that,
although the Secretary-General has a global mandate
to serve all States Members of the Organization, there
must also be very close coordination between the
Secretary-General and the Security Council so that
the United Nations can achieve concrete results in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Finally, I wish to assure the President of my
delegation’s full support in his efforts to revitalize
the General Assembly and to strengthen its role and
authority.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
endorses the statement delivered by the representatives
of Algeria on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
of Estonia on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, respectively.
My delegation joins others in recognizing the
work carried out during the sixty-ninth session by the
Ambassadors of Croatia, Mr. Vladimir Drobnjak, and
Namibia, Mr. Wilfried Emvula, as co-Chairs of Ad Hoc
Working Group on the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly. We welcome their re-appointment
as co-Chairs for this session.
Peru recognizes the importance of the consensus
adoption of resolution 69/321, which reaffirms the
functions and authority of the Assembly, recognizes
the pressing need for this organ to review its working
methods, commits resources to strengthen the Office
of the President of the General Assembly, and further
reaffirms the role of the General Assembly in the
process of selecting and appointing the next SecretaryGeneral. My delegation believes that this last point
should be given particular consideration given that we
will elect the next Secretary-General next year. The
growing challenges that face our Organization require
us to strive to identify and designate the best possible
candidates for the position of Secretary-General and

Bearing in mind the process established in Article
97 of the Charter, Peru believes that greater interaction
between the Security Council and the General Assembly
in the process of selecting and appointing the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations is essential. In that regard,
we appreciate the stress placed in resolution 69/321 on
the role to be played by the General Assembly — the
sole universal organ of our Organization in which all
States are equally and democratically represented — in
that important process.
The procedure set out in resolution 69/321
responds to the demand of the membership for greater
participation and transparency in the important
task of choosing the successor of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-Moon. We are convinced that the proper
implementation of the provisions of that resolution
will give greater legitimacy to the way in which the
next Secretary-General is elected and help us to select
the best candidate, which will undoubtedly benefit the
work of whoever assumes the job.
The President has a twofold mission. He must
play an active role in the process of selecting and
appointing the Secretary-General from the outset of
that process, by issuing a joint letter with the President
of the Security Council and by convening and leading
dialogues with the candidates and the membership. He
also faces the great challenge of ensuring the effective
implementation of resolution 69/321 in that process.
Indeed, implementation is key. We trust in his capacity
to lead that process and his political will to fulfil
these mandates, both of which are highlight important
to the Organization. My delegation is committed to
participating actively and constructively in that process.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

15-3470327/27
