II.

32/5.

Recent illegal lsraeli measures in the occupied Arah territories designed to change
the legal status, geographical nature and
demographic composition of those territories in contravention of the principies
of the Charter of the United Nations, of
Israel's international ohligations under the
fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and of
United Nations resolutions, and ohstruction of efforts aimed at achieving a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Stressing the urgent need to achieve a just and lasting peace in the Middle East,
Expressing grave anxiety and concem over the_ pr~sent serious situation in the occupied Arab temtones
as a result of the continued Israeli occupation and the
measures and actions taken by the Govemment of
Israel, as the occupying Power, and designed to chan~e
the legal status, geographical nature and demograph1c
composition of those territories,
Considering that the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, 6 is applicable to all the Arab territories occupied since 5 J une 1967,
1. Determines that all such measures and actions
taken by Israel in the Palestinian and other Arab. t~rritories occupied since 1967 ha~e no legal va~1d1ty
and constitute a serious obstructlon of efforts aimed
at achieving a just and lasting pcace in the Middle
East;
2. Strongly deplores the persistence of Israel in
carrying out such measures, in !?articular the. cst~blishment of settlements in the occup1ed Arab terntones;
3. Calls upon Israel to comply strictly with its
international obligations in accordance with the principies of international law and the pro~isions ?f. !he
Geneva Convention relative to the Protect10n of Ctviltan
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949;
4. Calls once more upan the Government of Israel,
as the occupying Power, to desist_ forthwit~ from taking
any action which would result m chan~mg the ~e.gal
status, geographical nature or _dem~graph1c co~pos1t~on
of the Arab territories occup1ed smce 1967, mcludmg
Jerusalem;
5. Urges all States parties to the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War to ensure respect for and compliance
with its provisions in all the Arab territories occupied
by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To undertake urgent contacts with the Government of Israel to ensure the prompt implementation
of the present resolution;
( b) To submit a report to the Generral Assembly
and the Security Council, not later than 31 Decembcr
1977, on the results of his contacts;
7. Requests the Security Council to :eview the
situation in the light of the prcsent resolut1on and of
the report of the Secretary-Gencral.
52nd plenary meetinf?
28 October 1977
6 United

13

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Comm.ittee

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.

32/7.

Question
Mayotte

of

the

Comorian

island

of

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Dec~mber
1960, containing the Declaration_ on the Grantmg of
Independence to Colonial Countnes and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also resolution 3161 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, in which the General Assembly affirmed
the unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros and
through which the representative of France affirmed
the intention of the Government of France to respond
faithfully to the aspirations of the Comorian people,
Recalling that those aspirations were clearly expressed by the overwhelming v~te of. ~2 De~ember
1974 in favour of independence m pohtical umty and
territorial integrity in accordance with the provisions
of General Assembly resolution 3291 (XXIX) of 13
December 1974,
Considering that in its communication of 17 O<:to~er
1975 7 the Security Council recommended the adm1ss1on
of the Comoros to membership in the United Nations
and that on that occasion France raised no objection,
Recalling that by General Assembly resolution 3385
(XXX) of 12 November 1975 the Comor~s wcre admitted to membership in the United Nat1ons as an
entity composed of the islands of Anjouan, GrandeComore, Mayotte and Mohéli, as em~hasized in resolution 3291 (XXIX) and other resolut1ons,
Recalling the provisions of resolution_ 31/4_ of 21
October 1976, mainly its paragraph 6 m wh1ch the
General Assembly called upon the Government of
France to enter into negotiations with the Government
of the Comoros,
Bearing in mind the efforts of the Organization of
African Unity, especially those of its Committee of
Seven on the Question of the Comorian Island of
Mayotte, which met at Moroni on 5 and 6 September
1977 and recommended that individual and collective
efforts should be exerted in order to bring about a
just and urgent solution by the Government of Fr~nce
to this problem which prcoccupies the whole of Afnca, 8
l. Ca/is upan the Government of the Comoros and
the Government of France to work out a just and
equitablc settlement for the problem of the_ ~omori~n
island of Mayotte which rcspects the poht1cal umty
and territorial integrity of the Comoros, in accordance
with the relcvant resolutions of the General Asscmbly
on this issue;
2. Mandates thc Secretary-General to take, in close
consultation with the Governmcnt of the Comoros and
the Government of France, any initiative in favour of
ncgotiations bctween the two Governments;
3. Further requests the Sccretary-General of the
United Nations to contact the Administrative Secretary-Gencral of thc Organization of A_frican Unity w~th
a view to obtaining any assistance wh1ch may hclp h1m
to discharge his mission;
7 Ofjicial Records of the General Assemb/y, Thirtieth Session, ~1 nnexes, agenda ítem 22, document Al I 0302.
~ Sce A/32/305, annex II.

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

14

4. Decides to keep the item entitled "Question of
the Comorian island of Mayotte" on its agenda and
requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution.
55th plenary meeting
1 November 1977
32/9.

Question of Namibia
A

lMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONHOOD
PROGRAMME FOR NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which it decided to assume direct responsibility for Namibia, as well as resolution 2248 (S-V)
of 19 May 1967, by which it established the United
Nations Council for Namibia to administer the Territory until its independence,
Recalling further its resolution 31/153 of 20 December 1976, by which it decided to establish a comprehensive assistance programme within the United Nations
system, covering both the period of struggle for independence and the initial years of independence of
Namibia,
Aware of the decisive stage achieved in the struggle
of the Namibians for self-determination, freedom and
independence under the leadership of the South West
Africa People's Organization,
Recognizing that, by assuming direct responsibility
for Namibia, the United Nations and its Member States
have also assumed the responsibility for assisting the
people of Namibia morally and materially,
Recalling its resolution 2679 (XXV) of 9 December
1970, by which it dccided to establish the United
Nations Fund for Namibia, as well as subsequent resolutions relating to the Fund,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, 9
Commending the steps taken by various specialized
agencies and other organizations and bodies within
the United Nations system to provide assistance to
Namibia,
Reaffirming its determination to fulfil its responsibility
towards the people and Territory of Namibia,
1. Approves the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia;
2. Calls upan the United Nations Council for Namibia, as the legal Administering Authority of the Territory, to continue and intensify, in consultation with
the South West Africa People's Organization, the direction and co-ordination of the N ationhood Programme for Namibia;
3. Expresses its appreciation of the efforts of those
specialized agencies and other bodies within the United
Nations sys!em which have contributed to the planning
of the Nat10nhood Programme for Namibia;
4. Calls upon the specialized agencies and other
United Nations bodies to elaborate further their plans
9 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/32/24).

for assistance to the Namibian people in arder to
enable the United Nations Council for Namibia to consolidate ali assistance measures in a comprehensive
and sustained plan of action, and in particular requests:
(a) The World Health Organization to assist the
United Nations Council for Namibia regarding contingency medica] plans for Namibia;
(b) The International Labour Organisation, in consultation with the United Nations Council for Namibia and the South West Africa People's Organization,
to prepare a programme for the training of Namibians;
(e) The Intcr-Govcrnmental Maritime Consultative
Organization to assist the United Nations Council for
Namibia in enacting a decree on navigation in Namibian
watcrs which would further the cause of the liberation
struggle of the Namibian people led by the South West
Africa People's Organization, and to prepare training
programmes in maritime skills for the benefit of suitable
Namibian candidates;
(d) The Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations to assist the United Nations Council
for Namibia in the preparation of legislation on the
protection of Namibia's fishery resources;
(e) The International Atomic Energy Agency to
take urgent measures to ensure that South Africa <loes
not in any way represent Namibia in the Agency and
to assist thc United Nations Council for Namibia in
the hearings, in 1978, on the question of the exploitation and commercialization of Namibian uranium;
(f) The United Nations Industrial Development
Organization to co-operate with the United Nations
Council for Namibia in the preparation of an industrial
development assistance programme for Namibia;
(g) The United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization to intensify its assistance to the
United Nations Council for Namibia in the preparation
and implementation of the Nationhood Programme for
Namibia;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary assistance to the United Nations Council for
Namibia for the effective planning and implementation
of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia;
6. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
57th plenary meeting
4 November 1977

B
UNITED NATIONS FUND FOR NAMIBIA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which thc United Nations decided to termínate
the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia and assume
direct responsibility for the Territory until independence, and its resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967,
by which it established the United Nations Council for
Namibia,
Recalling f urther its resolution 3112 (XXVIII) of
12 December 1973, by which it appointed the United
Nations Council for Namibia trustee of the United
Nations Fund for Namibia,
