General . lssnn/,/_v--Fiftcrnth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPI'ED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SPECIAL
~OLITICAL COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
1597 (XV). Treatment of people of Indian and Inda-Pakistan origin in the Union
of South Africa ( 13 April 1961) ( item 70) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

1598 (XV). Question of race conflict in South Africa resulting from the policies
of apartheid of the Government of the Union of South Africa ( 13 April 1961)
(item 72) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

1604 (XV). Report of the Director of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (21 April 1961) (item 26) . .

6

1597 (XV). Treatment of people of Indian and
lndo-Pakistan origin in the Union of South
Africa

1598 (XV). Question of race conflict in South
Africa resulting from the policies of apartheid of the Government of the Union of
South Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1460 (XIV) of 10 December
1959,
Having considered the reports of the Governments of
India 1 and Pakistan,2

The General Assembl}',
Recalling its previous resolutions on the question of
race conflict in South Africa resulting from the policies
of apartheid of the Government of the Union of South
Africa,

1. Notes that the Governments of India and Pakistan
have reiterated their readiness to enter into negotiations
with the Government of the Union of South Africa in
accordance with the expressed desires of the United
Nations, and with the express declaration that such
negotiations would not in any way prejudice their own
position or the position taken by the Government of the
Union of South Africa regarding their respective juridical stands in the dispute ;
2. Notes with deep regret that the Government of the
Union of South Africa has not replied to the communications from the Governments of India and Pakistan
on this subject, and has not yet shown any disposition
to arrive at a solution of this problem in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the Unitecl
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the rep<';,.ted recommendations of the General Assembly;
3. Draws the attention of the Government of the
Union of South Africa to the repeated appeals of the
General Assembly to co-operate to this end;
4. Urges the Government of the Union of South
Africa to enter into negotiations with the Governments
of India and Pakistan;
5. Invites Member States to use their good offices
in such manner as may be appropriate to bring about
the negotiations envisaged by the General Assembly in
this matter;
6. Invites the parties concerned to report to the General Assembly, jointly or separately, regarding any
progress which may be made.
981st plenary meeting,
13 April 1961.

Considering that its resolutions 6 ll, 1l ( V 11 ) of 5
December 1952, 917 (X) of 6 December Jt)55 and 1248
(XIII) of 30 October 1958 have declared that racial
policies designed to perpetuate or incn·ase di;-;crimination are inconsistent with the Charter llf the L: nited
Nations and with the pledges of ~!embers Ullder Article
56 of the Charter,
Noting that its resolutions 395 ( V) of 2 December
19 50, 511 ( \" I ) of 12 January 19 52 a11 d (, ]() .\ ( \ 1I ) of
5 December 1952 have successively affirmed that the
policy of racial segregation (apartheid) is lll'L'l"ssarily
based on doctrines of racial discrimination,
Rcrnlling also that the c;overnment of the Union of
South Af. ica has failed to comply with the repeated
requests and demands of the United Nations and world
public opinion and to reconsider or revise its racial
policies or to observe its obligations under the Charter,
1. Deplores such continued and total disregard hy
the Covernrnent of the Union of South Africa and furthennore its fietermined aggravation of racial issues by
more discriminaton· laws and measures and their enforcement, accompa;1ied by violence and bloodshed;

2. Deprecates policies based on racial discrimination
as reprehensible and repugnant to human dignity;
3. Requests all State,; to consider taking such separate and collective action as is open to them, in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations, to bring
about the abandonment of these policies;
4. Affirms that the racial policies being pursued by
the Government of the Union of South :\ frica are a
flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
are inconsi5tent with the obligations of a Member State;

1
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 70, document A/4416.
2
Ibid., document A/4417.

5
