UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/31
29 May 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3784th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 May 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its support for the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as they begin a new period in their
history. The Council respects the legitimate national aspirations of the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to achieve peace, national
reconciliation and progress in the political, economic and social fields to
the benefit of all, and opposes any interference in its internal affairs.
"The Security Council recalls its resolution 1097 (1997) of
18 February 1997 which endorses the United Nations five-point peace plan.
"The Security Council welcomes the end of the fighting and expresses
its satisfaction that stability has begun to return to the country.
"The Security Council reaffirms the national sovereignty and the
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and calls for
the withdrawal of all external forces, including mercenaries.
"The Security Council, in accordance with the United Nations fivepoint peace plan, calls for the rapid and peaceful settlement of the crisis
through dialogue and the convening of an international conference on peace,
security and development in the Great Lakes region. The Council also
reaffirms the statement of its President of 30 April 1997 (S/PRST/1997/24)
calling for rapid agreement on peaceful transitional arrangements leading
to the holding of democratic and free elections with the participation of
all parties.
"The Security Council believes that the convening of an international
conference on peace, security and development in the Great Lakes region
under the auspices of the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity will be essential in promoting regional peace and stability.

97-14254 (E)

290597

/...

S/PRST/1997/31
English
Page 2

"The Security Council, in accordance with the United Nations fivepoint peace plan, calls for protection and security for all refugees and
displaced persons and facilitation of access to humanitarian assistance.
It reiterates its call for full respect for the rights of refugees and
displaced persons, and for access and safety for humanitarian relief
workers. It also reiterates in the strongest terms its call for complete
cooperation with the United Nations mission investigating reports of
massacres, other atrocities and violations of international humanitarian
law in the country, including to provide it full and immediate access and
to ensure its security. It is particularly concerned by reports that
refugees in the east of the country are being systematically killed. It
calls for an immediate end to the violence against refugees in the country.
"The Security Council expresses its deep appreciation to the
Secretaries-General of the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity and their Special Representative, to the Government of South Africa,
and to all those inside and outside the region for their efforts to
facilitate a peaceful solution to the crisis in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo."

-----
