S/PV.7653

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7653rd meeting

Monday, 21 March 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Chikoti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Angola)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Ybañez
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Duddridge
Ms. Power
Mr. Rossselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Prevention and resolution of conflicts in the Great Lakes region
Note verbale dated 8 March 2016 from the Permanent Mission of Angola to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/223)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region (S/2016/232)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-07780 (E)
*1607780*

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Prevention and resolution of conflicts in the
Great Lakes region
Note verbale dated 8 March 2016 from
the Permanent Mission of Angola to
the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/223)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region (S/2016/232)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their presence
today underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Australia, Belgium,
Brazil, Burundi, Canada, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Georgia, Germany, Ireland, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Italy, Kazakhstan, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland and
Thailand to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedures, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Said
Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region of Africa, Mr. Smail Chergui,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, and Mr. Vijay Pillai, Adviser in the Office of
the Vice-President of the African region of the World
Bank.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Mr. Koen Vervaeke,
Managing Director for Africa of the European External
Action Service of the European Union; and Mr. Pascal
Couchepin Roger, Special Envoy of the Secretary2/64

21/03/2016

General for the Great Lakes Region of the International
Organization of la Francophonie.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/223, which contains a note verbale
dated 8 March 2016 from the Permanent Mission of
Angola addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
a concept paper on the item under consideration.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2016/232, containing the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
I further wish to draw the attention of Council
members to the letter dated 17 March 2016 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, which conveys the United Nations
Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework 2016-2017.
This letter will be issued as a document of the Council,
in the coming days, under the symbol S/2016/255.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I am pleased to join the
Security Council today for this important and timely
debate on the prevention and resolution of conflicts in
the Great Lakes region. I thank Angola, as President
of the Security Council and Chair of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, for organizing
this meeting.
Significant advances have been made over the past
16 years since the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was first
deployed to that country. These include the withdrawal
of foreign armed forces, the reunification of the country,
the establishment of a transitional Government, the
organization of two national elections, and the signing
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
in February 2013.
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

The past several years have also seen some
progress in stabilizing the security situation in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The defeat of the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and the successful
conclusion of the Kampala dialogue in December 2013
have helped to improve the region’s security situation.
Nonetheless, major peace and security challenges persist
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region,
and require our continued attention. Sustained efforts
are required to neutralize all negative forces, including
by finding sustainable solutions for former combatants
and extending State authority into areas reclaimed
from armed groups. In this regard, I have welcomed the
decision of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to resume joint military planning and
operations with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to eliminate negative forces, notably the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and the Allied
Democratic Forces.
I urge participants in today’s debate to agree
on tangible recommendations to accelerate the
disarmament and demobilization of all armed groups
still operating in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I also call on the members of the Security
Council to reach out to relevant actors and to support
our efforts to fully implement the Nairobi Declarations,
which ended the M-23 insurgency. There is no doubt that
eliminating negative forces will be more challenging
if these forces continue to harvest and trade in natural
resources from the region.
The illegal exploitation and trade in natural
resources is worth billions of dollars. It is urgent
that these economic lifelines be cut. I am therefore
encouraged that my Special Envoy is working with the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
to help improve the governance of natural resources.
I call on the Governments of the Great Lakes region
to formulate sound strategies to turn their States’
natural resources into powerful drivers of human and
economic development.
I am worried about continued violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other parts of
the region. In addition to the violence perpetrated by the
many armed groups operating in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the past months have seen
a sharp increase in intercommunal and inter-ethnic
conflicts. This is an alarming trend that requires our

S/PV.7653

urgent attention. Attending to the needs of the most
vulnerable people in conflict-affected areas is a key
component of the United Nations strategy to promote
sustainable peace and security in the Great Lakes
region. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo alone,
7.5 million people are currently in need of humanitarian
assistance, including more than 1.5 million internally
displaced persons. Due to the threat posed by armed
groups, population displacements and human rights
violations occur on a daily basis in some parts of the
country. As the Democratic Republic of the Congo
enters a delicate electoral period, we are concerned
about the risk of election-related violence, which. could
worsen an already grave humanitarian situation.
The rapidly deteriorating security situation in
Burundi is also of concern. More than 1 million people,
including some 25,000 internally displaced persons,
are in need of assistance in Burundi. In addition,
some 250,000 Burundian refugees are being hosted
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda,
Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia. I commend Member
States for their hospitality in receiving refugees from
neighbouring countries. I also remind Member States
of their international and moral obligation to protect
and provide asylum to refugees. Under no circumstance
should States use refugees for political purposes.
It is also our shared responsibility to prevent the
militarization of refugee settlements, which must retain
their civilian character.
(spoke in French)
I am also very concerned about the continuing
impasse in organizing the upcoming elections in the
Democratic Republic of Congo. During my recent visit
to the country, in February, I urged all stakeholders to
resolve their differences through dialogue and to create
conditions conducive to the holding of timely and
credible elections, in accordance with the Constitution.
In the past, political crises in the Great Lakes region
have led to widespread violence and serious security
problems. We must prevent such a scenario from
materializing. I ask the Security Council and the leaders
of the region to help us to maintain political stability in
the Democratic Republic of Congo by quickly finding a
solution to the current impasse.
(spoke in English)
While we often focus on political, security and
humanitarian issues as we discuss conflict prevention
and resolution, we should remind ourselves that

16-077803/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

peace and security go hand-in-hand with human
and economic development. That is why I am very
pleased with the success of the Great Lakes Private
Sector Investment Conference held in Kinshasa in
February. The Conference gave Great Lakes leaders a
rare opportunity to engage with private investors and
business leaders from around the world to discuss how
to improve the business and investment climate in the
region. I am particularly pleased with the Conference’s
recommendation that private investors should support
business ventures that promote livelihoods for women
and youth, with a special emphasis on capacity-building
and skills-development.
Finally, today’s meeting marks the official launch
of the United Nations Regional Strategic Framework,
which seeks to better align the work of the United
Nations in the Great Lakes region with the objectives of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. The
Strategic Framework has six pillars, namely, sustainable
natural-resource management, economic integration,
cross-border trade and food nutrition security, mobility,
youth and adolescents, gender and sexual and genderbased violence, and justice and conflict prevention.
Progress in implementing the strategic framework will
greatly contribute to sustainable peace and development
in the region. I call on the Security Council, the States
of the Great Lakes region and the donor community to
endorse the strategic framework and extend their full
support to its implementation.
(spoke in French)
Let us work together to bring stability, dignity and
opportunities for the future for the peoples of the Great
Lakes region.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Djinnit.
Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I thank the Angolan
presidency for its initiative to hold this open debate on
peace and security in the Great Lakes region of Africa.
Along with the Sahel and the Horn of Africa, the Great
Lakes region is among the areas of the African continent
that has been most affected by conflict and instability.
Yet lasting peace in Africa seems to hinge on stabilizing
this vast, pivotal region of the continent. And it must be
said that the region does not lack assets to become a
zone of prosperity and stability on the continent.
4/64

21/03/2016

Since the conflicts and political upheavals of the
1990s, the region has made significant progress in
terms of political stability and development. Some
countries have recorded impressive economic growth
rates, with obvious repercussions on the living
conditions of the population — even if it is regrettable
that all segments of society do not benefit equally.
Ambitious and promising integration and economic and
social development cooperation initiatives have been
launched, such as the various development corridors
linking landlocked countries to countries with
coastlines. Furthermore, countries in the region are
engaged in economic, democratic and political reform
processes, with varying levels of success.
Following the conflicts of the 1990s, and with the
support of the United Nations and the African Union, the
region entered into the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development, which emerged from the International
Conferences on Great Lakes Region held in Dar es
Salaam in 2004 and Nairobi in 2006. The Pact aimed
at sealing the hard-won peace and at consolidating the
gains of the 1993 Arusha Accords on Rwanda and the
2000 agreements on Burundi, as well as the Lusaka
peace process and the outcomes of the inter-Congolese
dialogue held in Sun City in 2002. In February 2013,
the countries of the region came together under the
auspices of the United Nations, the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the Southern African Development
Community to make specific commitments in line
with the Addis Ababa framework agreement in order
to halt the wave of instability that threatened the peace
in the region following the capture of Goma by the
Mouvement du 23 Mars (M-23) rebel group, which was
eventually militarily defeated.
Therefore, this meeting of the Security Council is
timely to assess the progress made and the challenges
still to be overcome on the way to the consolidation
of peace, conflict prevention and stabilization of the
region. Council deliberations will certainly touch both
on current issues that are a source of immediate concern
as well as on the root causes of instability in the Great
Lakes region. It must be emphasized that those two
levels of the Council’s concerns are at the heart of the
mandate and the road map of my Office.
(spoke in English)
Over the past few years, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the countries of the region as a whole
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

have made encouraging progress towards implementing
the commitments under the Pact and the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. However, there is still
a long way to go to achieve long-term stability and
development in the area. Despite the efforts deployed
thus far to eradicate negative force in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, those armed
groups — including the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR), the Allied Democratic
Forces and other Mai Mai groups — continue to
kill innocent people, commit serious human rights
violations, engage in illegal exploitation of natural
resources and contribute to perpetuating mistrust in
the area. In that regard, I would like to commend the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for recent decision to authorize the resumption of
cooperation between its armed forces and the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with a view to neutralizing
the FDLR and other negative forces operating in the
eastern part of the country. We look forward to the
early operationalization of that decision.
Little progress has been achieved so far in the
repatriation of the former M-23 combatants from Uganda
and Rwanda and in the implementation of the Nairobi
Declarations. Delays in implementing the latter and in
the repatriation process are sources of serious concern.
Disturbing reports in recent weeks have alluded to the
return of several former M-23 combatants to Masisi,
outside the framework of the Nairobi Declarations.
As a follow up to a decision of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism and the Addis Ababa ministerial meeting
of 28 January, the guarantors of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework are expected to visit Uganda,
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo soon
to engage the relevant stakeholders on the best ways
and means to address obstacles that impede the full and
effective implementation of the Nairobi Declarations
and the repatriation process.
While significant progress has been achieved in
consolidating democracy in the region, as seen in the
holding of peaceful elections in several countries, those
achievements remain fragile. Issues relating to respect
for the Constitution and electoral processes remain
very divisive and generate tensions, as is the case in
Burundi, where the crisis reached unacceptable levels
of violence, with attendant human rights abuses and
implications for regional cohesion and cooperation. I
wish to commend the renewed efforts of the leaders of

S/PV.7653

the region to strengthen the East African Community
mediation under President Museveni, through the
appointment of former Tanzanian President Benjamin
Mkapa as the new facilitator. I reiterate our collective
call for the speedy resumption of an inclusive dialogue
process. I also take this opportunity to call for genuine
dialogue to prevail among national stakeholders in
the region and for the strengthening of elections
governance and democratic institutions as effective
tools for conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
Durable solutions for the maintenance of
international peace and for conflict prevention and
resolution in the Great Lakes region must include social
and economic strategies that tackle poverty, create jobs,
especially for youth, and foster economic integration
and shared prosperity within and among countries of
the region. I am pleased to report that, as part of the
implementation of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda,
adopted by the leaders of the signatory countries of the
Addis Ababa Agreement, my Office organized, jointly
with the ICGLR secretariat, the Great Lakes Private
Sector Investment Conference in Kinshasa on 24 and
25 February. More than 500 participants, including
representatives of the private sector, Governments,
development partners and experts from all over the
world, attended the Conference, which generated
passionate and constructive discussions on the need to
improve the business climate in the region and promote
responsible investments. I thank the Secretary-General,
who attended the opening ceremony together with
President Kabila and other leaders from the region, for
his support for that initiative.
The Conference generated a lot of expectations
and hope. We intend to build on the momentum that
the Conference has created in order to ensure that the
great economic potentials of the region for durable
development and peace are fully realized. My Office
will work closely with ICGLR to support the Great
Lakes Region Private Sector Forum, which was
established in the course of the preparation process for
the Conference to serve as a permanent mechanism to
promote investments in the region.
The illegal exploitation of natural resources
remains a critical driver of conflicts and a key factor in
the proliferation of criminal networks that undermine
peace and security in the region. That is an issue that
requires collective and decisive actions. As a follow-up
to the Kinshasa Conference, where the issue of natural
resources featured prominently, and as I suggested

16-077805/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

during the Development Partners Ministerial Forum
in Addis Ababa on 12 July last year, my Office will
continue to consult on the idea of convening a forum
to review the progress in initiatives taken by various
national, regional and international stakeholders
with regard to the responsible exploitation of natural
resources in the Great Lakes region. The proposed
forum will seek to offer a fresh and comprehensive look
at the issues involved. The debate should also include
urgent measures that need to be taken with the support
of the Security Council to improve natural resources
governance and cut off the economic lifelines of armed
groups in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as those groups continue to benefit from the illegal
exploitation of resources, such as gold and charcoal,
while taking advantage of vulnerable persons, including
women and children.
The region will not enjoy long-term peace and
stability if the culture of impunity prevails and
individuals are not held accountable for the crimes
they have committed. My Office has been working
with the ICGLR Executive Secretariat and other
partners to support initiatives aimed at promoting
judicial cooperation among the countries of the region,
particularly in relation to gender and sexual-based
violence. I wish to take this opportunity to commend the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for its recent decision to transfer Ladislas Ntaganzwa,
a suspect in the 1994 Rwanda genocide, to the Residual
Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals, in
compliance with an order issued by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda calling for his transfer
to Rwanda.
The refugee and humanitarian situation resulting
from the influx of more 250,000 refugees from Burundi
to neighbouring States remains a matter of the utmost
concern. Recognizing that durable solutions will
require efforts on the part of political, humanitarian and
development partners, my Office is working with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the World Bank and other partners to bring
together key national counterparts and international
partners to look into creating new models that can
promote dignity and better opportunities for displaced
persons and increase the benefits for host communities.
In an effort to promote the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
we have also continued to engage with civil society,
6/64

21/03/2016

including through supporting a series of national civilsociety consultations in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Burundi and Uganda and assisting in
the convening of the second General Assembly meeting
of the ICGLR Regional Civil Society Forum in Dar
es Salaam.
The Women’s Platform for the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, which was established by my
predecessor, continues to remain a catalytic instrument
for women’s empowerment in the region. Over the
past two years, my Office has supported a number of
grass-roots women’s organizations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda.
I wish to thank the Governments of the Netherlands,
Norway, Ireland, the United Kingdom and Belgium,
as well as the Oak Foundation, for their contribution
to the Trust Fund in Support of the Activities of the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative to the Great
Lakes Region of Central Africa, which supported both
the Women’s Platform and other activities, including
the Private Sector Conference. Equally, my Office has
supported various activities to engage and empower
youth in the region in line with regional initiatives,
especially the ICGLR Special Summit on the fight
against youth unemployment in Nairobi in 2014. We
will continue to work with civil society in general, and
with women’s and youth networks, as well as with the
recently established Great Lakes Private Sector Forum,
and support their active contribution to the ongoing
efforts for economic and political development in
the region.
Finally, I would like to invite the Council to give
its blessing to the United Nations Great Lakes Region
Strategic Framework, which was developed jointly
by my Office and the United Nations country teams
in the region in support of the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and the
development of the region. The Strategic Framework
represents the culmination of a process launched by
the Secretary-General during his joint mission with
the World Bank President to the Great Lakes region in
May 2013. The Framework is not only a key tool fir
addressing the root causes of conflicts in the region, but
also represents a collective and coordinated platform for
partnership between United Nations entities working
in the Great Lakes region, international partners and
Member States for effective solutions for conflict
prevention and resolution, and for the attainment of
durable peace, as envisaged in the Peace, Security
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

and Cooperation Framework. I thank the Council for
accepting that the United Nations Great Lakes Region
Strategic Framework be formally launched on the
occasion of this open debate.
(spoke in French)
Like other parts of the African continent, the Great
Lakes region is at a crossroads. Praiseworthy efforts are
being made by its leaders and peoples to leave behind
the instability that it has faced for a long time now
and to lay the foundation for sustainable development
and peace. As with any transition period, it is still
vulnerable to relapses, and it is therefore imperative
that the gains of peace and democracy in the region be
consolidated. In that regard, I can only encourage the
Council to continue to pay attention to the region and
to invite the international community to continue to do
the same.
The President: I thank Mr. Djinnit for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.
Mr. Chergui (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the presidency of the Commission of the
African Union, allow me to express the deep gratitude
of the African Union to Angola, which holds the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March 2016, for scheduling this debate on the Great
Lakes region. I would like to thank the Angolan
presidency for the opportunity to address the Council.
I would also like to take this opportunity to once
again express the gratitude of the African Union to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his personal
commitment to Africa, as well as for his unstinting
support, not only to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, signed in Addis Ababa on 24 February
2013, but more generally for the initiatives he has taken
in favour of peace, stability and prosperity in the Greak
Lakes region. His loyalty to the principles and founding
goals of the United Nations naturally led him most
recently to the Western Sahara in order to provide the
necessary impetus to the peace process so that we can
finally achieve the objective for which the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara was
established, namely, the organization of a referendum
on self-determination for the Saharan people.
That was also the reason behind the SecretaryGeneral’s recent visit to Burundi and to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the month of February in

S/PV.7653

the context of the extension of the mission of Security
Council members from 21 to 22 January in Bujumbura.
The Secretary-General’s visit to Burundi on 25 and
26 February was followed by a high-level delegation
made up of five Heads of State and Government of the
African Union within the framework of supporting the
country to emerge from the spiral of violence that had
enveloped it since April 2015. That visit also underscores
the unanimous vision and the complementarity of action
between the African Union and the United Nations
when it comes to Burundi.
The Great Lakes region faces numerous security and
humanitarian challenges that are mainly linked to the
results of the activities of the negative forces operating
in the region. They have taken the development of the
region as hostage and encouraged the illegal trafficking
of natural resources, thus adding to the poverty of
the population and preventing development, which is
unsustainable. However, thanks to the efforts of the
countries of the region, supported by bilateral and
multilateral partners, significant progress has been
made, namely, since the signing of the Peace, Security
and Coooperation Agreement. The most outstanding
progress is the neutralization of the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23), the signing of the Nairobi Declarations,
on 12 December 2014, as well as the organization of
the Private Sector Investment Conference for the Great
Lakes Region held in Kinshasha on 24 and 25 February.
In that regard, we also welcome the resumption of
cooperation between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of Congo and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on joint military operations against the Forces
démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda (FDLR)
and the other negative forces that are present in the
eastern part of the country. Council members will
remember that the Heads of State of the region had
encouraged the resumption of that cooperation during
the sixth meeting of the follow-up mechanism of the
Framework Agreement, which was held here in New
York on 29 September 2015.
In that regard, we must also congratulate the
co-guarantor organizations of the Framework
Agreement — the Southern African Development
Community, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, the African Union and the United
Nations, as well as the two co-chairs of the Technical
Support Committee — for their efforts in implementing
the Framework Agreement. I would like to encourage

16-077807/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

the planned visit by the co-guarantors to Uganda, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda from
11-25 April, as well as the evaluation mission of the
members of the Support Committee to Goma during the
same time period. Both those visits would be a part of
the decisions that emerged from the second ministerial
retreat of Member States and the guarantors of the
Framework Agreement, which was held on 28 January
in Addis Ababa.
I hope that those initiatives will help us to identify
possible solutions to questions linked to the repatriation
of ex-combatants of the M-23 cantoned in Rwanda and
Uganda, the repatriation of the FDLR cantoned in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
neutralization of the combatants of the FDLR.
The latest political developments in the Central
African Republic are a reason for hope for the African
Union and the United Nations, which have spared no
effort for the return of stability to that country. That
is why I would like to congratulate the transitional
authorities for the sound holding of the elections that
led to the election of a new democratically elected
President as head of the country.
On South Sudan, the signing of the agreement on
security arrangements on 3 November 2015 will make
it possible to implement the peace agreement signed in
August 2015 under the facilitation of Intergovernmental
Authority on Development between President Salva
Kiir Mayardit and Mr. Riek Machar. I would like to
renew our support for the security measures under way
to finalize the return of the First Vice-President to Juba,
as well as the setting up of a transitional Government.
I hope that the return of Mr. Machar to Juba is a matter
of days, not of weeks.
The African Union, through its High Representative,
President Alpha Oumar Konaré, is continuing its
mission to support the peace process under way. I
would like to renew the unreserved support of the
African Union for the efforts of President Mogae as
head of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Mission
of the Peace Agreement on South Sudan in order to
establish peace and to promote both parties’ full respect
for the ceasefire. That would prevent a worsening of a
humanitarian situation, one that is already disturbing,
at a time when a large part of the region is experiencing
a serious drought and is facing an acute food crisis.
The African Union remains concerned by the
security and humanitarian situation in Burundi, where
8/64

21/03/2016

a durable solution would be the holding of an inclusive
dialogue, under the facilitation of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), without
preconditions, among all the actors in the crisis. In that
regard, I am pleased by the ECOWAS appointment
of Mr. Benjamin Mkpa as the new facilitator for
the Burundi crisis. Mr. Mkapa has just conducted
a consultation mission to Bujumbura, Rwanda and
Uganda with a view to holding this dialogue as soon
as possible.
The African Union, like the United Nations,
is committed to providing its entire support to the
mediation team in order to provide every opportunity
to that dialogue. At the same time, the African Union
continues its operation to deploy 200 human rights
observers, as well as military experts, approved by the
Government of Burundi and the Peace and Security
Council of our organization in order to support the
dialogue and also to restore a secure environment in the
country where human rights and freedom of expression
are respected. The very high number of refugees, as
well as displaced persons, must also command our
full attention.
Given the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as the constitutional time line is approaching
for the holding of presidential elections, the African
Union remains alongside the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and intends to support it in every effort to hold
inclusive, peaceful, credible, free, just and transparent
elections. I welcome the support of the United Nations,
as well as of the entire international community,
to the efforts of the facilitator of the African Union,
Mr. Mkojo, with a view to holding a political dialogue
with the Congolese stakeholders to find solutions with
regard to the electoral time line, as well as the actual
holding of elections in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in peace and unity.
I cannot conclude without recalling the need for
greater promotion of the rights of children and women
in the region. Any type of violence against women
must stop immediately. And the inclusion of women
in conflict prevention, in conflict resolution and in
reconstruction is not an act of charity, but rather an
investment in a society that would be fair, inclusive
and respectful of the rights of everyone and in harmony
with the eternal values of Africa.
Finally, I hope the Kinshasa Investment Conference
will send a decisive signal on support for cooperation,
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

development and solidarity in combating the ideology
of hatred, suspicion and recurring crises in the Great
Lakes region.
The President: I thank Mr. Chergui for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Pillai.
Mr. Pillai: It is an honour to be in the Security
Council today for this important meeting on the Great
Lakes region, and I thank the Angolan presidency for
organizing it.
It has been three years since 11 nations signed
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
Agreement for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region. Since then, there has been
progress but, as speakers before me have highlighted,
significant challenges remain. Today’s meeting is a
good opportunity to renew international support for
delivering on the fine principles and commitments
laid out in the Framework Agreement. On behalf of the
World Bank, I would like to make three points.
First, the Great Lakes region presents a stark
example of the economic and human costs of conflict.
As we all know, the drivers of that conflict are deepseated — weak institutions, a lack of access to basic
services and economic opportunity, an uncertain
security situation and ethnic divisions, all compounded
by rapid population growth and competition over
natural resources. We continue to see examples in
the Great Lakes of how a lack of peace and stability
plays through very quickly in terms of macroeconomic
instability, rising fiscal deficits and reduced investor
appetite, which further fuel the lack of jobs and access
to basic services.
As a development institution, the World Bank is
acutely aware that peace and stability are essential
prerequisites for our support to the region, which is
aimed at reducing poverty and expanding opportunities.
We emphasize to national and international partners
that ensuring peace and stability is an urgent need for
the region, for only then can its people reap the full
benefits of development cooperation.
Secondly, in 2013 the President of the World Bank
and the Secretary-General visited the region, and their
message was very clear: the international community
is committing development resources to support the
objectives of the Framework Agreement. The World
Bank Group had committed to providing $1.2 billion in
additional resources for regional solutions in the Great

S/PV.7653

Lakes. Today, I am pleased to report that we are well
advanced in approving regional projects for the full
amount. Over time, those projects will help to tap into
regional power-generation opportunities, providing an
additional 250 megawatts of power, and will facilitate
secure and higher incomes for nearly 100,000 trading
communities and small-time traders who currently
sustain life through insecure cross-border trading. The
projects will help to alleviate the misery of thousands
of women who have been sexually abused as a result of
the conflict and of people who have suffered the grim
consequences of forced displacement.
Those are difficult areas to tackle in any country,
and more so in places with weak capacity and uncertain
security environments. The World Bank remains
committed to working with the Governments involved
to ensure that those projects are effectively implemented
so that the benefits flow in full for the people of the
region, thus creating a path to a virtuous cycle between
development benefits that help to further enhance the
region’s peace and security objectives.
Finally, the Framework Agreement recognizes
specific roles for the national Governments and the
international community. Each has a role to play.
In addition to what is stated under the Framework,
all of us — countries, bilaterals and multilateral
partners — have a responsibility to act in a coordinated
manner. I am delighted that the World Bank has
been working well with the United Nations and other
development partners and remains committed to
sustaining those partnerships for the benefit of the
Great Lakes region.
The President: I thank Mr. Pillai for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for External Relations of Angola.
I am honoured to preside over today’s debate, and
on behalf of the President of the Republic of Angola
and Chair of the International Conference of the Great
Lakes Region, His Excellency José Eduardo dos Santos,
I will share with the Council some ideas on the subject
under consideration: the prevention and resolution of
conflicts in the Great Lakes region. I welcome the
Secretary-General’s presence and participation in this
meeting, which is a demonstration of his commitment
on an issue that has been the object of his persistent
efforts to find solutions to the inextricable conflicts
that have plagued the region for too long.

16-077809/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Great Lakes region faces many challenges and
is undergoing great stress. Its high levels of economic
growth have not led to broad-based development or
tangible improvements in the well-being of its citizens.
Poverty, inequality and inequity are commonplace,
fuelling social tensions and unrest and shattering social
cohesion. Pockets of deadly conflicts persist. Their
causes revolve around economic, institutional, regional
and global geopolitical factors that have been extremely
costly in socioeconomic and human terms, engendering
a vicious cycle of violence. The nexus between natural
resources and conflict is paramount in formulating
adequate responses and mitigation measures. In that
regard, the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, with one of the greatest concentrations
of precious minerals and metals in the world, poses a
multidimensional challenge to economic and human
development in the affected countries and the region
as a whole.
There is a need to put the Great Lakes region back
on a path of sustainable development. Strong leadership,
political will, working institutions and State-building
are key for ensuring the effective participation of
citizens and communities in socioeconomic and
political choices, for the decentralization of service
providers and for transparency in public-sector and
finance management.
Sustaining peace is an important objective that
must be achieved through open dialogue among all the
parties concerned. Angola has been deploying sustained
efforts to contribute to that endeavour. The African
Union, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the East African Community and other
subregional arrangements should provide the required
support. A crucial part of that equation is integrity
and genuine involvement on the part of all internal
stakeholders, combined with commitment by external
partners in implementing regional projects, based on a
shared, long-term vision and on the expectations of the
peoples of the region.
Angola’s objective in holding this debate is to
shift the traditional narrative, which focuses on
armed conflict, the plundering of resources, egregious
violations of human rights and a general incapacity to
find sustainable solutions to the problems affecting
the region. The drivers of conflict are clearly identified.
Our aim is to have a forward-looking approach by
identifying game changers, thereby permitting the
10/64

21/03/2016

transformation of those drivers of conflict into drivers
of peace and social and economic development.
In that connection, we warmly welcome the
launching of the Regional Strategic Framework for the
Great Lakes Region, in support of the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
which establishes a clear link between peace, security
and development and commits to strengthening regional
cooperation and deepening regional integration.
The road map set up in the Regional Strategic
Framework establishes nine priorities for regional
action, which Angola fully shares: efforts to neutralize
the negative forces; confidence-building measures;
promoting correct electoral processes; strengthening
peace
and
security
oversight
mechanisms;
addressing the issue of Rwandan refugees; promoting
socioeconomic development and regional integration;
initiatives to mobilize women, youth and civil
society; fighting impunity, improving accountability
and strengthening the rule of law; and leading and
coordinating the international community’s support
for the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.
The eastern region of the African continent, which
comprises the Great Lakes region, is one of the fastestgrowing economic regions in the world, with a 6.2 per
cent growth rate in 2015. A meaningful part of the growth
is driven by endogenous and potentially sustainable
structural factors, namely, rising demographics, the
prominence of youth, a growing middle class with an
increasing purchasing power, rapid urbanization and
growing infrastructure needs, as well as an expanding
intra-Africa trade.
In addition, the Great Lakes region has shown a
certain degree of resilience, taking into account that
a significant part of the region’s exports are linked to
commodities subject to falling prices. Moreover, the
region is one of the most densely populated areas in
Africa, and investments are needed to turn that potentially
huge market into a demographic dividend. The Great
Lakes region’s rich natural endowments — especially
mineral and metal resources, water for irrigation
and hydroelectric power generation, arable land and
population size — are important structural factors on
which to base its integrated development. The report
of the Economic Commission for Africa, Conflicts in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo: Causes, impact
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

and implications for the Great Lakes region, defines
regional integration as a crucial developmental link,
seeing such integration as leverage for peacebuilding
and post-conflict reconstruction. To realize such
potential, the human capital base and infrastructure
need to be upgraded, as do the quality and capacity of
its institutions, the legal and regulatory frameworks,
the levels of transparency and accountability, and
the depth of social and political debate, consultation
and collaboration.
The International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR) Regional Initiative against the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources is one concrete
instance of concerted action aimed at such an endeavour,
calling for redoubled efforts and extended support to
the ICGLR and the Regional Initiative. The Kimberley
Process was a landmark initiative in that direction.
The Great Lakes Private Sector Investment
Conference, held in Kinshasa on 24 and 25 February,
represents a key milestone in this process, and I am
confident that its outcomes will serve as a canvas on
which to implement most of the required actions. The
Investment Conference indicates that the region is
ready to champion a vision of long-lasting peace and
prosperity and to welcome responsible and sustainable
long-term investments in line with the framework of
hope: the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region. The Framework emphasizes the importance
of shared responsibility, whereby peace, security
and socioeconomic progress are the responsibility
of all — citizens and institutions within and outside
the Great Lakes region. It is therefore our duty to
ensure that we deliver on the promises to bring about
a brighter future embedded in the outcomes of the
Investment Conference.

S/PV.7653

Finally, I hope that I have provided some insights
as a contribution to our debate in the Council, and I
thank everyone for their kind attention.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Foreign Minister Chikoti for being here today and for
hosting this timely debate on an incredibly important
set of issues. Let me also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, Commissioner Chergui, Special Envoy
Djinnit and Mr. Pillai of the World Bank for their
remarks and determined work throughout the Great
Lakes region.
The Great Lakes Private Sector Investment
Conference, co-hosted by Special Envoy Djinnit’s
Office in Kinshasa last month, spoke to the economic
and security gains made acress the region over the last
decade. That progress is tenuous and fragile, and there
is still a long way to go. The trajectory over the past
several years, however, has clearly been positive.
I would like to use my remarks to underscore
the inextricable connection linking democratic
accountability, human rights and the rule of law, on the
one hand, and economic progress and lasting stability
and peace, on the other.

“The people of the Great Lakes region count on
you ... to fully contribute to the goal of transforming
the region ... It is the pathway to peace and stability.”

On the very same day that the Great Lakes
Private Sector Investment Conference began, a court
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ruled on
the case of six young activists — five men and one
woman — who had been charged with attempting to
incite civil disobedience. They had been arrested eight
days earlier at a private home in Goma at 4.30 in the
morning as they prepared banners for a general strike
to protest potential election delays. One of the banners
read “in 2016 we won the Cup” — in reference to the
African nation’s soccer championship — “we can also
win democracy”. They were convicted and sentenced
to two years in jail, a term reduced, on appeal, to
six months.

Our key role, as members of the international
community, is to ensure that those positive changes
are sustained and transformed into permanent gains.
I strongly believe that the Great Lakes region has
everything required to achieve a new destiny and follow
an equitable and sustainable development pathway.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is not
the only country in the region where civil society is
threatened or where democratic processes are being
deliberately undermined. This unfortunately has
been the accelerating trend in recent months, evident
at the top, where leaders make increasingly blatant

In his words at the Conference, Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon urged all of us to act when he said,

16-0778011/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

power grabs to remain in office, and on the streets,
where their Governments close media outlets, arrest
opposition members, intimidate civil society groups
and otherwise squeeze the political space available
for competing views. This widening disregard for
democratic processes threatens to undermine the
political security and development progress achieved
over the past two decades, and it imperils the progress
still to come. It defies the ability of citizens to freely
choose their leaders and hold them accountable. It
drives them into the streets or out of the country. It
threatens to plunge communities back into the cycle of
poverty and violence, from which many are only now
beginning to emerge.
Let me speak briefly to the situation in four
countries where this trend is most pronounced and
where there is still time to change course.
The economic achievements of President Kagami’s
Rwanda are well known and rightly celebrated. Per
capita income has doubled since the year 2000. Rwanda’s
advances on the Human Development Index are greater
than any other country in the world over the past 25 years.
It has become a leader in international peacekeeping,
in numbers as well as in performance, with its forces
admired for their bravery and their commitment to
civilian protection. When one reflects on the horrors
of the genocide that killed approximately 800,000 Tutsi
and moderate Hutu 22 years ago next month, one sees
the epic scale of the achievements by President Kagami
and by the Rwandan people. The results on the ground
for Rwandans are remarkable. Unfortunately, despite
Rwanda’s progress on economic rights, women’s right,
and on so many development axes, its record in the
protection and promotion of civil and political rights
is less impressive. The United States remains deeply
committed to its partnership with Rwanda, but the
continued absence of political space and the inability of
individuals and journalists to discuss political affairs or
report on issues of public concern pose a serious risk to
Rwanda’s future stability. Rwanda can achieve lasting
peace and prosperity through a Government centred
on the principle of democratic accountability, not one
centred on any single individual.
The same applies in Uganda. Uganda is a critical
contributor to peace and security, especially through
its long-time contribution to the African Union force in
Somalia. It is also a generous host to more than 500,000
refugees, providing the right to work and access to
social services to refugees and Ugandan citizens alike.
12/64

21/03/2016

However, when it comes to democratic accountability,
the run-up and aftermath to last month’s elections show
real issues. The Government and its security forces
detained opposition figures without legal justification,
harassed their supporters and intimidated the media.
It passed legislation restricting the operations of
non-governmental organizations, banning them from
acting against the “interests of Uganda”. President
Museveni’s actions contravene the rule of law,
jeopardize Uganda’s democratic progress and threaten
Uganda’s future stability and prosperity.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
President Kabila appears to be considering a similar
path. His country remains one of the poorest in the
world, but it has begun to see gains in democracy,
stability and economic growth. In 2014, its economy
grew by 9.5 per cent. Yet as President Kabila’s term
nears its end, that fragile progress hangs in the balance.
Continued development depends upon further advances
against armed groups and the extension of State
authority. And, of course, it depends on free and fair
presidential elections in November. There is no credible
reason that the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
elections would not occur on schedule. The Independent
National Electoral Commission said in January that it
would need 18 months to update voter rolls. But election
experts assure us that it can be done in six months. As
the representative of a country that continues to debate
its own electoral processes, I recognize that elections
are not always perfect, and certainly not always easy,
but fidelity to the Constitution — not to mention longterm stability — means that elections must occur on
time. Not only must ballots be cast, but individuals must
be allowed to campaign for their preferred candidates
and express their opinions freely. There is no excuse for
the harassment and detention of peaceful activists and
opposition leaders in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, like the six activists I mentioned earlier or the 18
other members of the pro-democracy youth movement
known as LUCHA, who were detained last Tuesday
and held for four days. Their offence was peacefully
protesting the Supreme Court’s refusal to release two
activists, Fred Bauma and Yves Makwambala, who
were arrested a year ago and still have yet to receive a
trial. It should go without saying that this is not the path
to lasting stability. Fred, Yves, the Goma six and all the
other young people who have done nothing more than
seek a better future for their country should be released.
The Government’s attempt to limit its cooperation with
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to
force a reduction of troops is also concerning. Let us
be clear: the Council should not allow peacekeeping
missions to become pawns in political games. When
Blue Helmets are deployed, they must be allowed to
fulfil their mandate, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or any place else.
We need look no further than Burundi to see the
dangers of pursuing personal power over the interests
of the people. Burundi’s economy grew steadily for a
decade, but contracted by an estimated 7 per cent last
year. President Nkurunziza’s decision to stay in office,
in defiance of the Arusha Accords, and his crackdown
on political opposition have swiftly undone the
country’s progress of recent years. That is evident in the
widespread reports of sexual violence, the more than
400 people who have been killed, the over 250,000 that
have fled the country and the even more challenging
economic times that, unfortunately, lie ahead. What
remains to be seen is whether President Nkurunziza
will take decisive action to correct course. Some of his
Government’s recent commitments are encouraging,
but none have yet been matched by meaningful action.
Of the 2,000 prisoners he pledged to free, just 158 have
been released to date, and only 47 of those were political
prisoners. Two of the five radio stations shuttered have
been allowed to re-open. But that is just two of the five,
and one of those allowed to re-open is pro-Government.
We will welcome and support constructive steps when
we see them. But rhetoric is not enough.
Let me conclude. The United States has historically
been a strong partner of all four of those countries, as
it has been for others in the region. Those partnerships
are not tied to any particular individual leader, but to the
people of those countries. This has been evident in our
long-standing aid programmes, our efforts to encourage
stability and our commitment to institution-building.
It is evident, too, in our strong support for the PublicPrivate Alliance for Responsible Minerals Trade,
which we hope will enable supply-chain solutions that
encourage the legitimate trade in natural resources.
All four of the leaders I have mentioned today have
led their countries through extraordinarily difficult
times, but the choices they make now will determine
whether their countries’ gains are sustained and how
they themselves will be remembered decades from now.
President Obama told an audience in Ethiopia last year,
“Sometimes you’ll hear leaders say, well, I’m the
only person who can hold this nation together. If

S/PV.7653

that’s true, then that leader has failed to truly build
their nation.”
Those nations are ready. If they are given opportunities
to fully participate in democratic processes, to hold
their leaders accountable, to be subjected to and benefit
from the rule of law, they will not merely survive, they
will prosper.
The President: I now give the floor to His Exellency
Mr. Ignacio Ybañez, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Spain.
Mr. Ybañez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by thanking Angola and in particular you,
Foreign Minister Chikoti, for the organizing today’s
open debate, which is of the utmost importance and
topicality. I also extend my thanks to the SecretaryGeneral, the Commissioner for Peace and Security of
the African Union, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral and the representative of the World Bank for
their valuable contributions.
A well-known African proverb affirms that when
two elephants fight the grass gets hurt. The Great
Lakes region continues to experience some of the worst
conflicts currently ravaging the African continent.
The region has not completed its search for the path of
peace, stability and prosperity, and it is the population
that is suffering the consequences.
In recent decades, the structural transformation of
the Great Lakes has been spectacular. In the 1990s, we
witnessed a brutal genocide in Rwanda, followed by a
cruel war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
2013, we witnessed the signing of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region. The distance
between those two events is enormous.
But this transformation is not enough. Or put another
way, it has not been completed. The region continues
to fail to turn the page on conflict. The constant
threat of conflict forces us to look further — to try to
understand the deeper forces that persist in a region
still suffering from instability and violence despite the
still-remarkable progress in stabilization and growth in
countries such as Rwanda and various regions of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that context, I
want to discuss three challenges that we consider to be
priorities, namely, democratic governance, inclusive
development and regional cooperation.

16-0778013/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

The first factor is democratic governance. Every
peaceful, stable and prosperous society is built upon
a social contract that requires leaders to fulfil their
responsibilities and provide services to everyone in
the civilian population. The democratic mandate is the
best instrument we know to fulfil these objectives and
is the expression of a fundamental right, namely, the
right to political participation, which makes citizens
the architects of their own destiny. The absence of
governance leads to a vacuum of responsibility and the
inability to provide adequate services to the population.
The lack of democracy implies the denial of the rights
of individuals.
In the Great Lakes there is a serious problem of
lack of democratic governance. Some countries have
made progress in the provision of services to its
population, but in several of them elections do not end
up becoming an instrument of democratic development
and social inclusion. Political participation is an
essential instrument for empowering citizens. Today
it is essential to ensure that this includes women, who
have been traditionally excluded in many societies and
who are possibly the greatest force for change in the
world. Inclusion and respect for legal procedures are
conditions to ensure that electoral processes contribute
to peace, stability and prosperity.
Constitutions and the legal order as a whole are
frameworks for coexistence that no one can overturn,
because all citizens are equal before the law. And the
leaders must lead by example. It is essential to respect
the provisions and limitations of presidential mandates,
since the rotation in power is one of the best safeguards
of peace and stability. The most worrisome case at
the moment is that of Burundi, which I would like to
address in greater detail.
Over a year ago, Burundi was poised to be honoured
as an example of success in the Great Lakes. It seemed
to be a country able to turn the page on violence and
instability and begin writing a history of development
and prosperity. In April 2015, that illusion began
to unravel. Since then, the number of dead has not
stopped growing. And there are approximately 240,000
Burundian refugees who have been forced to leave
the country. This situation can and must end without
any further delay. Spain respects the role of African
countries as primarily responsible and interested in the
prosperity and stability of their continent and believes
that, as emphasized by the Presidents of Africa at the
African Union Summit in January, it is urgent to have an
14/64

21/03/2016

inclusive and unconditional political dialogue that fully
respects the Arusha Agreement and the Constitution of
Burundi and enables the parties to reach a broad and
generous agreement on the future they want for the
Burundian people.
The second fundamental challenge is to achieve
inclusive economic and social development that
benefits all citizens of the countries of the region. This
challenge is also a non-negotiable obligation, for we
cannot go on justifying the tens of millions of people
living in poverty, the millions of suffering young people
whose outlook on the future is marked by hopelessness
and the lack of opportunity, and the millions of women
suffering from attacks on their lives and integrity and
living excluded from economic and social participation
in a region that is extraordinarily rich.
Let us take the case of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The country has enormous resources of
all kinds, valuable deposits of minerals, fertile soil and
plentiful water resources — in a world where water and
energy are two of the most precious assets. With the
support of the international community, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo can and should move forward
in combating the illegal exploitation of its resources,
especially in the eastern part of the country. We
must move from armed groups to the generating of
tax revenues and from violence and corruption to the
construction of schools and hospitals and the creation
of decent jobs for young people.
The question now is how to unlock the energies
that still prevent the achievement of the future that
the people deserve. In part, this question has been
answered — through democratic governance. It is
crucial for the institutional strength of the State to reach
those areas that today remain outside the control of the
law. In those places where the State is not present, where
the law is not respected, violations of human rights and
illegal exploitation of natural resources go hand in hand.
The State must return to those regions or newly appear
in areas where it could not be found previously. In other
words, it is necessary that there be a fair and inclusive
electoral process and that constitutional parameters be
adjusted. We look forward to the country’s upcoming
elections. They will be the best way to measure the
maturity of the people and institutions of Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We have confidence in them.
The third major challenge for the Great Lakes
region is developing effective regional cooperation that
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

is able to ensure that the countries of the region come
together to achieve a better future and that they share
the benefits of prosperity. The Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region is the key reference point
for all efforts, and its provisions must be fully respected
by all its signatories. In particular, it is crucial that no
country tolerate or assist any armed group in any way.
I would to mention in that regard the recent agreement
on the resumption of military cooperation between the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the (Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo, which is an excellent development and
which, we trust, will soon begin to bear fruit. We
must recognize the crucial role played by MONUSCO
in helping Congolese society achieve the goals I
mentioned earlier. With respect to the repatriation of
the former combatants of the Mouvement du 23 mars,
we agree with the Secretary-General’s encouragement
that the countries of the region decisively move forward
pursuant to the Nairobi Declarations.
Finally, I would like to express my concern about
reports of the recruitment, training and infiltration of
a group of Burundian rebels in neighbouring countries
for the purposes of carrying out attacks against
Burundi. As I said earlier, the situation in Burundi is
extremely serious, and the work of the countries of
the region is essential to finding a peaceful solution to
the crisis. In the past, episodes of mass violence in the
Great Lakes region have been closely interconnected,
and there is no reason to think that the dynamics have
changed today. For humanitarian reasons, but also for
self-interest, all countries in the region must make
every possible effort to bring an end to this conflict,
which casts a dark shadow over the present and the
future of the region. The voice of the African Union
and its capacity to maintain peace on the continent are
extremely important in that respect and must be heard
clearly and firmly.
I began my statement by citing an African proverb,
and wish to conclude it by quoting another: “In order
to cross a bridge you must first reach it.” After a few
decades of uncertainty, the Great Lakes region has now
reached its bridge and has all the capacities it needs to
cross it, leaving a past of violence and instability behind
it once and for all. The international community’s
could be of great assistance, but in the final analysis
the countries of the region are masters of their own

S/PV.7653

destinies. The challenge is so huge that there is no room
for doubt or hesitation, and requires all their energy and
commitment. The present moment is highly complex,
but the future of peace and stability that we seek for the
region is within our reach. Let us move forward.
Mr. Duddridge (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Sir, for convening this important and timely debate.
I join others in thanking the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
Bringing peace to the Great Lakes area has been
one of the most difficult challenges faced by the
Council. Decades of violence and chaos have left
millions dead — millions without hope or, indeed,
a home; millions vulnerable to attack from armed
groups. The Charter of the United Nations pledges to
save successive generations from the scourge of war.
In the 70 years since we collectively made that pledge,
nowhere has it rung more hollow than in the Great
Lakes region.
Nowhere is that more obvious today than in
Burundi. When I visited the country in December last
year, I heard horrific stories of suffering and abuse.
People spoke of torture, disappearances, extradjudicial
killings, mass graves and murder, and indiscriminate
raids on their homes. I met with health workers who
were running out of medicine for sick children, human
rights activists living in fear for their lives, and
traders who were helpless against the collapse of their
economy, which prior to the troubles was doing so well,
as we heard earlier. In January, the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights noted that extrajudicial
killings were increasing, despite the Government’s
claim that the situation was normal. Evidence of nine
mass graves — one of which contained at least 100
bodies — was cited in the same report, again denied by
the Burundian Government. And the violence continues
today. Abductions and killings are creating a climate of
fear. Just last month, Human Rights Watch presented
credible evidence of the increasing and worrying use of
organized sexual violence.
The United Kingdom is committed to doing
everything in its power to seek a peaceful solution to
the situation in Burundi. We must not, collectively
or individually, repeat the mistakes of the past. We
thank the Secretary-General for his leadership and
members of the Council for their leadership and active
engagement, particularly during their second joint
visit to Bujumbura and Burundi earlier this year. We

16-0778015/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

welcome the pledges made by the African Union (AU)
and the East African Community to take decisive
action to prevent human rights abuses anc crimes
against humanity more generally in Africa. We in
the United Kingdom stand ready to support the AU.
We thank Uganda for its constructive participation
in this mediation process, and we also welcome the
participation of His Excellency Benjamin Mkapa,
former President of Tanzania, in these efforts and offer
him our strongest support and assistance.
It is right that the international community should
play its part. However, let us be clear. Let us be under
no misunderstanding. The primary responsibility for
this crisis lies with the Burundian Government. The
Burundian Government has failed in its fundamental
duty to its nation to support the security and safety of
its own people. It has within its power the power to
change things. Burundi has found a pathway to peace
before, and it must do so again. President Nkurunziza
must deliver on his promises to the Secretary-General
and representatives of the African Union.
The first step is simple. The Government must
participate in a fully inclusive dialogue with all
parties — not just those whom President Nkurunziza
feels happy dealing with. All parties must be included,
as peace among just a few is no peace at all. We have
learnt time and time again elsewhere in the world
that, for peace to endure, communities need to resolve
conflict peacefully. The United Kingdom believes
genuinely that democratic and accountable governance
is the best foundation for stability. That means a frank,
lively and uncensored national debate, an active,
representative civil society, and a freely operating
media. It also means timely and democratic transition
of power to maintain lasting stability. Failure to allow
that transition puts the progress made across the Great
Lakes at risk. We urge all countries of the region to use
electoral processes to demonstrate their commitment to
peace, stability and accountability.

21/03/2016

We stand by resolution 2211 (2015). The Democratic
Republic of the Congo must hold elections this year,
in accordance with its Constitution. With every missed
milestone in its democratic journey, the Government
loses credibility with the United Kingdom and, I
believe, with the Council. It breaks a promise not to us,
but to its people, threatening further instability in that
already fragile region.
We know that the process is not easy, and we are
ready to help. We are ready to help with funding and
support for the electoral process. The Council has
also offered its full support to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and I expect that
to be repeated when the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is renewed later this week. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo must make the most
of this support, and seize the opportunity to show
leadership across the region.
The United Kingdom believes in the enormous
potential of the countries and the people of the Great
Lakes. That is why we have maintained our strong
friendships and support. But their fates are inextricably
linked, so their Government must work together if this
potential is to be realized. The Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, signed by the countries
of the region in 2013, offered a comprehensive, joint
approach to the region’s problems, but not enough has
been done to deliver it.

Today, that is particularly pertinent to the Republic
of the Congo, which held elections yesterday following
a referendum in which a national debate can be said,
sadly, to have been neither frank, lively or uncensored.

We all know that peace and security are
fundamental building blocks for economic growth.
Together, they hold the key to unlocking the potential of
the people of the region. The Private Sector Investment
Conference for the Great Lakes Region of Africa, held
in Kinshasa — of which we have heard something
earlier in the debate — last month highlighted how
poverty fuels conflict in the region. But it also showed
that investment, economic growth and job creation
can and will build peace. In recognition of that, the
United Kingdom recently appointed trade envoys to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.

Looking across the border, 2016 is a crucial year
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The United
Kingdom is a particularly close long-term partner of
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and we want them to enjoy stability and prosperity.

I urge leaders of the region to play their part in
bringing peace, making the measures set out in the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework a reality
and uniting to make long-term peace and prosperity. As
they strive to do so, the people of the Great Lakes region

16/64

16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

will have the full support of the United Kingdom — and,
I hope, of the Council.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to beging by warmly
welcoming and thanking you, Mr. President, and the
Angolan presidency for convening today’s open debate.
We also appreciate the comprehensive concept note
(see S/2016/223) circulated, which helps to guide this
timely discussion. We welcome and acknowledge the
presence and participation of high-level representatives,
including ministers and senior Government officials
around the table and from countries of the Great Lakes
region. My delegation thanks the Secretary-General
and all the other briefers for their presentations. We
commend their dedication to bring peace and stability
to the region and we fully support their ongoing efforts.
Malaysia welcomes the Great Lakes Region
Strategic Framework and the road map just presented.
We hope that the plans elaborated will galvanize both
Member States and regional and international actors in
strengthening the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region.
While aligning my delegation by the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, Malaysia
wishes to emphasize the following with a view to
further contribute to the discussion.
First, it is imperative that we bring an end to all
armed conflicts in the Great Lakes region. Ending the
cycle of violence will require a multi-pronged approach
that entails both short- and long-term measures.
Secondly, we must redouble our efforts to
neutralize the lingering vestiges of armed groups,
which are the main cause of insecurity in the region.
We welcome the resumption of cooperation between
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo and the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to defeat armed
groups operating in the eastern part of the country. We
urge the parties to armed conflicts in other parts of the
region to disarm and commit to participate in peaceful
ways to resolve conflict.
Thirdly, in addition to coordinated military
operations, tackling the drivers of conflict — such as
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
the illegal exploitation of natural resources — is equally
important. Disrupting the sources of income of armed

S/PV.7653

groups is vital in weakening and dismantling them for
good. Strengthening regional mechanisms to tackle the
illicit flow and promote the sustainable management of
natural resources is essential.
Fourthly, the importance of dialogue and respecting
peace processes and agreements as part of ending
armed conflict and preventing it from recurring cannot
be overemphasized.
Fifthly, governance frameworks and the capacity of
national institutions must be shored up. In particular,
we wish to highlight the importance of security sector
reform and of strengthening justice systems and
accountability mechanisms to fight impunity, especially
for serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law.
In addition to those aspects, serious attention
must also be given to the root causes of conflict and
violence in the region, in particular poverty. Efforts
to improve socioeconomic development in the Great
Lakes region are therefore crucial, and should be
carried out in tandem with efforts to end violent
conflict and strengthen State authority in enforcing
the rule of law, justice and accountability. We welcome
initiatives, such as last month’s Great Lakes Private
Sector Investment Conference, held in Kinshasa and
jointly organized by the Office of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, which provide much-needed opportunities for
economic cooperation and transformation. We hope
that the momentum from the Investment Conference
will be sustained through strengthened engagement
among Member States, regional organizations and the
international community.
On our part, Malaysia remains committed to
providing capacity-building training to member
States of the Great Lakes region through the Malaysia
Technical Cooperation Programme (MTCP). To date,
approximately 3,000 participants from 13 countries
of the region have benefitted from MTCP training in
areas such public administration, good governance,
health services, education, sustainable development,
agriculture, poverty alleviation, investment promotion,
information
and
communications
technologies
and banking.
The well-being and prosperity of the people
of the Great Lakes region must be at the heart of all
our efforts. We wish to draw special attention to the

16-0778017/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

children and youth of the region, who have borne the
brunt of decades of conflict and who remain vulnerable
to grave violations where armed conflict persists in
the region. Thousands of children remain among the
ranks of armed groups across the region. Securing their
release and facilitating their reintegration into their
communities must be given importance as part of longterm measures to break the cycle of conflict. We pay
tribute to the tireless work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, UNICEF and national and international
partners in advocating for child protection, including
the release and reintegration of children associated with
armed forces and groups and providing much-needed
services to children affected by armed conflict. We
call on all parties to armed conflict in the Great Lakes
region to end and prevent violations and abuses against
children, including by adopting and implementing
child-protection action plans and commitments in
cooperation with the United Nations.
Malaysia also strongly supports efforts to empower
youth in the region, including through projects
and initiatives outlined in the Regional Strategic
Framework. We call on the international community to
support those efforts. We believe that the rich dividends
in peace and stability for the region will be well-worth
the investment in supporting the development of
children and youth.

21/03/2016

In the past two decades, the Great Lakes have
witnessed some of the most brutal and devastating
conflicts since the Second World War. The genocide in
Rwanda in 1994 set in motion events that resulted in
three major African wars and the deaths of a further
5 million people in the years that followed. For much of
that period, the positions of the international community
were characterized by missed opportunities and an
inability or unwillingness to act. Africa’s institutions
have also struggled. Today we are still working through
the consequences of those failures. And the costs in
terms of lives lost, women and children traumatized,
infrastructure shattered and development foregone
continue to rise.
We must acknowledge that much work has been
done by the African Union, regional organizations
and players, the United Nations, the World Bank and
intergovernmental and non-governmental actors. There
have been bright spots. As the United States Ambassador
pointed out, there have been impressive economic
gains — in Rwanda in particular, but also in Uganda.
As she also noted, however, political developments and
human rights have not kept pace and undue weight has
been given to the cult of personality, to the detriment of
the long-term future of those countries.

In conclusion, Malaysia believes that this vision
of peace, security and stability — shared not just by
countries in the region but also by the international
community — is achievable through our collective
efforts and sustained political will. It is time to close
once and for all the chapter of conflict and destruction
that has haunted the Great Lakes region for over a
century and to raise the curtain on an era of peace and
security. We hope that today’s open debate will pave
the way towards the beginning of such an end.

Furthermore, we cannot honestly claim to be even
close to achieving sustainable peace. In the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, many of the same
militias that played a central role in the previous
conflicts continue to operate, largely with impunity,
and the potential for violence around the upcoming
elections poses serious risks to national and regional
stability. In Burundi, we have watched as many of the
gains of the past decade, in terms of development and
national reconciliation, have crumbled away in a matter
of months, while the President of the country and those
around him have prioritized their personal ambitions
over the good of Burundi, its people and the collective
national commitment to reconciliation reflected in the
Arusha Accords.

Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank the
delegation of Angola for organizing this open debate
on one of the regions of Africa that has taken up a
very large part of the Security Council’s time over the
past two decades. I also want to thank the briefers,
especially Special Envoy Djinnit, Mr. Chergui, and
Mr. Pillai of the World Bank, for their helpful briefings
on the contributions of their institutions to the ongoing
efforts in the Great Lakes region.

Regional engagement and a focus on confidence­
building measures are essential for achieving longterm and sustainable solutions. We therefore welcome
the United Nations Great Lakes Regional Strategic
Framework, which requires a consistent approach to
implementation and active follow-up by the countries of
the region. We also welcome the Great Lakes plan was
just presented by the Secretary-General. The Security
Council must actively support those processes.

18/64

16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

During New Zealand’s campaign for election to
the Council, we heard time and time again that the
single greatest priority for improving the Council’s
effectiveness was to strengthen its performance in the
prevention of conflict. However, 10 years on from the
adoption of the landmark resolution 1625 (2005), the
Council continues to shy away from putting conflict
prevention into practice, including in relation to the
Great Lakes region.
My delegation recalls the sense of optimism that
greeted the establishment in 2002 of the Council’s
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa. Initially, that Working Group
provided practical leadership on specific country
situations and pioneered innovative working methods
that have since been adopted by the Peacebuilding
Commission’s country-specific configurations. We
would like to see such leadership again.
Since joining the Council, New Zealand has
advocated for more serious and effective efforts to
address emerging conflict risks. Effective conflict
prevention requires a willingness to be flexible and to
work patiently and discreetly with national and regional
stakeholders. It also requires a genuine commitment
by stakeholders to look for solutions, rather than for
excuses for delaying engagement. New Zealand argued
for early, discreet engagement on the part of the Council
in Burundi, including through the dispatch of a minimission to support the efforts of the African Union
(AU), thr Secretariat and regional partners. It took six
months for that visit to happen. By that time, the crisis
was entrenched, and the scope for quiet diplomacy was
seriously diminished.
We cannot afford to allow opportunities for early
preventive engagement to slip through our fingers. In
our view, there are a number of steps that the Council
can take to improve its game.
First, we must find ways to improve the Council’s
awareness of risks of evolving conflict, so as to enable
more timely, consistent and effective attention to its
role in managing them. To achieve that, we will need
to be open to some changes in our working methods,
so as to enable Council members to better engage
using a problem-solving mindset. We also need to
invest in building a real working relationship with
the Department of Political Affairs and to strengthen
the quality of information that we receive from the
Department and the wider Secretariat.

S/PV.7653

Secondly, improving our game also means making
practical improvements to the Council’s willingness and
ability to work with regional organizations, particularly
the AU, on emerging conflict risks. The Council’s
interaction with the AU Peace and Security Council in
Addis Ababa in January demonstrated the value of such
engagement. We need to find ways to make meaningful
engagement an everyday habit, particularly in dealing
with complex challenges, such as the conflict risks
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South
Sudan. Perhaps the Ad Hoc Working Group could play
a greater role there.
Thirdly, both Council members and national
and regional stakeholders need to move beyond the
current false dichotomy between confrontation and
non-intervention, which so often leads to inertia. Early
engagement to prevent conflict is both a legitimate and
a necessary role for the Council. At the same time, such
efforts are more likely to be effective when conducted
in a manner that is sensitive to concerns of national
sovereignty and when stakeholders see the Council as
a body committed to working with them in order to
try to resolve real problems. That means proceeding
early before problems are entrenched; it means being
respectful and genuinely listening to national and
regional actors; and it means coming to discussions
without political agendas, other than the prevention of
conflict and the saving of lives.
Fourthly, in order to be effective in preventing
conflict, the Council must take a more inclusive
approach, involving the countries concerned, important
regional stakeholders and others who can contribute
to our discussions in a balanced and collegial way.
We think that we should make more use of informal,
interactive formats aimed at deepening our political
analysis of the issues involved and building shared
understanding of the drivers of conflict. If we do not
understand the issues properly, we will come up with
the wrong solutions.
More broadly, New Zealand remains concerned that
the international community and the United Nations
itself continue to underfund conflict prevention. The
review of peace operations identified the urgent need
to shift our focus from investing resources when we
respond to crises to the far more cost-effective and
humane business of preventing conflict. We call
for urgent and favourable consideration by the Fifth
Committee of the modest proposals put forward in
that regard by the Department of Political Affairs.

16-0778019/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

We need stronger mediation and analytical capacity
in the United Nations, and we need to invest more in
regional engagement.
It is vital that we pay close attention to the Great
Lakes region in the year ahead, particularly the
evolving situations in Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and that the Council be ready
to act — discreetly and sensitively, with the Secretariat
and regional partners — to ensure that the people of
that region are spared further tragedy so that they
can build a future commensurate with the human and
natural resource capital of the region.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express my gratitude to
Mr. Georges Rebelo Chikoti, Minister of External
Relations of the Republic of Angola, for presiding over
our meeting today. I commend the important initiatives
launched by Angola during its Council presidency,
foremost among them this open debate.
The Great Lakes region is at the heart of the
African continent, and therefore at the centre of
Egypt’s concerns — not only because of geographical
considerations but also for political, economic and
development reasons, given the rich natural resources
of the region, the great cultural heritage of its people
and its massive growth potential. Promoting peace in
the Great Lakes region will have an impact on and
implications for development and stability across
Africa.
As a sponsor member of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, Egypt is proud
of the important role played by the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region in promoting democracy
and strengthening cooperation among the countries of
the region.
We should seek durable solutions based, first
and foremost, on the principle of national ownership;
secondly, on collective responsibility, given the
regional dimension of peacebuilding operations and the
challenges facing security and stability; and thirdly,
on the building of partnerships with regional and
international partners, especially the African Union
and the United Nations system.
Despite the significant advances made and all of
the efforts undertaken by the Congolese forces and
the support and cooperation provided by the United
20/64

21/03/2016

Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in that area, the
situation in the eastern part of the country still suffers
from instability and the spread of armed groups, which
pose a major impediment to the establishment of State
authority and a great threat to civilians, which has dire
humanitarian consequences. In addition, a number of
the countries in the region face serious challenges that
require the support of the international community.
The great challenges facing the elected authorities in
Central Africa in terms of rebuilding State institutions,
achieving reconciliation and finding durable solutions
for dealing with armed groups require the consolidation
of regional and international efforts.
With regard to the situation in Burundi, there is a
need to build on the positive outcomes of important visits
undertaken by the delegation of African Presidents, the
Secretary-General and the Peacebuilding Commission
and to intensify efforts aimed at achieving a political
solution through inclusive national dialogue. All
possible assistance must be extended to the mediation
efforts of the African Union and the East African
Community. Actions to prevent conflicts must be
undertaken under the coordination of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General.
Armed groups pose the greatest security
impediment in the region. Egypt therefore welcomes
the communiqué issued by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda, which includes measures
aimed at resuming joint military operations against
armed groups. Egypt also stresses the need for all
the parties to implement their obligations set out in
the Nairobi Declarations and the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. Egypt would like to stress
the need to coordinate United Nations efforts with the
African Union and international partners, with a view
to creating a regional environment that promotes those
commitments and requirements.
Moreover, the neutralization of armed groups
requires the pursuit of an integrated approach that is
not limited to military means alone, but also includes
measures to address the root causes of instability. The
most important reason for those conflicts is likely
the illegal exploitation and trafficking in natural
resources, which is worth more than $1.2 billion
annually. Such trafficking finances the activities of
armed groups and organized crime and deprives the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo of
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

their natural resources and the potential contribution
that those resouces could make to the national
development process.
I would like to refer to important developments over
the past few years, including the development of national
legislation with regard to the management of natural
resources and fighting the illicit exploitation thereof.
We must address the gap between the enactment of laws
and the implementation of those laws on the ground.
Better enforcement would allow the region and beyond
to uphold the rule of law and to hold perpetrators to
account. Egypt will continue to accord that matter due
importance through its chairmanship of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) and the work of the Group of Experts on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which traces the
financing of armed groups there.
An integrated approach to addressing those
different challenges requires an emphasis on the close
relationship among peace, security and development. In
that regard, Egypt welcomes the holding of the Private
Sector Investment Conference for the Great Lakes
Region, given the potential contribution of the private
sector to development and the creation of jobs for youth.
In view of its close relations with the countries of
the region, Egypt is keen to do its part in supporting
development projects, especially through the platform
of the Egypt Agency for Development Partnerships,
through capacity-building and the exchange of expertise
in all development spheres. Furthermore, Egypt’s
initiative for the development of the Nile River Basin
countries has been extended to include several projects
in the Great Lakes region in areas such as infrastructure
and energy. Recently, a memorandum of understanding
was signed with the Congolese development agency for
the development of such projects in the region.

S/PV.7653

of United Nations peacekeepers deployed around the
world, today the Great Lakes region still remains a
cause for concern and the subject of great attention for
the international community.
That is why we thank you, Sir, both as President
of the Security Council and as the head of the
International Conference of the Great Lakes Region,
for having organized this important meeting. Our
efforts must continue. We also welcome the presence
of the Secretary-General, several ministers from the
countries of the region and the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, Mr. Chergui, as well
as the representative of the World Bank, Mr. Pillai. We
thank them as well as Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
for his commitment and we support the road map that
he has put forward for implementation.
In his report (S/2016/232) on the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the SecretaryGeneral outlines certain positive developments in the
region, in particular the holding of largely peaceful
elections in Tanzania, but also in the Central African
Republic, where the challenges were immense. Today
a new era is opening in that country. The end of the
transition and the establishment of elected authorities
requires our continued commitment to help the country
in stabilizing and developing.

In conclusion, it is our hope that our debate today
will provide an opportunity to reinvigorate the resolve
of the international community to bolster the will of the
countries in the Great Lakes region and its people to
work towards peace, stability and development across
the region.

On the other hand, the political crisis in Burundi,
which is also accompanied by a serious security and
humanitarian crisis, is a sad reminder that we must never
be complacent. After a decade of commitment on the
part of the United Nations, which has enabled Burundi
to begin its journey on the road towards stability as
outlined in the Arusha Accords, we are concerned by
the developments in the country. It is crucial that all
regional and international actors join efforts to ensure
that violence ends and that a genuine dialogue begins
without any delay. France, together with the United
Nations and the African Union, will continue to act to
end that crisis and to re-establish peace and stability
while respecting human rights.

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): The
Great Lakes region has been the subject of a great
deal of attention on the part of the Security Council
for many years. The commitment of the United Nations
demonstrates the importance attached to stability in
that region at the heart of Africa. With over a third

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we are
on the eve of a crucial period for the future of a country
where the United Nations has been so committed. The
situation has improved since 1999, when the Council
decided to create the United Nations Observer Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Nevertheless,

16-0778021/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

we remain concerned by the continuing fragility of the
country. In several regions, the security situation has
stabilized and the restoration of the State’s authority
is taking place across much of its vast territory. The
capacity of the Congolese armed forces and the
Congolese national police have also been reinforced.
However, instability in the east of the country
remains a reality, with dozens of armed groups still
contributing to the expansion of a spiral of violence.
They are illegally exploiting natural resources and are
committing abuses against the population, who has
already suffered too much. Everyone must play their
part to put a definitive end to the threat posed by those
groups. Most concerned in that regard, of course, are the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in cooperation with the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as the countries of the region.
Efforts to restrict political space also concern us,
on the eve of important electoral deadlines for the
country’s future. The deadlines stipulated for those
elections, envisaged in the Constitution as taking
place by the end of the year, concern us, especially
as they risk causing a new period of instability in
the country. Respect for civil liberties is essential,
and that calls for vigilance on our part. We urge the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of Congo to
respect their constitutional commitments as well as
their international commitments to respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms, and we encourage all
stakeholders to move towards dialogue in all its forms,
and not to resort to violence. In that regard, again, the
Security Council will have to be particularly vigilant,
at a time when we are considering the renewal of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
France is a long-time friend of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the countries of the region.
Our greatest wish, as a close partner and member of the
Security Council, is to see those countries consolidate
their momentum towards sustainable peace and
stability. That would allow them finally to profit from
the wealth of their natural resources and to focus on their
development and the well-being of their populations.
In that vein, we welcome the holding in Kinshasa on
24 and 25 February of the Private Sector Investment
Conference for the Great Lakes Region, which brought
with it hopes for the essential economic development
of the region. Better regional economic cooperation
22/64

21/03/2016

will be crucial to creating common and shared interests
and for overcoming divisions. The regional strategic
plan presented today and the commitment of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
will be key to keep moving in that direction. France,
along with the European Union and the United Nations,
remains at your side, Sir, in your capacity within the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, to
help the whole of the region along that path.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela appreciates the Republic of Angola’s
initiative in convening this timely and important
debate on the prevention and resolution of conflicts
in the Great Lakes region. We welcome the Minister
for External Affairs of Angola, Mr. Georges Rebelo
Pinto Chikoti. We also appreciate the briefings by the
Secretary-General, the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region and
the Adviser to the Office of the Vice President for the
Africa region of the World Bank.
Venezuela associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Iran on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would like
to highlight the valuable role played by Angola in its
capacity as Chair of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region since 2014, and believes that
concerted action on the part of the the Conference, the
United Nations, the African Union and the Southern
African Development Community is a priority if
we are to accelerate development and consolidate
regional peace.
Today, the countries of the region are facing serious
threats to their stability and economic development,
thanks to a a number of distinct conflicts in which
exclusion, the exploitation of natural resources and
poverty play a important role, which in turn affects
the States’ consolidation of their institutions and
jeopardizes the progress that has been achieved in recent
years. Various criminal groups have taken advantage
of the vacuum created by that institutional weakness
to exploit and trade illegally in the region’s mineral
resources and wildlife, as the Secretary-General
highlights in his report on the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region (S/2016/232),
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7653

which indicates that 50 per cent of that illegal traffic
comes from the illicit trade in gold. If such extraction
were done legally under the direction of the States in
the region, the revenues would substantially benefit
their economic and social development.

small arms and light weapons. With the proliferation
of weapons being a destabilizing factor in the region,
we believe that the international community, and the
Security Council in particular, should redouble its
efforts to ban the transfer of arms to non-State actors.

In that context, it is worth noting that since 1990
at least 18 armed conflicts have been funded directly
through the illegal extraction and trade of natural
resources. That is why the natural resources best suited
to financing conflicts are those that can most easily be
extracted, concealed and sold. In many cases, armed
groups do not have to carry out the extraction directly
but simply finance themselves through illegal taxes
on the commodities’ trade and export transit routes.
In that regard, the international community should
support and strengthen the institutional capacity of the
countries affected by this issue to enable them to have
full and sovereign control over their natural resources,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1803
(XVII), adopted in 1962.

It is important to give direct support to countries
that have ended fighting in order to ensure they do
not relapse into conflict, by providing them with the
capacity to manage their natural resources and their
economies themselves, including by strengthening their
institutions. Cooperation on the part of international
donors, international financial institutions and bilateral
partners, without conditions, is crucial to promoting
development projects, reducing the vulnerability of
the population and revitalizing economic activity in
the Great Lakes region. We believe that the United
Nations system in the Great Lakes region should
continue to promote economic development, which
should be handled holistically. It is vital to ensure that
the settlement of conflicts addresses the underlying
economic and social causes of the problems that have
historically plagued these States. The political process
must be addressed in a multidimensional way, supported
by the pillars of development policy, the protection of
human rights and the eradication of poverty, which will
ultimately bring shared benefits.

The complexity of the problems affecting the
countries of the Great Lakes region requires us to
implement an international policy of genuine cooperation
and solidarity that takes into account the countries’
individual situations in creating the economic and social
conditions conducive to eradicating poverty, exclusion
and violence. We would like to highlight the efforts of
the States and regional bodies of Central Africa to work
for peace and democracy. In that regard, we welcome
the elections that have been held in the region in recent
months. We encourage the international community
to support and respect the sovereign decision of the
region’s citizens in electing their authorities while
avoiding the customary practice of interfering in those
countries’ internal affairs. We also urge for stability
and national reconciliation in order to overcome the
political and security difficulties that may arise, so as
to resolve differences through political negotiation at
both the national and regional level.
Venezuela is aware that dealing with such conflict
situations is a challenge both for the Governments
of the countries in the region and for regional and
subregional bodies and the United Nations. Extreme
actions and violence represent a major challenge to
peace. We therefore firmly condemn any violation of
human rights or international humanitarian law caused
by armed clashes and emphasize the importance of
accountability for ending persistent cycles of impunity.
We also support the fight against the illicit trade in

Lastly, we reiterate our solidarity with and support
to the work that the countries of Africa are doing to
promote peace and economic and social development
for their peoples. We believe that the priorities
established in the road map for the Regional Strategic
Framework for the countries of the Great Lakes region
should be our shared goal, supported by the entire
international community.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal is pleased to see the Minister
for External Affairs of Angola presiding over today’s
meeting of the Security Council. We also welcome
the briefings of the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, and those of Mr. Said
Djinnit, Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union and Mr. Vijay Pillai,
Adviser to the Office of the Vice President for the
Africa region of the World Bank.
The delegation of Senegal greatly appreciates the
opportunity provided today by the Angolan presidency
to discuss the burning issue of the prevention and
resolution of conflicts in the Great Lakes region. The

16-0778023/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

subject is important in that it directly concerns a dozen
countries in the heart of Africa in a sensitive region
that for decades has unfortunately been afflicted by
multidimensional crises with diverse causes resulting
from the convergence of historical, demographic,
economic, social and political factors. It is also
important for the numerous initiatives that are currently
under way with the aim of halting this crisis-provoking
dynamic and turning it into a virtuous cycle of stability,
prosperity and inclusive, sustainable development.
A review of the situation in the Great Lakes region
points inevitably to how closely the issues are tied to
the land, to natural resources, to the division of power,
the rule of law and good governance, all factors that
create fertile ground for intercommunal clashes. We
recall the genocide that occurred in Rwanda in 1994
and the intra-communitarian wars in Burundi, which
were tragedies that culminated in a spiral of instability
in that important region of the continent.
In addition to the evolving aftermath of those
tragedies, other regional conflicts have exacted a heavy
toll on the trust and relations among States, creating
challenges and substantial limits to necessary regional
cooperation. Indeed, various reports on the subject,
including those of the Secretary-General, reveal an
emerging pattern in the the causes and manifestations
of the crises wracking the region. Without being
exhaustive, we can identify the following, inter alia:
the growing number of armed non-State entities;
inter-community or ethnic tensions; problems pertaining
to governance and democracy; the illegal exploitation
of natural resources that fuel conflicts; the cyclical
flows of refugees and internally displaced persons, and
their resulting humanitarian consequences; the high
number of civilian victims in that context of insecurity;
sexual and gender-based abuse, particularly against
women and girls; and lest we forget, the poignant case
of children who are often recruited by warring parties.
Given those crucial challenges, the momentum
launched by the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region is of critical relevance, in that it allows us
to establish a holistic regional approach that, above and
beyond providing localized and necessarily piecemeal
responses to conflicts and crises, takes into account of
the need for prevention, integration, and the promotion
of peace and sustainable development in the region.
Similarly, the Senegalese delegation believes that the
Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the Great
Lakes Region, which was signed in 2006 by members
24/64

21/03/2016

of that organization, represents a reference point for
stimulating and coordinating regional efforts in the
following areas: peace and security; democracy and
good governance; economic development and regional
integration; and humanitarian and social issues.
A similar approach seems to justify the conclusion
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
which, as its name suggests, is specifically designed to
handle the challenges raised by the chronic insecurity
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I take this opportunity to call on the signatory
countries to strengthen their commitment and
cooperation in promoting the effective implementation
of that important regional instrument.
Analyzing several crisis situations in Africa
teaches us that, when duly assumed, regional leadership
can be a decisive factor in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts. It is therefore important to work to
better harmonize the policies initiated by the various
subregional, regional and international organizations
with regard to the Great Lakes region with a view to
effective and coordinated action on the ground at every
stage, from early warning to the lasting resolution of
conflicts, including peacebuilding, which is in and of
itself a considerable tool for preventing the resurgence
of crises. Moreover, taking into account the importance
of cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, the delegation of Senegal stresses the
importance of strengthening of a partnership with
greater synergies between the Security Council and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
which your country, Sir, is leading so effectively. We are
convinced that sharing efforts and resources will build
the capacities and effectiveness of regional entities in
preventing and resolving conflicts.
The security challenges facing the region require
the reinforced commitment of the international
community and optimal regional cooperation in order,
among other things, to end the threat of armed groups
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and effectively combat the illegal exploitation
of raw materials. We also need a strong commitment
of the States of the region and regional and subregional
organizations, supported by the relevant international
bodies, to assuming responsibility for electoral
processes in an effective and sustainable manner, which
very often take place against a background marked by
tension that can lead to devastaing conflict.
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

We also take this opportunity to commend the
outstanding contribution of women in the region to
peace and reconciliation, in particular through the Great
Lakes Women’s Platform, which allows women to make
their voices heard and to participate more actively in
the decisions and social and economic development of
the region. The programme is a concrete embodiment of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security, and has already chalked up
significant achievements that draw in further support
at regional and international levels.
In conclusion, I should like to stress the importance
of the development aspect of the search for solutions to
the challenges facing the Great Lakes region, and call
for the full inclusion not only of women, but also of
young people, who need to be included in the private
sector of the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin
by expressing my sincere appreciation for Angola’s
leadership, as Chair of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, in consolidating peace
and security in the region. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral and the guest speakers for their briefings.
Today, I wish to focus on one crucial issue — the
importance of preventing lapses and relapses into conflict.
According to the World Development Report 2011, 57 per
cent of all countries that experienced civil war between
1945 and 2009 returned to conflict. Unfortunately, that
is the case in the Great Lakes region. The people of
the region have been suffering from instability for too
long. In that regard, let me share with the Council the
outcomes of the Peacebuilding Commission’s Working
Group on Lessons Learned.
As Chair of the Group until last year, I led
discussions on the challenges faced by post-conflict
countries during and after United Nations mission
drawdown. From that exercise, we drew two lessons.
The first is that there is a need for the sustained attention
of the international community to mitigating political
and financial gaps resulting from United Nations
mission drawdowns. The second is that there is a need
for countries in transition to build national institutional
capacities to achieve lasting peace. The question is how
to translate these lessons learned into practice in postconflict settings to prevent relapses.
The United Nations has various tools for funding.
In addition to the funds and programmes of the United
Nations, we have the Peacebuilding Fund and the United

S/PV.7653

Nations Trust Fund for Human Security at our disposal.
Let us make good use of them. These funds carry out
great work. Let me cite some examples. In Burundi,
the Peacebuilding Fund recently supported a group of
512 female community mediators in addressing more
than 5,000 local disputes. These female mediators are
helping to reduce tension within communities and also
between communities and security forces. The United
Nations Trust Fund for Human Security supported the
empowerment of conflict-affected communities in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. That project
supported the restoration of livelihoods and agriculture,
benefitting returnees, internally displaced persons and
members of host communities. It also provided access
to improved social services and local infrastructure.
Both funds contribute to empowering people in fragile
situations and to enhancing social resilience against
relapse into conflict.
Countries in transition can also make use of United
Nations and bilateral donor partnerships to consolidate
peace. Let me elaborate on the actions Japan has taken
in partnership with the United Nations focusing on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The first example is an institution-building
programme. For 12 years Japan has provided training
for more than 20,000 of the country’s total of 100,000
police officers, in collaboration with police forces of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This means
that one of every five police officers in that country
has been trained by Japan. We have also undertaken
the training of trainers to strengthen the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s training capacities. Given
that most of that country’s officers, unfortunately,
start working without any training, we believe the
programme has greatly contributed to enhancing the
capacity of the police force of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
The second example is a project for the reintegration
of children formerly associated with armed groups into
an education system in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Children are mixed discreetly with other
children in schools in order to avoid prejudice. This
project provides support not only to the children, but
also to the entire community so that children can go to
school. For example, parents are given support to sustain
their own livelihood. It is important that children are not
relied upon as a source of labour. Also, a professional
training centre for youth employment has been built.

16-0778025/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

This is an ongoing project carried out in collaboration
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, UN-Women, the World Food Programme,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Children’s Fund. We look forward to its
successful outcome.
Japan wishes to hold an open debate on the theme of
peacebuilding in Africa during our Council presidency
in the month of July. We would like to fully utilize
today’s very timely discussion in preparation for our
open debate in July.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Sir, we welcome you as President of the
Security Council, and we hope that your personal
participation in today’s meeting and Angola’s active
role in the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, will contribute to intensification of this organ’s
activities in the search for answers to the region’s
challenges.
The activities of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region are complemented by the active
efforts of the international community to settle conflicts
and to normalize the situation in the region. This
constructive involvement is demonstrated by, among
other things, the Secretary-General’s recent visit to the
subregion and by the successful Great Lakes Private
Sector Investment Conference. We hope that it will give
impetus to economic cooperation among the countries
in the region and will facilitate the strengthening of
peace and trust there. I take this opportunity to note
the role of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to the Great Lakes Region, Said Djinnit, in organizing
that Conference.
A cornerstone of stability in the Great Lakes region
is the 2013 Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region. Russia advocates all signatories fulfilling all
of their obligations, including respect for sovereignty,
non-intervention in the internal affairs of one another’s
countries, and the consolidation of trust among the
countries of the subregion. In that context, we cannot
help but be concerned by the mutual accusations we
have heard recently, including about the recruitment of
militants from among refugees. We call on the parties
to exercise maximum restraint and to take steps for
de-escalation, including the utilization of the broadened
joint monitoring mechanism, which is stipulated by the
Framework.
26/64

21/03/2016

We are compelled to note that, three years after the
signing of the Framework, its military component is
still far from fully realized. We pay tribute to the efforts
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which remains committed to the fight against
militias and to stabilizing the situation. However, armed
groups remain active in the country and in the region as
a whole, contributing to the prolongation of inter-ethnic
conflict, the illegal proliferation of weapons and
the worsening humanitarian situation. It is clear that
there is no solution through the simple use of force.
Comprehensive measures are needed to eradicate the
root causes of the conflict, including via consolidating
State power in the areas freed from rebels. At the same
time, we call on country’s Government and on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to quickly renew
their full-scale joint operations to neutralize militias,
and we welcome the January signing of an agreement
on the resumption of cooperation in that area.
We are also concerned by the state of affairs
regarding repatriations from Uganda and Rwanda to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular of
several hundred former combatants of the Mouvement
du 23 mars. Despite active efforts through the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
this process has practically ground to a halt. The
lack of practical results might lead to recidivism
among the former militants from the Movement. The
implementation of the Framework might be made easier
by the consolidation of its governing structures. We
welcome the measures being taken by the signatory
countries to increase the effectiveness of the functioning
of the regional monitoring mechanism, as well as the
efforts by the Technical Support Committee.
Many countries in the region are actively
establishing or reforming democratic institutions.
Some of them are entering an important pre-election
period. We welcome the mediation and good offices
through the United Nations and regional organizations
in helping to start national mechanisms for political
dialogue in those countries. Having said that, there
can be no doubt that any internal political conclusions
will lead to long-term stability only if they are reached
and adopted by the countries themselves. Imposing
solutions in such affairs is unacceptable.
As a member of the Group of Friends of the Great
Lakes Region, Russia intends to assist further in the
search for a peaceful process in the region.
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate the Angolan presidency for
organizing this debate, as well as for the concept note
that has been distributed (S/2016/223, annex). Allow me
as well to say how pleased we are at the participation
of many other ministers and deputy ministers present
today, as well as of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region, the Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union, and the
Adviser from the Office of the Vice President of the
World Bank. Uruguay also welcomes the participation
of the Secretary-General at the beginning of our
meeting and is pleased to note its satisfaction with and
support for the work he is doing in the different areas
of his activity.
At this stage in the debate, many of my remarks
have already been said by speakers that preceded me,
so I will deliver a shortened version.
My country joins others that have expressed
their satisfaction at positive developments in various
elements the Great Lakes region, in particular those
due to the intense effort carried out by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union and the excellent
level of work and partnership with the United Nations
in this entire matter. We also emphasize, as other
delegations have, the fundamental importance that
we attach to development and the protection of human
rights and peace and security in the area, and we stress
the need to address the structural causes underpinning
all the conflicts in the area. Our country has a longstanding commitment to the Great Lakes region,
which is especially reflected in our commitment to the
stability and pacification of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo through our contribution of troops to the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
We agree with what was said a few minutes ago
in this Chamber with respect to the importance of the
peacekeeping operations in the Great Lakes region
and their continuity. We also agree, in particular, in
the light of the threats to the ongoing peacekeeping
operations as a result of unilateral actions that have
been developed in certain contexts during the last few
days. With regard to MONUSCO, Uruguay wishes
to express its satisfaction with the recent agreement
signed between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO, in order to
resume cooperation between the Mission and the
Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV.7653

and, convinced that strengthening cooperation between
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations is essential to fulfilling
the mandate of the Mission, hopes that the agreement
will be fully implemented.
Similarly, Uruguay is closely monitoring the
evolution of the political process and is looking forward
to democratic elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo taking place in a transparent and inclusive
manner. In that context, Uruguay would like to express
its support for the work that is being done by African
Union facilitator, former Prime Minister of Togo,
Mr. Edem Kodjo, with a view to supporting a transparent
and inclusive dialogue between all political actors. It
is crucial that the authorities ensure respect for human
rights and avoid outbreaks of violence before, during
and after the elections.
Uruguay is concerned about the current political
situation in Burundi and the growing human rights
violations committed within its territory and expects
the parties to reach a peaceful and negotiated resolution
to the conflict. It also believes that the thousands of
refugees from Burundi who have been displaced to
neighbouring countries should be a matter of concern
and priority for the international community. In this
context, Uruguay wishes to thank the Secretary-General
for his efforts during his recent visit to Burundi, which
followed the visit made by the members of the Security
Council, hoping that President Pierre Nkurunziza will
honour his commitments and allow the development of
a transparent and inclusive process of dialogue for the
parties involved.
For Uruguay, of particular concern are the possible
repercussions that the situation in Burundi may have
at the regional level and for the tension that has arisen
between the Government of Burundi and Rwanda. In
this regard, we urge the Governments of both countries
to resolve their differences through dialogue because
the revitalization of their good-neighbourly relations
and spirit of cooperation will help to ensure that peace
and stability take substantial root.
We cannot end our statement without calling
the Governments of the region and the international
community as a whole to unite their efforts aimed at
achieving political and social stability in the Great Lakes
region. These efforts must be based on strict respect for
the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs
of neighbouring countries and in a renewed agreement

16-0778027/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

not to tolerate or lend assistance or support of any kind
to armed groups operating in the region, nor to shelter
or protect any person accused of serious crimes, and
to cooperate with the International Criminal Court
in arresting people accused of these crimes where
appropriate so that impunity does not prevail, so as to
put an end to the very serious humanitarian situation and
ensure the protection of civilians and the strict respect
for human rights of all people without distinction.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Angola for its initiative in convening today’s
open debate. We are pleased to see Angolan Minister
for Foreign Affairs Chikoti here in New York, presiding
over today’s meeting. I thnk the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit,
the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Mr. Smail Chergui, and the representative of the
World Bank, Mr. Vijay Pillai, for their briefings.
The Great Lakes region, which is in the heart of
the African continent, is steeped with a long history
and rich cultural heritage and blessed with tremendous
potential for development. However, for a long time, the
Great Lakes region has been troubled by frequent armed
action and instability in the security environment, giving
rise to underdevelopment and a grim humanitarian
situation. China welcomes the Secretary-General’s
visit to Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo towards the end of February during which he
attended the first private sector investment in the Great
Lakes region, which speaks volumes about the level of
attention and support the United Nations accords to
peace and development in the region.
The States of the Great Lakes region are an
interdependent community of common destiny and
shared interests. The interests of all countries in the
region are best served by ensuring common security,
realizing shared development and promoting win-win
cooperation. China supports the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region in actively
facilitating the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region,
working hard to resolve regional conflicts through
good offices and promoting general security and
common development in the region on all fronts. China
applauds the active efforts of the countries of the Great
Lakes region and would like to see all parties in the
region build confidence and consensus in line with
28/64

21/03/2016

their shared interests as countries in the region, commit
to eliminating the root causes of disputes and conflicts
and realize lasting peace and common development in
the region. In this vein, I would like to highlight the
following four points.
First, the Framework should be unswervingly
implemented to achieve the shared goals. China
encourages countries in the region to respect each
other’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity, actively promote political trust among the
parties and reinforce good-neighbourliness. We hope
the international community will, in support of the
wishes of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, actively help it to intensify security
sector reform, strengthen governance in the eastern
part of the country and promote national reconciliation,
while lending robust support to the Regional Oversight
Mechanism and Technical Support Committee of
the Framework. China welcomes the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General Djinnit’s proposal on the
nine priorities for the period 2015-2017 and supports
the continued positive, constructive role he has been
playing in assisting the States of the Great Lakes region
to implement the Framework.
Secondly, regional security capacity-building
and cooperation should be strengthened to achieve
common security. China welcomes the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s positive
endeavour to build up its national armed forces
(FARDC) and neutralize armed groups, and appeals to
the international community to step up the training of
and support for the FARDC so that it can take on the
role of defending national security as soon as possible.
We hope that the States of the region will actively
implement the Nairobi Declaration and work together
on the repatriation of former Mouvement du 23 mars
fighters and on jointly neutralizing such armed groups
as the Democratic Liberation Forces of Rwanda and the
Allied Democratic Forces.
We hope that the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) will assist and support the FARDC
in addressing the threats posed by armed groups
within the purview of its Security Council mandate.
China welcomes the decision of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO to
resume joint military operations against armed groups.
We hope that strategic dialogue between the two parties
will continue, and that such issues as the MONUSCO
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

drawdown and exit will be properly resolved in the light
of the wishes and practical needs of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Thirdly, investment in the region’s development
should be scaled up to achieve common development.
Poverty and underdevelopment are among the root
causes of the chronic conflicts in the Great Lakes
region. China welcomes the drafting by the United
Nations country teams in the Great Lakes region
of the Regional Strategic Framework to support the
region’s economic integration, boost cross-border trade
and promote the sustainable management of natural
resources. We appeal to the international community
to make greater investments in the agriculture, energy,
infrastructure, communications and tourism sectors of
the countries of the region in order to create more jobs
and facilitate regional trade and connectivity, so that
those countries can all partake of the peace dividend
and achieve economic prosperity. We hope that the
World Bank will actively implement the Great Lakes
region initiative, honour its $1.4 billion pledge to the
region and make it available as soon as possible, so
as to offer strong support to the region’s economic
development and employment improvements.
Fourthly, the functions of regional and subregional
organizations should be leveraged to build synergy
and draw on each other’s strengths. The African
Union, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the East African Community, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and other
regional and subregional organizations have their roots
in Africa and are therefore knowledgeable about and
in tune with Africa. They enjoy prominent advantages
and have played an important role and accumulted a
wealth of experience in addressing such issues as those
concerning Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan.
China supports the ongoing joint efforts of the
regional and subregional organizations concerned
to work to resolve hot issues in the region through
dialogue, mediation and good offices. The United
Nations and the international community at large
should strengthen coordination with the regional and
subregional organizations concerned and work together
for a peaceful and stable Great Lakes region.
China attaches great importance to developing our
relations with Africa. At the Johannesburg summit

S/PV.7653

of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, held
in December 2015, His Excellency Mr. Xi Jinping,
President of China, proposed five pillars for ChinaAfrica relations: political equality and trust, win-win
economic cooperation, mutually enriching cultural
exchanges, mutual assistance in security, and solidarity
and coordination in international affairs. China is ready
to enage in practical, results-oriented cooperation with
Africa in the following 10 areas: industrialization, the
modernization of agriculture, infrastructure, finance,
green development, trade and investment facilitation,
poverty reduction, public health, culture, and peace
and security. China is ready to work with the entire
African continent to implement the outcomes of the
Johannesburg summit, improve livelihoods in Africa
and continuously support African States in building
their independent development capacities in the light of
Africa’s actual needs.
China has been consistently supportive of the
peace process in the Great Lakes region and sent a
special Government representative on African affairs
to the countries of the region on multiple good offices
missions. China is an active player in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, supports Africa in addressing
its own problems in the African way, contributes to the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the East African Community, and helps the regional
organizations concerned to promote regional peace. We
stand ready to work with the countries of the region and
the international community in unremitting efforts for
the peace, stability, prosperity and development of the
Great Lakes region.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): It is a great pleasure to
see you, Mr. Minister, presiding over our meeting.
At the outset, I should like to state that Ukraine
also aligns itself with the statement to be delivered on
behalf of the European Union.
The security situation in the Great Lakes region
remains a topical issue on the Security Council’s agenda
after several decades of consideration and numerous
decisions taken on this subject. The root causes of
conflicts in the region are all too familiar: inter-ethnic
and intertribal rivalries, inefficient governance, weak
political institutions, judicial systems partial to the
views of those who happen to be in power, high levels
of corruption, widespread poverty, the pervasive and
deeply destabilizing activities of uncontrolled armed

16-0778029/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

21/03/2016

groups, flows of refugees and displaced persons due to
armed conflicts and internal instability, and porous and
fluid borders.

list the odious Lord’s Resistance Army and its leader in
response to its destructive violent activities affecting a
large area of the region.

In this context, the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains one of the biggest
concerns. As Franz Fanon, an influential thinker and
Afro-Caribbean philosopher, once said: “Africa is
shaped like a gun, and Congo is the trigger. If that
explosive trigger bursts, it’s the whole Africa that will
explode”. That is why I would briefly touch upon the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
the first place.

We believe that the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region remains one of the key multilateral
mechanisms that can bring stability to the country.
Proceeding from the main principles and provisions of
that document, it is of utmost importance for all parties
and other relevant stakeholders to continue undertaking
the necessary efforts aimed at fulfilling their obligations
and commitments arising from the Framework. Taking
into account the joint commitment not to interfere in
the internal affairs of neighbouring countries, we are
deeply concerned over reports, including those coming
from the Panel of Experts, about numerous cases of
the territory and capacities of neighbouring countries
being used to train armed groups and infiltrate them
into adjacent regions and conflict areas.

As the Council is aware, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has not had a peaceful transfer of power in
the 55 years since its independence. Even today, we all
have the same worries that the ongoing internal dispute
over the elections in that country could spark violence,
with a possible spillover of instability into neighboring
countries. The Constitution of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo limits a President’s tenure to two popularly
elected terms. This provision was established after
years of the unchecked Mobutu rule, and it constitutes
a safeguard against a return to dictatorial practices.
It is an axiom that a democratic change of power
through elections is a fundamental principle and a
gateway towards progress in other areas of the social
and economic development of a country or community,
as opposed to a continued simmering of popular
discord, which can eventually erupt in a violent
protest, casting the country back to reliving earlier
distressful experiences. Bearing this in mind, we call
upon all national stakeholders, for the sake of their own
people, to pursue political dialogue and to accept the
international mediation of the United Nations, African
Union or other authoritative regional organization on
this issue.

The continued smuggling of natural resources from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains among
other serious challenges to the peace and stability
of the region. Regrettably, in the regional context,
natural resources tend to fuel conflicts rather that
contribute to sustainable development and economic
prosperity. In view of recorded facts with regard to
the involvement of military elements in the smuggling,
and the inability of the relevant authorities to prevent
the illegal use of natural resources, we believe that
additional serious efforts are needed to address the
phenomenon and reverse the prevailing trend. In our
view, the International Conference of the Great Lakes
Regional Initiative against the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources is a good example of the search for a
common solution that could ensure that those resources
are used to generate much-needed revenue and to
promote regional development.

One cannot but mention another issue that affects
the whole region — the irregular armed groups present
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They are still
active in the eastern part of the country and continue to
terrorize the civilian population, despite our numerous
calls for their neutralization and the deployment in the
area of one of the largest United Nations peacekeeping
missions, which we fully support. In this regard, as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic,
I would like to draw Council members’ attention to the
fact that the Committee recently added to its sanctions

The flow of refugees is another pressing challenge
faced by the Great Lakes region. Internal instability,
poor governance, ethnic intolerance and violations
of human rights on a massive scale by illegal armed
groups cause people to flee. As a result, approximately
430,000 refugees from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are seeking shelter in Burundi, Rwanda,
Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania. In that
connection, I cannot overlook the situation in Burundi.
We cannot afford to waste the chance to prevent the
impending conflict situation from descending into
chaos. The wounds are still fresh, as we all remember

30/64

16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

very well the terrible repercussions of the Burundian
genocide in 1972 and the 1993-2005 civil war there. It
is the duty of the Security Council and of the whole
international community to ensure that such tragic
events do not unfold again. All stakeholders must
spare no effort to prevent any development that could
increase the risk of a full-fledged conflict and mounting
violence against the Burundian population. For its part,
the Burundian Government should not fail to live up to
its commitments and obligations.
I am proud of Ukraine’s contribution to United
Nations efforts to bring stability to the Great Lakes
region, especially as one of the major troop-contributing
countries to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and as a former member and vice-Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission. We are resolved to
maintain that commitment, including as a member of
the Security Council in the period 2016-2017.
Peace, stability and prosperity in the Great Lakes
region require strong commitment, joint action and
dialogue. All of those are the necessary prerequisites
for addressing current conflicts and preventing future
crises and calamities. Let us hope that this discussion
will serve as a Council contribution to fostering that
commitment and as a sign of an unwavering dedication
to carrying out our responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security in that crucially
important region.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber. I would also like to appeal to speakers to
deliver their statements at a reasonable speed so that
interpretation may be provided accurately. I wish to
inform all concerned that we will be carrying out this
open debate right through the lunch hour, as we have a
very large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Alain
Amié Nyamitwe, Minister of External Relations and
International Cooperation of Burundi.
Mr. Nyamitwe (Burundi): At the outset, please
allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
country, Angola, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March 2016. I wish

S/PV.7653

to express my appreciation for the timely scheduling of
this meeting on this theme. This region has suffered at
least three major wars over the past 25 years, leaving 3
to 5 million people dead and a huge number of refugees
as a result. We have to learn from the past. I also wish
to thank the Secretary-General, the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and
the representative of the World Bank for their briefings.
We associate ourselves with the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
My delegation appreciates the role of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region in
organizing the Great Lakes Private Sector Investment
Conference last February. We believe that creating
economic opportunities for youths is key to preventing
conflicts. I also wish to acknowledge the positive role
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region in the fight against the illegal exploitation of
natural resources and in addressing regional peace and
security issues.
Burundi is recovering from a massive, severe
campaign of violent regime change. All possible means
imaginable were used. All types of people were called
upon. The sound of that campaign reverberated in
places as far as this very building. Information was
manipulated, while all sorts of prophecies competed
in predicting the worst that could happen to Burundi.
The opposition was clearly given credence for all its
allegations. And at least one speaker today relayed
those at this meeting.
Our history does not start with the re-election of
President Pierre Nkurunziza. As a matter of fact, when
one assesses the situation that our country is fixing,
one cannot help but conclude that violence predates the
current term of the President. Burundi was attacked on
30 December 2014 by a group affiliated to an opposition
political party, with a view to thwarting the 2015 electoral
process and installing a different political regime in
Burundi. The insurrection of April 2015 was organized
by the same ring of politicians, associated with groups
in the military and police, again, with the objective of
overthrowing the Government. The attempted coup of
13 May 2015 and the subsequent attacks on Burundi
from neighbouring Rwanda confirmed the overall
objective of regime change.

16-0778031/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

It goes without saying that information was
manipulated and some organizations formulated
policies with regard to my country based upon wrong
assessments, or in the absence of any assessment at
all. Groups that, in the name of exercising the right of
assembly, have been busy killing innocent civilians
over the past months are now coming out in the open.
Many are confessing their crimes, indicating who their
leaders are and which country trained them. One is met
with horror and shock as mass graves are found one
by one in the hotbeds of the insurrection. Yet not long
ago, especially in the wake of the simultaneous attack
against three strategic military barracks, Government
forces were accused, without any regard to either its
right of self-defence or the aggressive nature of the
assailants. Again, right here a short while ago, the
United Kingdom Minister decided to attack Burundi on
this issue without regard for those developments.
Burundi is not on the verge of a precipice. Contrary
to the rhetoric that we have heard here, we believe that
the security situation is improving. The challenges of
today are met with the resolve of President Nkurunziza
and the Government to address them. On human rights,
for instance, our Government has made a number of
goodwill gestures, in full compliance with our own laws
and in respect of our sovereignty. A presidential decree
granting pardon to 2,000 prisoners was issued, and their
release is ongoing. That number includes youths who
had been arrested because of acts of violence against
the State and civilians over the recent months.
While we understand the legitimate concerns that
have been raised from time to time, we wish to take
this opportunity to invite our friends, near and far, to
understand our peculiar situation. As a sovereign State,
Burundi also has laws, which need to be enforced, as
befitting independent States. There is a country called
Burundi.
In view of all this, we find it difficult to understand
some of the decisions made against our country by
some partners, who have consistently proclaimed,
urbi et orbi, that they want peace and stability in
Burundi. Cutting aid to the Government does not fall
in the category of measures aimed at stabilizing the
country — to the contrary.
Our Government has offered cooperation in
monitoring the human rights situation on the ground.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights dispatched a team of three experts,
32/64

21/03/2016

who concluded their mission last week. We are finalizing
the memorandum of understanding with the African
Union on monitoring the human rights situation. The
number of monitors has increased to 200 — 100 are in
charge of human rights and the other 100 are military
experts — and part of their mandate is to monitor the
border with Rwanda.
Criminal acts involving the mass graves, which for
months were not clear, are no longer mysteries. We now
know who killed the three Italian nuns two years ago
and who killed and hurriedly buried innocent civilians
in areas that were hitherto covered by remote-controlled
demonstrations. Criminals are now talking; they are
now indicating who gave them what and which country
in particular played which role.
With regard to the right of association, I wish to call
for caution, as some groups claim to speak in the name
of the human rights cause but are actually engaged in
efforts to promote one side of the conflict. Sometimes
they promote ethnic hatred, with all the consequences
that entails.
As for the freedom of the press, two radio stations
that had been shut down in the wake of the attempted
coup have been authorized to operate once again.
Today, 13 radio stations operate on the territory.
Only three are still shut down, for obvious reasons of
ongoing investigations.
With regard to dialogue, former President Mkapa of
Tanzania is already at work. Last Friday he concluded
his tour in the region by visiting Burundi, where he
was received by President Nkurunziza. We will soon
be informed of what is to be the way forward. It is our
view that the stability, security and territorial integrity
of the State should not be sacrificed at the altar of
inclusiveness. Resolution 2248 (2015) charts the way
forward. President Mkapa needs to be encouraged and
supported. Our Government trusts in his capacity to
conduct the dialogue process towards new horizons.
Meanwhile, the National Commission for Dialogue has
opened a debate on important matters pertaining to the
life of our nation. There can be no more inclusiveness
than that which brings on board all the citizens of the
country. Our Government asks for support.
The United Nations Great Lakes Regional Strategic
Framework was developed because the region was
plagued with negative forces and counted millions
of refugees. Both challenges compound the already
existing fragility of the region. The Framework was
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

established to address both issues by devising ways of
creating wealth for future generations while fostering
cooperation among concerned countries.
Obviously, acts of aggression are contrary to the
Charter of the United Nations and to the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region. Supporting
negative elements that disturb peace in neighbouring
countries is prohibited by existing relevant instruments.
Recruiting refugees for the sole purpose of destabilizing
Burundi is a clear violation of international law. The
civilian nature of refugee camps has to be respected. I
wish to thank the Secretary-General for emphasizing
that aspect.
All the acts I have described have been committed
by the Republic of Rwanda against Burundi. The Group
of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has reported those facts, joining other institutions and
States. The youths arrested in the course of their lost
battle of Kabarore, on 10 July 2015, have given extensive
details of their journey from the refugee camps to the
battlefield, through training camps inside Rwanda.
The security authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have also arrested some youths who, along
with deserters from our army and Rwandan nationals,
were using the eastern territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to launch their attacks against
their country.
Urgent action is needed. Burundi has already
turned to the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, which at least twice decided to deploy
to Rwanda the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism
with a fact-finding mandate. That mission is yet to
be authorized by Rwanda. On the other hand, our
Government will soon turn to international courts on
that very serious threat. The required Security Council
action is of course without prejudice to the right of the
State of Burundi to enter into a litigation process.
I wish to reiterate my country’s full commitment
to, and support for, the United Nations Great Lakes
Regional Strategic Framework for 2016-2017. Burundi
offers its full cooperation for the fulfilment of the road
map therein proposed. It is our wish that point 5 of the
road map cater to the Burundian refugees, whose return
should be facilitated. We stand ready to work together
with the Office of the Secretary-General in that regard.
Finally, my delegation wishes to remind all our
partners that a selective assessment of the situation

S/PV.7653

in the region cannot help. Some talk today, in 2016,
in the way they used to refer to African countries in
the 1950s, giving orders to fully sovereign nations.
By all standards, it is absolutely unacceptable that
some appoint themselves as judges over our countries.
Burundi is not a colony of any country. As I said earlier,
our country vows cooperation, not subjugation. All the
African initiatives to address the situation in Burundi
should, in our view, be respected and encouraged. We
cannot accept undue interference in those initiatives.
The facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue is a
former President, who deserves respect, not injunctions
on how he should conduct his business.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Augusto Ernesto dos Santos Silva,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Portugal.
Mr. Silva (Portugal) (spoke in Portuguese; English
text provided by the delegation): It is with great
pleasure that for the first time I address the Security
Council on behalf of Portugal in this timely initiative of
the Angolan presidency. I welcome the tireless efforts
of the Secretary-General and of his Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes Region to support the stability, peace,
security and development of the countries in the region.
In that connection, we welcome the United Nations
Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework 2016-2017.
We acknowledge with satisfaction the establishment of
a road map of priorities by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, as well as the six pillars of action
selected, all corresponding to areas we recognize to
be crucial for adequately tackling the most important
challenges in the region.
Portugal, both nationally and as member of the
European Union, has supported and will continue to
support the efforts of the countries in the Great Lakes
region in their processes of national reconciliation,
democratic consolidation, social and economic
sustainable development and the promotion of respect
for human rights, in accordance with the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, agreed in Addis
Ababa in 2013.
We have been following the situation in Burundi
with particular attention and concern. We commend
the efforts of the East African Community, the African
Union and the United Nations to promote an inclusive
dialogue. We believe that is the only valid path to avoid

16-0778033/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

an escalation of the conflict and further deterioration of
the human rights situation in the country.
The Arusha Agreement, which is still in force, is
a good example of an African solution to an African
problem. We hope that the current conflict will be solved
through inclusive political dialogue. The deployment
of 200 military experts and observers of the African
Union to the field is an important positive step.
There has been progress on security in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, progress
in the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations
has been slow, with the persistence of tension and
the presence of armed groups in the country. In that
context, we commend the recent agreement that enables
joint operations of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo/United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) against the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda. It is therefore crucial to ensure
strong support for MONUSCO and to promote its closer
collaboration with the armed forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We highlight the importance
of the strategic dialogue between the United Nations
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with regard to the MONUSCO exit strategy,
which, in our view, should be a gradual process based
on progress on the ground.
It is urgent to ensure the inclusiveness and
representativeness of the national political dialogue
within the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Any
changes in the constitutional framework that do not
garner the necessary political consensus represent a
risk factor for the country’s stability, with potential
negative repercussions for the entire continent.
The repeated violations of the ceasefire agreement
and the tragic human rights situation in South Sudan are
very concerning. All parties must commit with urgency
to fulfilling the terms of the Peace Agreement and to
establishing the planned transitional Government.
It is also urgent to ensure that humanitarian aid
reaches those in need throughout the whole region.
We therefore call for the unreserved cooperation of all
States in the establishment of the conditions required for
access so that we can lessen the suffering of refugees,
internally displaced people and populations in urgent
need of humanitarian aid.
34/64

21/03/2016

Africa holds a special place in Portuguese foreign
policy. Portugal is also firmly committed to effective
multilateralism that is based on the primacy of the
United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Our motivation is to constantly be
a solid partner in solidarity, both bilaterally and within
the European Union. We shall continue along that path,
in full respect for the principle of State ownership and
while recognizing the specific responsibility and role
of regional organizations.
We will continue to participate in the efforts
being undertaken by the international community
aimed at promoting dialogue with the countries of
the region, notably through regional and subregional
organizations, including the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the East African Community and the Southern African
Development Community.
We will promote and support training initiatives on
good governance, anti-corruption efforts, the equitable
distribution of resources, the empowerment of women
and the right to education. We stand ready to develop
cooperation in the area of capacity-building, notably on
the reform of the security and justice sectors. We will
encourage private-sector and civil-society participation
in the implementation of projects that promote peace
and development.
I take this opportunity to commend the work of
Angola in its presidency of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, in which it has promoted
efforts for the peaceful resolution of conflicts and the
development of the region.
Aside from the great challenges in the Great Lakes
region, there is great potential for development. Only
peace and security can foster the basic conditions
for development. Only peace can make it possible to
avoid the exploitation of natural resources by warlords
and rebel factions. Only good governance and solid
institutions will enable transparency in the extractive
industries and the implementation of policies to ensure
that economic development translates into human
development, tangible to all segments of the population.
No one should be left behind.
The consolidation of a democratic culture requires
stability. I do not mean stability at any price, but rather
stability built on strict fulfilment of the constitutional
order, the rule of law, transparency and free and fair
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

electoral processes, as well as State institutions that
safeguard the interests of the entire population.
In concluding, I reaffirm Portugal’s commitment
to collaborate with the countries of the Great Lakes
region, in the wish that Nelson Mandela’s dream of an
Africa at peace with itself will become a reality.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Tshibanda
N’tungamulongo, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Tshibanda N’tungamulongo (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your accession
to the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March. I am also particularly pleased to welcome,
through you, a kindred friendly country, Angola,
with which the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
long-standing, excellent relations marked by the seal
of reciprocal trust and respect. Next, I want to thank
you for having taking the initiative to organize this
important debate on the maintenance of international
peace and security and the prevention and resolution of
conflicts in the Great Lakes region, a theme that reflects
the interest that the Security Council has in our region.
This meeting allows us to assess the effectiveness of
our joint action for peace within our States and between
our States, and gives us an opportunity to reflect on
ways and means to accomplish that, not just so as to
resolve disputes but also, above all, in order to prevent
them, with the ultimate goal of bolstering cooperation
between the States of the region and thereby usher in
an era of lasting peace and stability. Finally, I want to
welcome the presence at this meeting of my friends
and brothers, Smail Chergui, Commissioner of the
African Union for Peace and Security; Maman Sidikou,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; and Said Djinnit,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, and to commend the way in which they
are carrying out their respective tasks.
Today’s debate has, above all, the interest of
keeping us well aware of the crisis in the region,
which, through its unprecedented duration and cost in
human lives and the massive destruction of goods and
infrastructure and the violation of human rights, not to
speak of its humanitarian aspects, constitutes for the
leaders and peoples of the African Great Lakes region a
test of their sense of responsibility; and for the Security

S/PV.7653

Council and United Nations peacekeeping operations
a test of their relevance and effectiveness; and for the
world in which we live a measure of its humanity. The
participation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in this debate, as in all previous meetings on the topic,
reflects a collective awareness of the challenges and
our ongoing willingness to work in concert with other
regional and international actors to meet the challenges
posed and affirm our determination to shoulder our part
of the responsibilty to ensure that peace and harmony
can return and be consolidated in the region, so that the
universality of the principles and values underpinned
by the Charter of the United Nations can be shown to
be effective and so that the Sustainable Development
Goals cease to be an illusion for the people of our
country and the peoples of the Great Lakes region.
The recurring conflicts in the Great Lakes region
are the result of the convergence of various factors, at
the heart of which are the moral and political failings of
the elite: the failings of the national elites when it comes
to governance, which for a long time has been, and in
certain cases remains, characterized by the denial of
the fundamental rights of citizens; the patrimonial
governance of States and the failure to respect
international law, thus opening the path to political
instability, social unrest, intercommunal conflicts
within States and open conflicts that have engulfed
the States of the region. We should also recognize the
failure of the elites within the community of nations,
which have not always lived up to their historic
responsibilities, owing to a lack of courage or to the
prevalence of diverging national interests, including at
the level of the Security Council. The result has been
subjective actions that have been at odds with the rules
of international law. Fortunately, despite those failings
and their tragic consequences, the spirit of the Charter
of the United Nations has always prevailed, and the
relevance of the universal Organization has always been
there to guide us. The same is true of the aspiration of
our populations to better living conditions, as well as
the determination of our peoples to control their own
destiny, and therefore to protect and preserve their
independence and sovereignty, while respecting, at the
national level, the rules of good political, economic
and social governance and, at the regional level,
respect for the international texts to which their States
have subscribed.
That is the context where many initiatives
undertaken by the States of the region and the

16-0778035/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

international community belong and should be
evaluated, including, in particular, the creation of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the signing of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework Agreement for the Democratic Republic of
Congo and the Great Lakes Region and the Security
Council’s adoption of several relevant resolutions,
including resolution 2098 (2013).
The conduct of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in dealing with all these initiatives has been
entirely responsible. Out of respect for the regional
and international commitments it has undertaken,
it has applied itself to implementing them, as it has
done with the Framework Agreement and the Nairobi
Declarations, despite the fact that implementation of
the latter has been obstructed for some time now by
the leaders of the former Mouvement du 23 mars.
We therefore remain committed to eradicating all the
negative forces and armed groups still active on our
territory. This fight, which was initially begun by the
Forces armées de la République Démocratique du Congo
on its own, and whose results are proof of a power and
professionalism that grows daily, has continued with
the support and cooperation of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the military operations
have been restarted. I should say that this struggle will
not end until the negative forces and armed groups have
been completely neutralized.
As witnessed by the excellent results we have had
so far, my country has shown the same determination in
implementing its national commitments by continuing
the reforms under way aimed at consolidating
democracy and the rule of law and rebuilding the
country and its economic and social development. In
order to solidify the State’s authority, especially in
formerly troubled areas, we have not only deployed the
National Police, the public administration and the courts
but also strengthened them, resulting in a significant
reduction in sexual violence. At the same time, the
decentralization provided for by the Constitution has
been consolidated through the enactment of a series of
laws needed to implement it, by the creation of 26 new
provinces and the election, to be held at the end of this
week, of new provincial governors and vice-governors.
Where the elections are concerned in particular, it is
important to emphasize that we are determined to hold
them on schedule, but above all in conditions that will
ensure their transparency, credibility and especially
36/64

21/03/2016

peace. In that context, the Independent National
Election Commission has been completely reformed
and, led by a new team made up of representatives of
the majority party, the opposition and civil society, is
actively preparing for elections, with one of its priorities
being the revision of the electoral register. In order to
overcome any obstacles to the process and prevent
post-election crises, the Head of State has invited
the political classes and civil society to an inclusive
political dialogue aimed at achieving a consensus on all
the issues dividing them ahead of time. In our view, that
is the only smart way in the circumstances, far more
so than any unilateral Government decision or solution
imposed from outside. We welcome the support to the
dialogue provided by the international community.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo’s strong
involvement in the implementation of regional and
international agreements is unfortunately not enough
on its own to end the damage done by the negative forces
and armed groups, still less to create the conditions
needed in the Great Lakes region for peace, stability
and prosperity. To do that, and to bring about positive,
real and lasting change there, it is essential that the
following five factors come together.
The first is that the other States signatories to
the various relevant regional and international legal
instruments must also be individually required to
implement them and to report periodically on that
implementation, particularly concerning respect for
each State’s sovereignty, non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States, the promotion of democratic
practices, and non-assistance to negative forces and
armed groups.
The second is that all States must be sincerely and
actively involved in combating those forces and groups,
as well as the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
within a framework of genuine cooperation on the
diplomatic, security and judicial fronts.
The third is that legitimate and necessary promotion
of the rule of law and democracy in the States of the
region must not be conducted at the expense of the
demands of peace and stability, without which there
are no real prospects for lasting improvement in the
overall situation.
The fourth is that without prejudice to the
universality of the principle of good governance, each
State’s individual circumstances, in terms of challenges
and also in efforts made and results obtained, should be
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

taken into account in evaluating its internal situation
and the importance of continuing support to it.
The fifth is that policies that incentivize private
investment and regional cooperation should be
implemented with the aim of achieving balanced and
integrated development in the region and thereby
providing better job prospects and decent incomes
for the countries’ populations, particularly women
and young people. In that regard, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of Congo welcomed
the holding in Kinshasa on 24 and 25 February of a
conference on private-sector investment in the Great
Lakes region. Opened ceremonially by the President
of the Republic, the conference was honoured by the
personal presence of the Secretary-General and other
high-level representatives of the worlds of politics and
business from the Great Lakes region and elsewhere.
It set the stage we need for peaceful coexistence and
shared prosperity in the region by identifying a number
of integrational projects in areas such as tourism, with
the mountains, landscapes and beautiful locations that
abound in Africa’s Great Lakes region making it a
naturally attractive tourist area. The same applies to the
energy sector, with the methane gas that countries in the
region have in common and the multiple watercourses
that represent possibilities for hydropower development
that are just as real. The prospects are similar for
development projects for the transport infrastructure
that is essential to the stimulation of cross-border trade,
intraregional commerce and the economic growth of
the countries of the region.
In conclusion, we should acknowledge that war
and armed conflict are at the root of the distressing
situation in the region, with its legacy of destruction of
the economic fabric, of loss of human lives, including
6 million Congolese and of the erosion of mutual trust
between the States of the region and their leaders.
Whatever the wounds and horrors that have resulted
from past suffering, of which we are all aware and
which we do not minimize, we cannot stay trapped in
dead-end positions indefinitely. That is why we must
promote reconciliation and cohesion within our States
and peaceful coexistence and cooperation between
them. Our history and geography require it, as do the
demands of survival and sustainable development.
Others before us, in other places, have endured tests
similar to ours. Without forgetting anything that had
happened, they were still able to renounce indefinite
reckless vengeance and a resort to force rather than

S/PV.7653

the force of law to resolve disputes. The prosperity and
peaceful understanding of those countries today should
be our inspiration.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank you
and your delegation, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s important debate on conflict prevention and
resolution in the Great Lakes region of Africa, and
for the concept note you circulated to Member States
(S/2016/223, annex). I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing. His presence here
today once again highlights his commitment to conflict
prevention and resolution, particularly in our region.
And I welcome the briefings by the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, Mr. Smail
Chergui, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes, Mr. Said Djinnit, and Mr. Vijay
Pillai of the Office of the Vice President for the Africa
region of the World Bank.
Conflict prevention and resolution have become
central to the work of the United Nations, but in the
wake of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda,
the growing intra-State conflicts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan, we see that the concept of
conflict prevention has been applied more in theory
than in practice. The United Nations, especially the
Security Council, was and still is much more focused
on crisis management than on crisis prevention.
The report (see S/2015/446, annex) of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations, as well
as the recommendations of the Secretary-General with
regard to the Panel’s report, rightly acknowledges the
primacy of politics with a focus on mediation and
conflict prevention. At the same time, it recognizes,
among other equally important tools, the usefulness of
strong global and regional partnerships in addressing
conflicts. Working together with the region in assessing
the situation with regard to the implementation of the
decisions of the Security Council can also help in
addressing the sources of conflict as early as possible.
The principles that we support will not bear fruit if
they are not implemented in good faith with a cohesive,
inclusive and effective strategy that brings on board all
stakeholders. That is why early-warning mechanisms
should guide the work of the Security Council in
preventing conflicts from arising. That would not only

16-0778037/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

improve the work of the United Nations, and of the
Security Council in particular, but it could also be costeffective when it comes to saving lives.
The situation in the Great Lakes region of Central
Africa speaks for itself. It is a region that has been
in turmoil since the 1950s. While various successive
efforts have been deployed, very few of them have
been aimed at addressing the root causes of the crisis.
For instance, the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region and the peace process in Burundi created
hopes that the epoch of violence in the African Great
Lakes region was finally drawing to an end. Howevr,
progress in realizing those initiatives has been limited,
if not disappointing.
With regard to the current situation in Burundi
since May 2015, political and security unrest in the
country have proved that the Great Lakes region is far
from being stable. Burundi is in political turmoil, with
State-sponsored armed militias murdering innocent
civilians in broad daylight. Moreover, the unverified
allegations from part II of the progress update in the
January 2016 report of the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the rumours
from Refugees International seek to externalize the
responsibility for the current conflict and represent
another failed attempt to shift focus away from the
real causes of the instability. Rwanda has already
demonstrated its obligation to protect and care for
refugees. While my Government is committed to
meeting its obligations under international humanitarian
law, it should not be negatively exploited by those who
expect to find solutions to the crisis.
The fact that Burundi has now descended into
a spiral of violence has not helped make the case for
our collective ability and will to prevent conflict, or to
protect civilians. By that I mean that the response from
the international community has been geared more
towards rhetorical exchanges than actions aimed at
preventing the escalation and the commission of mass
atrocity crimes. Nor has the response from Burundian
officials been better. Instead of exercising leadership
and living up to their responsibilities and obligations
to protect their own citizens, they have opted to turn a
blind eye to the daily killing of innocent civilians, and
the carnage continues.
On our side, in order to avoid any misunderstanding
of our intentions, we have requested the international
38/64

21/03/2016

community to work with us to plan the orderly and safe
relocation of Burundian refugees to third countries. Let
me just add that hatred and rhetoric directed against
my country, or against my President, are unacceptable.
He is our hero. Do not ever dare — ever — to treat him
that way.
The persistent presence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo of roaming predators under the name of
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR) — by the way, the FDLR are also in Burundi
today, working with the Government of Burundi, which
started the crisis — and the inaction on the part of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in
implementing the decisions of the Security Council, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the Southern African Development
Community have raised serious concerns about the
commitment of the stakeholders to seeking sustainable
peace and stability in the region. While we will
welcome the transfer of Ladislas Ntaganzwa yesterday
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we can
only note that nothing tangible has been achieved so
far on the ground when it comes to dealing with the
FDLR. Rwanda deeply deplores the lack of meaningful
action in the neutralization of that genocidal group
and terrorist organization, including its leadership.
It is unfortunate that the international community,
especially MONUSCO and its Intervention Brigade,
has not followed through with any military action
after the defeat of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23),
as called for by the regional bodies and the Security
Council. When we served in the Security Council from
2013 to 2014, we voted for resolution 2147 (2014).
The President’s concept note (S/2016/223, annex)
for this open debate also highlights the linkage between
natural resources and the forces of destabilization
and conflict. Without a doubt, natural resources have
served as the backbone for the efforts of countries so
endowed to advance their development agenda and to
lift their citizens out of poverty. In some parts of the
world, including the Great Lakes region of Africa, those
resources have been a blessing for some and a curse for
others. Many resource-rich countries remain in abject
poverty and continue to experience poor economic
growth — and, consequently, a lower standard of living.
The argument that the more resources a country has the
greater its economic growth and prosperity will be does
not necessarily hold true, just as it does not necessarily
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

hold true in marriages. The illegal exportation of
resources can be a factor in prolonging — and, in
some cases, fuelling — conflict, both in the areas of
exploitation and, at times, across the borders with
neighbouring countries. Armed groups in our region,
such as the Allied Democratic Forces, the Mai Mai,
the Lord’s Resistance Army and the genocidal group
FDLR, have benefitted from the illegal exploitation of
resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
order to cause insecurity in neighbouring countries,
including in mine.
The Government of Rwanda has set up verification
mechanisms that help to identify the origins of mineral
resources on its territory. Rwanda is one of the most
advanced countries in the region in the implementation
of the ICGLR certification mechanism. That was
confirmed at a meeting of the ICGLR on the fight
against the illegal exploitation of natural resources held
in Kigali in November 2015.
The country’s Geology and Mines Authority has
set up a mineral tagging and sealing scheme, which
aims to curb illegal trading of conflict minerals such as
tin, tantalum and tantalite. The project, called the ITRI
Tin Supply Chain Initiative, was set up by the United
Kingdom tin industry to assist countries in the region,
and the Government of Rwanda ensures that minerals
from Rwanda are verified and traceable right from their
source to smelters. We encourage counties in the region
to adopt similar measures, which will contribute to the
transparency of mineral trading in the region.
Allow me, before I conclude, to respond to the
remarks made by Ambassador Samantha Power and her
analysis of the situation in four countries of the region,
including my own. I hope she is watching this on the
webcast. If not, I ask that the message of Rwanda be
conveyed to her. First, I hope that she does not confuse
her name with her assignment — Ms. Power does not
have power over Rwanda.
In reaction to her remarks, we need first of all to
caution her against lumping together the approaches
of the four countries. There is no one-size-fits-all
solution in responding to the challenges confronting
the region. While we commend her remarks as to the
positive trajectory achieved by Rwanda in the economic
and social fields, and as to Rwanda’s key role in the
maintenance of peace and security in the international
arena, there is a need to emphasize that Rwanda’s
achievement did not occur in a vacuum. Indeed, the

S/PV.7653

success Rwanda encountered stemmed from many
factors, including good governance and an enlightened
leadership — led by His Excellency President Paul
Kagame — that single-handedly put together solutions
tailored to the Rwandan situation in the immediate
aftermath of the genocide against the Tutsi. Had it
not been for him, I would not be here talking to the
Council today.
Would the Council like me to tell my story, about
why we Rwandans want him? My grandparents were
refugees. My parents were refugees. I was born as a
refugee. Luckily, President Kagame went back home
and stopped the genocide. Luckily, I went back home,
too. In 1994, when over 10,000 people were killed on a
daily basis, what did the Security Council do? Nothing.
Nothing! We want that man there. He was the only one
to take up his responsibility and come and stop the
genocide. He is our hero.
As I was telling a gentleman in the Chamber,
we will never, ever accept anyone who tries to deny
what the Rwandans want to achieve, or what Rwanda
chooses. Drawing lessons from the bad politics that
led to the genocide, it was imperative for the Rwandan
people to build on a culture of ongoing dialogue with all
citizens of Rwanda so as to enable them to have a voice,
to participate, to redress any attempt to hamper their
well-being and to have an opportunity to claim their
rights when they feel their leaders are not responsive.
With that approach, pluralism has been deepened
in a consensual democracy in which citizen-led
consultations have yielded tangible results in mending
the social fabric and in addressing all issues of concern.
Citizens of Rwanda have been afforded numerous
platforms to convey their views and concerns. Rwanda
understood, as a vital element, that the only way to
consolidate gains was to stay connected through a
participatory democracy that enables people to have
a voice in all matters concerning their well-being.
That well-tested system has prompted the people of
Rwanda to opt massively to keep this very precious
man — the President we have today, namely, President
Kagame — at the helm of the nation.
If Rwanda has made the most progress in the
world in terms of human development over the past
25 years — as Ms. Power stated well — it has done so
through the President’s leadership. We know what is
good for Rwanda and Rwandans. One does not really
have to agree with us, but one can respect our choices.

16-0778039/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

There are some aspects of her country with which we
do not agree, but there is nothing we can do about it. We
leave it to them.
What we cannot agree with is this apparent desire
to occupy our political space. No one will ever come
to occupy our political space. It belongs to Rwandans
and only to Rwandans. If a democracy is for the people,
by the people, as she and her country’s leaders have
well stated, then please let the people of Rwanda have
their own choice. Attempting to ensure the peace and
stability of the country without taking into account the
political, economic and historical factors would be a
mere exercise that leads nowhere. We in Rwanda came
to the realization that it has to be an ongoing process
of education and dialogue with the people. It cannot,
by any means, be a cut-and-paste exercise from one
country to another; nor can it follow the same pattern,
as a country’s issues are unique to it.
In conclusion, let me reiterate my call for the
Security Council to shift from a culture of reaction
to one of prevention. With unfolding events in
Burundi — and elsewhere, of course — it is inevitable
that the Security Council try to improve its record with
regard to fully understanding early warning signs of
conflicts and responding through early action if it is to
remain relevant. While there has been a huge increase
in the level of international preventive diplomacy
and diplomatic peacemaking, for the most part by
the United Nations and more recently in partnership
with regional organizations, those efforts will remain
inadequate if they are not followed up by concrete
actions on the ground.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Nosiviwe
Mapisa-Nqakula, Minister of Defence and Military
Veterans of South Africa.
Ms. Mapisa-Nqakula (South Africa): Let me
join other speakers in congratulating the Republic
of Angola, as President of the Security Council this
month, for convening this thought-provoking and
timely debate. We also recognize your vital role, Sir,
as Chair of the International Conference of the Great
Lakes Region, in steering and leading all the relevant
stakeholders towards peace and stability in the region.
South Africa has always recognized the importance
and the urgency of peace, security and development in
the region. For the Great Lakes region to thrive, regional
and subregional organizations, together with the United
40/64

21/03/2016

Nations, should work in a coordinated manner in order
to achieve stability.
Following the visit to Burundi of the African Union
high-level delegation, led by President Zuma, we are
encouraged to note that all the relevant stakeholders,
including the Government of Burundi, the opposition
and civil society, agreed that an inclusive political
dialogue was the only means to address political
differences confronting their country. South Africa
believes that the people and the Government of Burundi
have the ability to overcome their challenges through
inclusive national dialogue, as well as through peaceful
political means, just as they demonstrated with the
Arusha Agreement, which ended the civil war that
killed thousands of Burundians.
We also welcome the mediation efforts led by
President Museveni of Uganda on behalf of the East
African Community, particularly with regard to
the need to ensure that all stakeholders in Burundi
participate in the inclusive dialogue and actively
preserve the gains of the Arusha Agreement. South
Africa also acknowledges the efforts by the East African
Community in reinforcing the mediation process by
appointing the former President of Tanzania, His
Excellency Mr. Bejamin Mkapa, to further expedite the
peace process in Burundi. We call upon the international
community to support the Government of Burundi by
making resources available to help make the possibility
of peace a reality.
With regard to the issue of natural resources in
the region, we are all aware that Africa, particularly
the Great Lakes region, is endowed with rich natural
resources, as well as fertile land for agricultural
purposes, and therefore has immense potential for
realizing economic prosperity and development. The
Congo River, for example, could provide half the energy
needs of the African continent. The mineral resources
of the land have the potential to make this region the
epicentre of commerce in the African continent.
Unfortunately, its true potential has not been
realized, as the subregion has been plagued by endless
conflicts. It is perhaps because of the abundance of
wealth that it is threatened by instability, because
often a paradox exists whereby resource-rich countries
are threatened with stagnation, less growth and
instability. That is partly as a result of the exploitation
of such resources, often by those outside the region. We
therefore encourage greater responsibility and national
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

ownership of those resources, good governance and
greater investment in order to grow all those sectors
of those economies. It is important to realize that
peace and stability are dependent on development, and
vice versa.
The Republic of South Africa wishes to make the
following observations and remarks pertaining to the
situation in the Great Lakes region.
First, South Africa recognizes that there has been
a relative improvement in the security situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
through a reduction of the threat posed by Congolese
and foreign armed groups. Secondly, we acknowledge
that not all the negative forces in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have been disarmed. Thirdly,
we further recognize that some negative forces have
found refuge in neighbouring countries and that efforts
to realize their repatriation are under way. Fourthly,
we are concerned about the possible broadening of
the Islamization of some aspects of the conflict in
the region. Fifthly, we note that recently allegations
have surfaced of interference in the internal affairs of
neighbouring States in the region and that those have
been met with counter-accusations.
It is the view of the Republic of South Africa that the
total neutralization of the negative forces in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo requires
optimum utilization of the military resources deployed
in that country. South Africa believes the objective of
neutralizing negative forces should not be perceived as
implying only the use of force against the armed groups,
but also including the application of all possible methods
to influence the negative forces to renounce violence
as a means of attaining their objectives, and to opt to
disarm and demobilize. That would enable the fasttracking of the process of restoration and consolidation
of State authority in the eastern part of the country.
South Africa supports the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, taking into
account the concerns of the Government of the country.
As the international community, collectively, we
need to go back to basics and identify the root causes
of the conflict in the Great Lakes region. In addition to
the resource paradox mentioned earlier, we should also
take into account the interwoven interest groups whose
pursuit of power and natural resources overshadows the
importance of developing the area and redistributing

S/PV.7653

the wealth of the land to the people of the region so that
they too, as in many societies in the world, can thrive
and live a prosperous life.
We also need to provide as much support as
possible to those countries as they emerge from crisis
in order to prevent a relapse into conflict, which
typifies the instability in the region. We therefore call
on the Peacebuilding Commission to do everything
it can in advocating for assistance for post-conflict
reconstruction in affected countries of the region.
South Africa has committed to work towards an
African continent that is unified and free, whose people
can thrive and realize their true potential as members
of the global society. The stability and prosperity of the
Great Lakes region is at the heart of that endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Annika
Sóder, State Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Sweden
Ms. Sóder (Sweden): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden. Let
me also mention that Sweden is presently chairing
the International Contact Group on the Great Lakes
Region, and I am happy to be accompanied today by
our Special Envoy, Ambassador Lena Sund, who is also
Ambassador to Angola.
At the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President,
for this important initiative, which comes at a critical
juncture but also at a moment of renewed opportunity
for the Great Lakes region. I would also like to express
my appreciation for the valuable testimonies made
earlier by ministers from the region, as well as for
the briefings by the Secretary-General, the African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security and the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region.
For too long, tension and conflict have been far
too common in the Great Lakes region, resulting in
suffering for millions of people. We need to do more
than just manage crisis and its consequences. We need
to collectively support and strengthen international and
regional efforts to prevent conflict by addressing the
root causes of conflict. That includes a wide range of
issues, such as socioeconomic needs, climate change,
good governance and human rights, just to name a few,
all of which are fundamental elements for building
sustainable peace, long-term stability and development.
The now three-year-old Peace, Security and

16-0778041/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region includes such a broad
agenda. It recognizes that peace and development are
two sides of the same coin and has tangible plans and
actions of fundamental importance to reduce fragility
in the region. Let me touch upon three areas that we
believe deserve particular attention.
First, with regard to the role of regional
organizations, the Nordic countries have consistently
advocated for strengthened cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, because
local ownership is a precondition for legitimacy and
effectiveness in peacemaking, as well as in facing other
challenges. We welcome and support the increasingly
important roles played by the African Union and
subregional bodies in the context of the Great Lakes
region, in particular the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). We encourage
their stronger partnerships and their institutionalized
collaboration with the United Nations.
Secondly, the lack of jobs and economic opportunities
fuel conflict. We have already recognized that only in
partnership with the private sector will we be able to
realize the Sustainable Development Goals and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and advance
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. We are
therefore encouraged by the Private Sector Investment
Conference for the Great Lakes Region, which was
arranged jointly by the United Nations and the ICGLR
last month. The role of the World Bank and the African
Development Bank in promoting economic growth
should also be recognized.
It is important to note that Governments and
businesses have a responsibility in securing decent
work conditions, combating corruption and promoting
human rights and environmental standards so that
economic growth leads to sustainable economic, social
and environmental development. The importance of
good governance and predictable framework conditions
for investments and private sector development cannot
be emphasized enough. Let me echo what Said Djinnit
said earlier about the importance of how natural
resources can serve countries and peoples and not
become a scourge or continue to be one. The region
has much potential. There are ample opportunities for
economic growth and job creation.
Thirdly, on the role of women, we emphasize
the importance of the full and active participation of
42/64

21/03/2016

women in the prevention, the management and the
resolution of conflicts, as well as in post-conflict
efforts and cooperation. In the experience of the Nordic
countries, the genuine participation of women in all
aspects of life, in all aspects of peacemaking, is an
indispensable foundation for sustainable development.
The Great Lakes region has shown leadership in
ensuring women’s participation in decision-making.
In that particular regard the example of Rwanda stands
out, with now around 50 per cent women members of
Parliament.
Let me turn to the developments in Burundi. We
remain deeply concerned about the reports of violence
and the risk that economic decline could become an
additional driver of the crisis. We welcome the strong
regional leadership by the East African Community
and the African Union, President Museveni and former
President Mkapa, with the support of the United Nations.
We were pleased to learn that the African Union and
the Government of Burundi have agreed to increase
the number of human rights and military observers.
Impartial monitoring can help clarify allegations and
ease tensions, and thereby prevent the escalation of
the conflict and help create an enabling environment
for dialogue. We believe that a political solution can
be found, and strongly encourage all parties to refrain
from using language that will encourage divisions
along ethnic lines.
Let me conclude by emphasizing that the Nordic
countries will remain committed to the people of
the Great Lakes region. That commitment goes back
to the 1960s, when the then Secretary-General Dag
Hammarskjöld so tragically paid with his life when
trying to make peace in the war-torn region. We now
look forward to cooperating with the country to realize
the great potential of the Great Lakes region.
The President: Once again, I wish to remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate their texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Let me thank the SecretaryGeneral; the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region, Said Djinnit; the Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union, Smail
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Chergui; and Vijay Pillay of the World Bank for their
insightful remarks.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
Italy welcomes today’s debate and connends Angola
for this initiative. As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
said last month during the Private Sector Investment
Conference for the Great Lakes Region in Kinshasa,
“We are in the heart of Africa. This region can be
an engine for development and economic growth.”
Africa today is a land of opportunities. We see the
progress that is being made in West Africa, in the Horn
of Africa and elsewhere. The African continent needs
economic cooperation and economic partnerships. That
is also true for the Great Lakes region, where we must
support the countries of the area to build an environment
conducive to better prosperity based on the rule of
law and accountability in upholding the rights of the
individual, the prevention and management of violence
and tensions, support for the plight of refugees and
internally displaced persons and economic powerment
at the local level.
Today’s debate is rightly focused on conflict
prevention and resolution — the link between
peace, security and development and the promotion
of sustainable business models that will create
opportunities. Italy’s partnership with Africa is built
on the same pillars. That partnership will be further
consolidated during the Italy-Africa ministerial
conference to be held in Rome in May.
Political stability is paramount if the Great Lakes
region is to achieve sustainable peace without relapsing
into conflict. Although each situation is different, there
are some common principles.
First and foremost is national ownership, without
which no sustainable solution can be achieved or
imposed from the outside.
Secondly, with regard to strengthening the role
and the commitment of regional and subregional
organizations, we welcome the appointment of the
African Union Envoy to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Edem Kodjo. We stand ready to support
his efforts to facilitate a political dialogue that will
lead to inclusive and transparent elections within the
framework of the Constitution. With respect to the
situation in Burundi, Italy supports the initiatives of

S/PV.7653

the United Nations, the African Union, the East African
Community and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, all of which could help foster a
political solution in the spirit of the Arusha Agreements
and help the country in its stabilization efforts.
Thirdly,
on
prevention,
revitalizing
and
implementing Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations is the key. The two visits by Security Council
members to the region in the past 12 months were a
positive step towards building a culture of prevention
rather than reaction. The Peace Building Commission
also has a positive role to play in promoting peace in
the region. Among the preventive tools at the disposal
of the Council, let me also mention the ad hoc Working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa,
which is chaired by Angola and which we support.
Political and regional stability will, in turn, allow to tap
into all of the available resources to achieve sustainable
development in the region. The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the African Union
Agenda 2063 are the blueprint.
With respect to economic development, the
management of natural resources must be sustainable
and benefit communities. Extractive industries in
particular should be managed soundly. By doing so,
we will also combat international criminal networks
that are profiting from illegal trafficking. In turn, that
phenomenon fuels other illegal activities, such as the
trade in small arms and light wapons. Eliminating the
one of thee causes of conflict while increasing State
revenues is crucial. For these reasons, Italy supports the
initiative of the Angolan mission in the framework of
the Kimberley Process and was pleased to co-sponsor
resolution 70/252, which is a significant General
Assembly resolution on the matter.
In conclusion, Italy welcomes the United Nations
Regional Strategic Framework for the Great Lakes.
Together with the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, it is the best road map for common
progress, with local ownership and a clear set of
commitments and benchmarks at the international,
regional and national levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer Mission of the
Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The Holy See
commends the presidency of Angola for bringing the

16-0778043/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

subject of the prevention and resolution of conflicts in
the African Great Lakes region to the attention of the
international community.
Pope Francis, during his visit to the Great Lakes
region last November, found inspiration in the motto of
the Central African Republic that exults the values of
unity, dignity and work. The Pope sees in this triad an
expression of the aspirations of each Central African
country, and indeed of each of the inhabitants of the
Great Lakes region.
The region continues to suffer from decades of
multiple local and regional conflicts fuelled by, among
other things, political instability and poor governance,
corruption and extreme poverty, ethnic divisions and
the exploitative use of the abundant natural resources.
My delegation believes that the three values of unity,
dignity and work are pillars of any prosperous society
and thus could greatly facilitate solutions to the complex
of causes of armed conflicts and underdevelopment in
the region. No solutions to the region’s many problems
will be possible if there are divisions instead of unity,
grave violations of human rights instead of respect for
the dignity of each person, and extreme poverty instead
of dignified work for all.
Unity is a cardinal value for the harmony of peoples
in all their diversity. It drives away the fear of the other
tribes and communities. It recognizes the plurality
of political views and religious beliefs. It eschews
the corruption and greed that endanger justice and
solidarity. However, translating the fundamental value
of unity in diversity into reality is a constant challenge
that demands creativity, generosity, self-sacrifice and
respect for others. With respect to dignity, mutual
respect and solidarity are possible only if everyone
recognizes the inherent and equal dignity of all. Finally,
with respect to labour, decent work for all would greatly
improve the lives of those in the region.
Addressing the Central Africans in Bangui, Pope
Francis exhorted all the countries of the region to
improve themselves by wisely exploiting the natural
resources that make the region one of the two lungs
of humankind on account of its exceptionally rich
biodiversity. The international community must
support the countries of the region in preventing the
abundant natural resources from becoming a curse
instead of a blessing, from being exploited in favour
of a privileged few instead of remaining the common
good of all. It is no doubt superfluous to underline the
44/64

21/03/2016

capital importance of honest administration on the part
of public authorities.
Stable and legitimate Governments require
electoral processes that are free, credible, inclusive and
transparent in order to discourage the recourse to arms.
Governments and all stakeholders in the region must
be helped to negotiate and deal with the various issues
at stake in the most impartial way possible, having in
mind only the common good of all citizens.
The region has been destabilized by the vast
proliferation of arms and armed groups fighting in the
territory. These groups must be persuaded to disarm and
commit themselves to cooperating in the development
of their respective countries. The international
community must assume a larger role in programmes
aimed at controlling the legal and illegal arms trade.
The Holy See expresses deep appreciation for the
countries that have already committed themselves to
this path.
A greater investment in preventive diplomacy
must accompany all efforts. The priority of the
diplomatic activity of the Holy See in the Great Lakes
region and elsewhere is preventive action geared
towards safeguarding the inviolable dignity of every
human person, protecting fundamental human rights,
promoting education and health care for all, and
fostering the identity of peoples. The grave problem
of the recruitment of youth and children by armed
groups and terrorist organizations must be made to
decisively contrast with investments in both education
and job opportunities that offer the young hope for a
better future.
Pope Francis expresses deep appreciation for all
that the international community and the regional
organizations have been doing and calls upon all to
continue along the path of unity, dignity and work to
help the countries in the region achieve disarmament,
prosperity and sound administration at all levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I would like to
congratulate Angola and Foreign Minister Chikoti on
having organized today’s open debate. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General, the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Region, and the representative of the World Bank for
their briefings.
The Great Lakes region of Africa has been
tragically plagued by a long history of violent struggles
and conflicts. As stated by the Secretary-General in
his latest report (S/2016/232), the Great Lakes region,
22 years after the Rwanda genocide, continues to face
major political, security and humanitarian challenges.
In February 2013, in Addis Ababa, a series of
commitments to addressing some of the root causes
of instability in the Great Lakes region were agreed
by the signatory countries of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, under the auspices of the
United Nations, the African Union, the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region and the Southern
African Development Community. This Framework
remains a key reference for a comprehensive solution to
the crises in the region. However, its implementation, as
that of the Nairobi Declarations, remains fraught with
challenges. As the Secretary-General declares in his last
report (S/2016/233) on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), it is essential that the signatories
of the Framework honour their commitments in order
to achieve sustainable peace in the Great Lakes region.
More specifically, we highlight the fact that all
13 signatories of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework have agreed, among other commitments,
not to interfere in the internal affairs of neighbouring
countries, to respect their sovereignty, territorial
integrity, legitimate concerns and interests, in particular
regarding security matters, and to neither tolerate nor
provide assistance or support of any kind to armed
groups. Regional interventionism has contributed to
destabilization in the area and should not be allowed
to take place, as it violates both the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework and international law,
perpetuating instability.
The situation of refugees and internally displaced
people remains worrisome. The already fragile
humanitarian situation has been aggravated by the
recent influx of 245,000 refugees from Burundi into
neighbouring countries. Their status and rights should
be fully recognized and respected. Reports that some of
them have been recruited by armed groups give rise to
serious concern.

S/PV.7653

We welcome the recent general elections in
Tanzania, the Central African Republic and Uganda.
We also take note that there are political questions
related to elections that remain unresolved in some
countries of the region. Notwithstanding the support
of the international community to find solutions, we
underline the need to respect national ownership in the
outcomes of these discussions.
The region of the Great Lakes is endowed with
abundant natural resources. The illegal exploitation and
traffic of these resources has for years helped finance
armed groups in the region, as stated in more than
one United Nations report. This illegal exploitation
also contributes to hindering the development of the
affected countries. To give a sense of the dimension of
the problem, in its report of January 2014 (S/2014/42,
annex), the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo came to the conclusion that 98 per cent of
all the gold produced in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was smuggled out of the country. It is therefore
important to find ways to transform the natural wealth
of the region into a driver of sustainable development.
In this regard, the promotion of responsible extractive
industries and the building of national capacities and
legal institutions are key. Considering the broader
question of sustainable development, the private sector
can play an important role, as illustrated by the Great
Lakes Private Sector Investment Conference, held in
Kinshasa last February.
Brazil has cooperated with conflict resolution
efforts in the Great Lakes since the beginning of the
involvement of the Organization in promoting peace
in the region, having contributed troops to the United
Nations Operation in the Congo from 1960 to 1964, and
more recently, through the designation of General Carlos
Alberto dos Santos Cruz as Force Commander of
MONUSCO from 2013 to 2015. Presently, Brazil
contributes officers to two United Nations Missions in
South Sudan — the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei and the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan — and to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic.
Brazil has also contributed to mitigating the
effects of the conflicts in the Great Lakes region with
humanitarian donations and cooperation with countries
of the region. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we have financed initiatives aimed at assisting victims
of sexual and gender-based violence and in combating

16-0778045/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

impunity. Brazil has also partnered with UNICEF,
the United Nations Development Programme and
civil society organizations in an innovative project
that allowed hundreds of children formerly linked to
armed groups in the North Kivu region to be socially
reintegrated through the practice of the Afro-Brazilian
martial art known as capoeira.
As the current Chair of the Commission on
the Status of Women, allow me to reiterate the
importance of the participation of women in political
processes related to peace, the protection of civilians,
reconciliation efforts and the establishment of a
protective environment. Allow me to acknowledge the
political leadership exercised by women in the region,
and in particular the high percentage of women in the
Cabinet and Parliament of Rwanda.
Strategies that do not address the root causes of
conflict are unlikely to produce lasting peace in the
region. The complexity of the conflicts in the Great
Lakes region demand a comprehensive approach towards
sustainable peace, focused not only on prevention and
the primacy of politics, but also combating the illicit
flow and illegal exploitation of natural resources. That
comprehensive approach should, among other initiatives,
contribute to addressing the need for eradicating
poverty, promote socioeconomic development, build
institutions, provide access to justice and create more
inclusive and reconciled societies. Those strategies
should be carried out in close coordination with
national authorities and their established priorities,
always respecting national ownership.
Two of the six current country-specific configurations
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) — Burundi
and the Central African Republic — are related to what
takes place in the Great Lakes region. My delegation
believes that the Peacebuilding Commission,
encompassing members from the Security Council,
the Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly, can have an important role in preventing the
relapse into conflict in the region. It is important to bear
in mind that peacebuilding is a task that reaches beyond
the security agenda and encompasses the entire United
Nations system. In that regard, we reiterate the need
for strengthening the relationship between the PBC and
the Security Council, with a focus on our collective
engagement with the promotion of sustainable peace in
the Great Lakes region.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Vervaeke.
46/64

21/03/2016

Mr. Vervaeke: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina;
and the European Free Trade Association country
Liechtenstein, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Armenia, align themselves with this statement.
Upon your request, Mr. President, I will deliver a
condensed version of my statement.
I am very pleased to be taking part, also on behalf
of the European Union High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Federica Mogherini,
in this meeting on the situation in the Great Lakes.
Holding this meeting in the presence of the SecretaryGeneral and several Foreign Ministers of the region is
a testament to the importance attached to this region. I
would also especially like to welcome the impetus given
by the Angolan presidency of the Security Council to
this subject.
The European Union has been deeply engaged in
the Great Lakes region over many years. Our consistent
belief has been that a transition from fragility to
resilience, and from conflict to peace is achievable, but
only with strong local ownership and strong cooperation
between the countries of the region.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region remains the best blueprint for common progress.
The fulfilment of commitments must be more closely
monitored, as they address all the key obstacles to longterm stabilization, including armed groups, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, the encouragement
of good neighbourly relations, gender-related issues,
economic aspects and the encouragement of regional
integration and democratic governance. We welcome
the efforts of Special Envoy Djinnit and the launch
today of the United Nations Great Lakes Regional
Strategic Framework. The European Union will be
using its own financial instruments, both at national
and regional levels, to support the Framework.
We have to face the fact that there are still serious
challenges before us. In recent years, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has made great progress, but
the problem of armed groups remains a serious threat
to stability in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Congo, despite the efforts and sacrifices of the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and despite an improving cooperation
between them, which we welcome. That is also why we
support the position taken by the Security Council in
resolution 2211 (2015) that any future reconfiguration
of MONUSCO and its mandate should be based on the
evolution of the situation on the ground and, in light
of progress, in the protection of civilians, stabilization
and the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.
However, the most critical challenge in 2016
will be to organize free and fair elections in order to
consolidate gains achieved. A political consensus is
urgently needed on seeking a focused set of steps to
deliver inclusive and transparent elections within the
framework of the Constitution. The European Union
stands ready to support the efforts of African Union
Envoy Edem Kodjo to facilitate such a dialogue. The
political and financial commitment by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Government to take the necessary
steps without further delay to ensure that elections take
place as planned will create the environment in which
the European Union can support the electoral process.
Resolution 2211 (2015) in its entirety should
continue to guide our work. That includes the context of
elections, with a focus on the presidential and legislative
elections, and the monitoring of human rights and
international humanitarian law. Fundamental civic and
human rights need to be fully respected in line with
international obligations.
The European Union pursues a coherent approach
across the Great Lakes region. The importance of
ensuring the right political climate for democracy to
work applies to all countries in the region, whether
in Rwanda, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Congo, Uganda, Gabon or elsewhere.
Inclusive and open societies, democratic transitions
and accountable Governments mean stronger societies.
Recent elections in the Central African Republic show
that it is possible even in a very fragile context.
The situation in Burundi shows how much is
at stake. We strongly condemn the violence, from
whichever side, which has cost too many lives and
made close to 250,000 citizens flee their country. We
are supporting all initiatives of the United Nations, the

S/PV.7653

African Union and the East African Community that
could help to lead to a political solution within the spirit
of the Arusha Agreement. Highest among those in
terms of priorities is the establishment of a functioning
and inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue mediated by
the East African Community. We welcome the recent
appointment of former President Mkapa to assist in
that process. We call on the Government, as well as
the armed opposition, to abandon the logic of violence.
The people of Burundi have demonstrated in the past
their incredible capacity to transcend divides; all sides
should revive that same spirit with determination.
It is also essential that sufficient capacity be
given to independent monitoring of the human rights
situation in the country, and we especially underline
the positive role played by the African Union and the
United Nations in that respect. Last week, the European
Union adopted a Council decision ending the special
consultations we held with Burundi under the Cotonou
Agreement. That decision sets out concrete steps that
could help to re-establish the rule of law in Burundi and
get our relations fully back on track, but they are also
specifically designed to support a political solution.
First steps have been announced by the Government;
they need to be implemented and enhanced.
The state of relations between Burundi and
Rwanda and the impact on the unity of the East African
Community also demand our attention. We call on all
neighbouring countries to contribute to the solution
in Burundi.
Angola has shared a concept note (S/2016/223,
annex) for the discussion today. It rightly notes the need
for a number of support measures to ensure effective
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. The European Union fully supports that
focus and stands ready to support it.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Belgium, His Excellency Mr. Frank De Coninck,
Belgium’s Special Envoy to the Great Lakes Region.
Mr. De Coninck (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium commends the initiative of the Angolan
presidency of the Security Council in convening today’s
debate on the Great Lakes region.
We subscribe fully to the statement delivered earlier
by the observer of the European Union. In our national
capacity, I would like to add the following comments

16-0778047/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

on the opportunities and challenges presented by the
current situation.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
Agreement for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region is an essential foundation that has lost
none of its relevance for peace in the Great Lakes region.
In that regard, we would like to welcome the Regional
Strategic Framework for the region that the SecretaryGeneral has just presented. Belgium would also like to
express its support for the work of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Ambassador Said Djinnit.
We welcome the recent holding in Kinshasa of a
conference on private investment in the Great Lakes
region, which brought together several hundred
representatives of Governments, financial institutions
and private investors and enabled them to better
comprehend the region’s enormous potential. It should
now receive concrete follow-up.
The situation in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is still not sufficiently stable,
despite bursts of progress. Armed groups, including
the Allied Democratic Forces-National Army for the
Liberation of Uganda and the Forces démocratiques
pour la libération du Rwanda, continue to threaten
the civilian population while committing countless
acts of violence. The problem of the ex-combatants
of the Mouvement du 23 mars is still unresolved.
All those factors hinder economic development,
encourage the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and illicit trafficking and have a very negative impact
on regional stability. However, Belgium welcomed
the announcement of the resumption of operational
cooperation between the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (МONUSCO) and the Congolese army. We hope
that they will be able to speedily neutralize the main
armed groups. That issue should be kept in mind when
considering the renewal of MONUSCO’s mandate.
The issue of refugees in the countries of the region is
another major concern. The presence of approximately
250,000 Burundian refugees in neighbouring countries
is not only a tragedy for those affected but also an
additional threat to regional stability.
For more than a year now, Burundi has been beset
by an internal crisis involving unacceptable violence
and numerous violations of human rights. The recent
measures taken by the Burundian Government to calm
the situation are certainly a step in the right direction, but
48/64

21/03/2016

they should be expanded and rendered irreversible. We
believe that only an inclusive dialogue, mediated from
outside, is capable of bringing the factors required for a
lasting solution to the serious crisis facing the country.
We hope that the efforts of the East African Community,
the African Union and the United Nations can converge
to achieve a political solution in the spirit of Arusha. We
welcome the appointment of former President Mkapa as
facilitator of the East African Community. The dialogue
should bring together a significant number of political
actors, without preconditions or exclusivity, and should
start soon. In that regard, the deployment of a credible
United Nations police mission is important to efforts to
calm the situation.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has made
significant progress over the past 15 years, both in
terms of unity and economic and democratic stability.
It is crucial for the country and for the whole of Central
Africa to ensure that this progress is consolidated and
broadened. The Congo is at a crossroads. In that regard,
Belgium is very concerned about the political impasse
that is becoming entrenched and hardened in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are also worried
about the shrinking political sphere and the pre-election
violations of human rights that we have seen. For
the country to emerge from that impasse, a dialogue
between the various political actors is essential. Under
regional or international facilitation, it should result
in the achievement of consensus on the modalities
of organizing free and open elections and on respect
for public order, human rights and the Constitution.
Belgium hopes that such a dialogue can be launched
as soon as possible. MONUSCO should play a role in
supporting both logistics and securing the elections
that should be better reflected in its new mandate.
In conclusion, Belgium urges the Security Council
to keep the situation in the Great Lakes region on
its agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): The history of conflict in
the Great Lakes region underscores the fact that the
trajectory towards peace is rarely linear. Burundi is a
prime example. Today a country that had just begun to
heal from the wounds of its civil war is again facing
renewed conflict. Australia is deeply concerned about
the lack of progress that has been made in resolving
Burundi’s recent crisis, and about the reports of human
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7653

rights abuses. We call on all parties in Burundi,
including the authorities, to take immediate steps to end
torture, sexual violence, arbitrary detention, enforced
disappearances and extrajudicial killings. Humanrights violations are important early indicators of the
potential for atrocity crimes. Respect for human rights
must be central to building sustainable peace.

as we have seen in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, or be a driver of sustainable,
inclusive growth. Peacebuilding, particularly in the
Great Lakes region, must pay particular attention to
improving the management and transparency of natural
resources, as well as ensuring that the benefits of
economic growth are shared equitably.

As Burundi’s situation demonstrates, regional and
international support to sustained political dialogue
and early preventive action are key to consolidating
peace. Australia welcomed the recent engagement on
the part of the Burundian authorities with the African
Union high-level mission, the Security Council and the
Secretary-General. However, we urge Burundi to also
engage, without preconditions, in the mediation talks
led by the East African Community. That requires
genuine engagement with opposition groups. Critically,
mediation talks, together with broader peacebuilding
efforts, must be inclusive of all, particularly women,
young people and civil society, if they are to address
the grievances that fuel conflict.

The path towards a peaceful, stable society is a
hard one, and we have many examples where countries
have emerged from conflict only to relapse back into it.
Indeed, the history of the Great Lakes region emphasizes
the fact that achieving just, meaningful and lasting
peace requires sustained effort, from action to prevent
and resolve conflict to reconciliation and recovery.
Australia welcomes the attention being focused on
those issues and I look forward to continuing to work
with the Angolan presidency, including in our role as
co-Chairs of the peacebuilding resolution negotiations
that are nearing conclusion.

We note with concern that implementation of
the commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region has recently been limited.
In that context, we welcome the agreement on the
resumption of military cooperation between the
armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as today’s launch of the United Nations Regional
Strategic Framework for the Great Lakes, which aims
to support the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. Australia is particularly
pleased that the Regional Strategic Framework outlines
practical steps for addressing violence against women
and girls in the region. We also commend its focus
on ending the culture of impunity by strengthening
institutions, empowering civil society organizations
and enhancing judicial cooperation.
Ultimately, countries must address the root
causes of conflicts, including historical and economic
grievances, lack of economic opportunity, scarce
resources and competition. In that regard, we would
welcome further discussion of the critical role played in
regional stability by mobilizing domestic resources and
enhancing economic integration. As we know all too
well, economic growth and prosperity, particularly when
derived from natural resources, can either fuel conflict,

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for having organized this important
debate, which comes at a timely moment.
Within the framework of the ongoing reviews of
peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding and resolution
1325 (2000), a broad debate has been developing around
the potential of the United Nations and its various bodies
in terms of conflict prevention. If we take the cases of the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
we note that both have considerable potential to prevent
conflicts. Their respective potentials are very different,
obviously, but they are complementary. While the
Security Council has a broad range of instruments,
including coercive measures to prevent the imminent
outbreak or escalation of a conflict, the preventive
potential of peacebuilding resides in its long-term,
structural and inclusive nature.
Peacebuilding is intended primarily not to be an
instrument for conflict management or conciliation,
but rather an approach that addresses the root causes
of conflict in a society, in close cooperation with
national authorities. The goal of peacebuilding is to
combat socioeconomic inequalities and the lack of
inclusiveness, ideologies of division and post-conflict
trauma. It seeks to promote social changes that reduce
the risk of a conflict breaking out. Peacebuilding
assumes different forms depending on the context and

16-0778049/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

requires a long-term commitment and investment on the
part of national actors and regional and international
partners. It is to that specific end that Switzerland has
for many years supported the peacebuilding activities
conducted in the Great Lakes region.
As we all know, the Great Lakes remains a
region beset by troubles. The causes and effects of
the problems confronting the region are largely of a
transnational nature. The illicit exploitation of natural
resources, narrow political space and tensions among
different social and non-State armed groups are
factors that transcend borders and weigh on regional
security. A coherent response to the problems of the
region therefore requires a regional approach, and
we particularly welcome the ongoing commitment of
regional organizations and forums.
The regional dimension is at the heart of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
Switzerland supports the Framework, especially its
goals of peacemaking, the provision of its good offices
in Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and providing platforms for dialogue, as well as its own
expertise. We appreciate the work on implementation
carried out by the Framework and trust that we can build
on the momentum generated thus far. The Framework
is tailored to promote coordination among the various
national, regional and international actors. That is
why we encourage bilateral and multilateral actors to
maintain or appoint special envoys for the Framework,
and to provide close coordination and cooperation.
In order to help galvanize the Framework and to
encourage a coherent international response to the
problems of the region, Switzerland will propose the
organization this year of a series of consultations and
a public conference with the key actors in Geneva.
Coherence between the United Nations, the African
Union, the East African Community and other regional
and international actors is essential to the success of
preventive measures in the Great Lakes region. Our
peacebuilding efforts in the region must be coordinated
and cannot be confined to simply bringing to an
end the grievances of the past. They must also offer
a vision of hope to the inhabitants of the region and
help create the necessary conditions so that future
elections can take place in a democratic, pluralistic and
stable environment.
50/64

21/03/2016

Allow me to conclude by stressing the importance
of prioritizing the resurgence of conflicts in the Great
Lakes Region. Recent developments show that decadesold conflicts cannot be resolved in the space of just a
few years, despite the presence of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the largest and most onerous
peacekeeping operation in United Nations history. The
grievances of certain groups within the societies of the
region and the violations of human rights can easily
become drivers of conflict. We must avoid premature
disengagement while remaining watchful and ready to
react to any events likely to provoke or exacerbate a
conflict in the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): As an observer
member of the African Union, we commend the Angolan
presidency for convening this open debate, which
focuses on the prevention and resolution of conflicts
in the Great Lakes region. The visits to this region by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon last month and by
the Presidents of the Security Council in March 2015
and January 2016 — Ambassador François Delattre
of France, and Ambassador Ismael Gaspar Martins of
Angola, respectively — demonstrate the determination
and commitment of the United Nations system to
achieve durable peace, reconciliation and development
there. We also acknowledge with appreciation the
untiring dedication of Mr. Said Djinnit, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, and Mr. Modibo Touré, Special Adviser to the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region.
To ensure further progress, my delegation
recommends a more comprehensive regional strategy
on the part of the United Nations system together with
the African Union, the European Union and other
African subregional organizations, such as the East
African Community, the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development, the Southern African Development
Community and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, with financial outlays by the International
Monetary Fund, World Bank, African Development
Bank and donor countries.
I am pleased to inform those present that during
the seventieth session of the General Assembly,
Kazakhstan and the United Nations Development
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Programme (UNDP) signed a cost-sharing agreement
for a new project, entitled “Africa-Kazakhstan
Partnership for the Sustainable Development Goals”.
This agreement focuses on providing technical support
to the ministries of foreign affairs and other relevant
institutions in 45 African countries, including in
the Great Lakes region. The project will promote
the sharing of institutional experiences and best
practices as Governments prepare to take forward the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1). UNDP is working directly
with ministries of African countries to implement this
project. Our overall objective is to build on the efforts of
these countries to achieve greater State-building, rule
of law, good governance, inclusive political processes,
and security and justice sector reform, together with
the protection of civilians, and the disarmament and
reintegration of combatants.
Peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding
missions should therefore have well-conceived
mandates with achievable objectives, adequate
qualified personnel, modern equipment and resources.
The efforts of all key actors need to be redoubled
to build stability and security, conflict mediation,
post-conflict reconstruction, and address the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. To that end, we have to
envision greater military, diplomatic and development
partnerships that go beyond North-South cooperation to
South-South and triangular cooperation. My delegation
therefore supports the actions of the United Nations, in
particular various Council resolutions that concern the
region as a whole and its individual countries.
Kazakhstan will join other Member States in taking
measures to strengthen political and legal institutions,
the holding of elections, State-building, improved
land ownership, inter-ethnic reconciliation, refugee
resettlement, humanitarian assistance and poverty
eradication. Governmental policies must go together
with the grass-roots participation of local actors
and civil society to bring about a transformational
approach that is both structural and relational, the
latter for healing, bridge-building and reconciliation.
Capacity-building for African organizations must
include long- and short-term technical assistance
in conducting timely assessments, programming,
and monitoring and reporting. This will be possible
with enhanced information technology assistance,
knowledge management and timely information sharing
region-wide, all with a view to combating the illegal

S/PV.7653

exploitation of natural resources, the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons and the rise of illegal
armed groups, ending gender-based violence and
ending all impunity and transboundary crime.
We need to work towards ensuring the region’s
stability, progressive development and achieving
human security for all. We therefore stand for the full
implementation of the recommendations of the reviews
of United Nations peace operations, the peacebuilding
architecture (S/2015/490), and resolution 1325 (2000),
and, most importantly, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) in
the region. This calls for broadening the concept of
peace and stability from State-centered security to
people-oriented security and from purely military
to non-military security, which includes food, water
and energy security, which represent important
priorities on our path to a non-permanent seat on the
Security Council.
President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, in
his statement to the General Assembly in September
(see A/70/PV.13), called for transferring 1 per cent of
the defence budgets of Member States to the special
Sustainable Development Goals Fund, and proposed
the adoption of a global strategic initiative plan to end
all conflicts on our planet by 2045, the centenary of
the United Nations. As terrorist, radical and violent
extremist military groups are on the rise in the
region and beyond, President Nazarbayev proposed
strengthening the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and the establishment of a global
anti-terrorist network by bringing together existing
measures operating under the aegis of the United
Nations. We call on all delegations to support these
bold and forward-looking approaches.
Development and peace go together, and so we
must support the countries of the Great Lakes region
in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. Kazakhstan is therefore reaching out to
countries in Africa through technical assistance with
United Nations Development Programme projects.
Humanitarian aid is not a solution; we have to invest
more in sustainable development. The upcoming World
Humanitarian Summit, to be held in Istanbul this May,
will provide new insights and a plan of action.

16-0778051/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

Kazakhstan is committed to supporting progress
in the Great Lakes region and throughout the critically
important African continent.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Coorsdrecht (Netherlands): I would
like to thank Angola for organizing this debate. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with the
statement of the European Union. I commend today’s
briefers for their interventions and their outstanding
work on perseverance and bringing peace and stability
to the Great Lakes region.
The Netherlands is concerned about the renewed
threat of conflict and human suffering in the Great
Lakes region. A poignant example is the unravelling
of the peace process in Burundi during the past year.
We have seen how a crisis has emerged after the parties
concerned were unable to peacefully agree on the
country’s democratic future.
The Netherlands has been a part of peace,
development and justice in the Great Lakes region for
decades. Through our embassies in each country we
contribute to peace and dialogue, to accountability and
human rights, and to inclusive development. We believe
that dialogue is a better proposition for the future
than repression or armed conflict. With the United
Nations, the Netherlands has supported the inclusive
dialogue in Burundi for many years, also at times when
very few people believed a solution was possible. We
accompanied the complex process of integration and
reform of Burundi’s security forces. These processes
were fraught with difficulties, but through experience
we know it can be done. We call on all parties in Burundi
to keep these past achievements in mind, to foreswear
all violence and to urgently participate in the regionally
led inclusive dialogue in a spirit of compromise. As in
the past, the Netherlands will stand by Burundi’s side
as a friend to advise, to support and to assist. We will
not let the citizens of Burundi down.
Like Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo now has a choice to either consolidate past
achievements or to descend into violence and social
unrest. The Netherlands fully supports the efforts of
the African Union, through Mr. Edem Kodjo, to bring
stakeholders together to seek consensus on the country’s
future. Electoral unrest is especially dangerous for the
fragile situation in the east of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Aside from addressing the root causes
52/64

21/03/2016

of conflict, it is important that the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo resume all
cooperation with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in neutralizing armed groups, such as the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, and
creating conditions for their effective disarmament
and reintegration.
The Netherlands is deeply concerned about the
increasing human rights violations throughout the
region. Hard-won space for media, human rights
defenders and political opposition is being deliberately
shut down. Arbitrary arrests disappearances and
extrajudicial killings are increasing. We call on all
parties to exercise restraint and to look for common
peaceful objectives that will benefit all citizens. As
impunity is at the basis of recurrent cycles of violence
and human rights violations, it is imperative that those
responsible for crimes, war crimes, sexual violence and
human rights violations be held accountable so that the
cycle can be broken and victims can see justice done.
We welcome the United Nations Regional Strategic
Framework, which addresses these very same issues.
We look forward to continue working with the United
Nations and with all parties concerned with a view to
restoring stability and a basis for a sustainable future
for all in the Great Lakes region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): We thank
the Angolan presidency for the opportunity to speak on
the important issue of preventing and resolving conflict
in the Great Lakes region. As Goal 16 of the Sustainable
Development Goals clearly indicates, peace and security
are indissociable from governance and development.
As the citizens of the Great Lakes region know, poor
governance, poverty, inequality, discrimination against
women and the inadequate management of natural
resources can all have destabilizing effects. Canada is
deeply concerned about the shrinking political space
and lack of respect for constitutional term limits in
certain countries in the region and elsewhere. As we see
today in Burundi, States that do not allow for open and
inclusive political dialogue, respect for human rights or
constitutional rule cannot sustain peace.
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

(spoke in English)
Canada also expects countries to ensure that
inevitable changes of leadership be timely, democratic
and peaceful. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Canada is concerned about the social, economic and
political risks entailed if elections are not held as per
the Constitution of that country. Canada encourages
all actors to work together to overcome the political
impasse through a national consensus that reflects the
will of the Congolese people.
Regional organizations and the private sector
have a critical role to play in addressing the region’s
challenges. Organizations such as the African Union,
the East African Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region are important
partners in facilitating agreements, such as the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, to
resolve conflicts in the region. Socially responsible
private sector investment, particularly in the extractive
sector, can form the basis for inclusive growth that
benefits all citizens and communities and promotes
sustainable peace. It is also important to remember
that women and girls are often agents of stability and
resilience within their communities, as well as voices
for moderation and peace.
Canada is committed to addressing the intertwined
challenges facing the region. Through its development
assistance, Canada supports inclusive and accountable
governance, the empowerment of women and the
protection of their rights and sustainable growth.
Canada also champions the establishment and
safeguarding of responsible mineral supply chains to
prevent conflict and ensure that companies, countries
and communities can benefit from development of
the region’s mineral wealth. Only by addressing these
challenges can the countries of the region prevent and
resolve conflict. Canada remains committed to working
with our partners to advance peace and prosperity for
the Great Lakes region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): Speaking
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), I
would like to begin by congratulating Angola on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to praise your initiative, Mr. President, to organize
this important debate. I also thank the Secretary-

S/PV.7653

General, the African Union Commissioner for Peace
and Security, and the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region for their inputs in
this debate.
The Great Lakes region is one of the African regions
that are richly endowed with natural resources and,
above all, industrious and creative people. It is one of
the cradles of human civilization to which many people
in Africa trace their origins, and yet the region is still
going through some of the worst conflicts affecting the
African continent.
NAM believes that it is in the interests of the
Great Lakes region, Africa and the wider international
community that this area be supported to emerge from
violent conflicts and human suffering to embrace peace
and stability and engage in economic cooperation,
regional integration and development.
Conflicts have impacted heavily across the Great
Lakes region, most notably around the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with proxy
conflicts contested by regional and international
actors, and with the involvement of the largest United
Nations peacekeeping mission. The consequences
of these conflicts have been devastating for the
civilian populations, the infrastructure and services,
undermining the development of the entire region.
The attempts made to end these conflicts and
establish peace have so far been ineffective, mainly
owing to the continued legacy of colonialism and
the failure to understand the complex nature of those
conflicts and to address their driving forces in a
comprehensive manner.
NAM welcomed the signing of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework in 2013 by 11 countries of
the International Conference for the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) as a positive development. Establishing a link
between peace, security and development is indeed a
crucial element in support of the implementation of
this Framework.
We support the decisions of the extraordinary
Summit of the ICGLR and its recent Joint Summit with
the Southern African Development Community, which
took place in Luanda, Angola, in March 2014, to ensure
durable peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. NAM also welcomed the establishment of
the ICGLR Regional Training Facility on 18 February

16-0778053/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

21/03/2016

2014 in Kampala to fight sexual and gender-based
violence in the Great Lakes region.

the prevention and resolution of crises in the Great
Lakes region.

The implementation of the Framework requires
financial resources to assist the countries of the region
in the provision of social services for the population,
generate more cross-border trade and develop the
hydroelectric potential of a region richly endowed with
water resources. It also requires coordinated efforts and
the sharing of responsibility between different actors
and stakeholders in its implementation, monitoring and
evaluation. National and regional institutions should
be strengthened to help the private sector to increase
its competitiveness.

The topic of this important meeting is particularly
relevant for us in particular because of the mandate that
the Bamako declaration envisions in the area of crisis
prevention and conflicts within the French-speaking
area. This meeting is part of the tireless efforts
undertaken by the international community to preserve
peace and maintain security and the well-being of the
peoples of the region.

Lack of economic growth, jobs and opportunities
create a breeding ground for conflict. The international
community and the political leaders of the region need
to focus their efforts on creating an environment that
is conducive to business operations and investments.
To foster an effective strategy for the prevention and
resolution of conflicts in the Great Lakes region,
first and foremost we need to strengthen productive
capacities, creating decent jobs and livelihoods,
improving economic governance and fostering inclusive
development and shared responsibility. The region has
the potential to become the engine for economic growth
and development for the whole continent.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
has faced significant challenges in recent years. NAM
hopes that this open debate will provide an opportunity
to reinvigorate national and international commitments
to its implementation, as well as to mobilize resources
and work towards the implementation of the United
Nations Development Programme Great Lakes
regional strategy.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Couchepin
Roger.
Mr. Couchepin Roger (spoke in French): The
current situation in the Great Lakes region is a
topic of considerable concern for the International
Organization of la Francophonie (IOF), which has
followed with great attention the political, security
and humanitarian developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Burundi. That is why, on
behalf of the Secretary General of la Francophonie, Her
Excellency Ms. Michaëlle Jean, I welcome the holding
of this meeting and would like to express our profound
gratitude for the opportunity to share with the Council
the point of view of our organization on the issue of
54/64

First, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
International Organization of la Francophonie is very
attentive to the various mediation initiatives aimed at
restoring political dialogue at the national level. As the
Council is aware, in the framework of the actions that we
have carried out to continue consolidating in a lasting
way democracy in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the IOF conducted an audit of the electoral rolls
in this country in November 2015, and we transmitted
the report of that audit to the Congolese authorities.
The implementation of the outcome of the audit could
contribute to holding inclusive and credible elections
within the time frame set out in the Constitution. For
this reason, we have also been working very closely
with the facilitator of the African union, the former
Prime Minister of Togo, Mr. Edem Kodjo, in order to
contribute to the efforts aimed at bringing together
all political actors around the same table. This should
be done in order to make it possible to hold smooth
elections rapidly. Trying to reach such an agreement is
a priority for our organization.
The situation in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains characterized by the
continuing violence and attacks by armed groups that
threaten the security of the peoples living there. We
support and will continue to support the actions carried
out by the armed forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which are aimed at restoring peace and security
in the region.
Concerning Burundi, we have been following with
great interest the very encouraging signals recently
sent by the authorities of Burundi, in particular the
cancelling of the international arrest warrants against
15 dignitaries, including members of the opposition;
the fact that amnesty has been granted to several
hundred detainees; and the decision to authorize the
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

reopening of certain private radio stations. However,
our organization remains concerned by the lack of a
truly inclusive political dialogue and the very precarious
security situation, as well as the continuing violations
of various human rights, including freedom of the
press, and the situation of the hundreds of thousands
of refugees. We are also concerned about signs that
lead us to fear a rapid deterioration in the country’s
economic situation, and especially since the European
Union, whose aid represented about 20 per cent of
the national budget, decided last week to suspend its
direct assistance to Burundi, based on the provisions
of the Cotonou Agreement. The country’s economic
deterioration can only worsen the serious implications
of the current crisis for the people of Burundi.
Based on our findings during my two missions
to Burundi in 2015, the country has been under
the observation of the Permanent Council of the
International Organization of la Francophonie since
then. In that regard, we have a duty to ensure that the
national authorities are taking concrete steps to reach
a solution to the current urgent crisis, and doing so
in strict compliance with the Arusha Accords. The
welfare of the people of Burundi, and the stability and
development of the region as a whole, is at stake, as are
the values and principles that we all hold dear and that
La Francophonie, in accordance with the provisions
of its foundational texts, can never compromise on.
La Francophonie is more than ever determined to
play a full part in the search for a peaceful solution,
together with Burundi’s national authorities and all of
its partners, including the United Nations, the African
Union and the East African Community.
More generally, on behalf of the Secretary General
of La Francophonie, I would like to emphasize the
impact that crises and instability have on our societies.
Instability is the wellspring of all the evils giving
the international community cause for concern, with
terrorism first among them. We therefore cannot
combat terrorism if we do not create conditions
that will encourage young people to have hope and
confidence in the future. Instability breeds distrust,
disillusionment, a loss of moral compass and identity,
all of which are what terrorist movements rely on,
motivated as they are by hatred and the destruction of
the values of peace, justice and freedom. Similarly, we
cannot claim to be able to solve the problem of forced
migration without directly tackling the root causes of
today’s crises — whether they are political instability,

S/PV.7653

insecurity, weak institutions, youth unemployment, or a
lack of prospects for private and public investors. That
is why it is imperative that all of us, without exception,
strive to implement concrete measures to help prevent
crises and to preserve peace and welfare for all. La
Francophonie will contribute to all of those efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Angolan presidency for convening
this meeting, whose topic underlines the importance
of ensuring peace and security in the Great Lakes
region. I would also like to thank today’s briefers — the
Secretary-General, his Special Envoy for the Great
Lakes Region, the African Union’s Commissioner for
Peace and Security and the representative of the World
Bank — for their valuable contributions.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the obseraver of the European Union (EU),
and in my national capacity I would like to make some
brief comments.
We believe that a transition from fragility to
stability and from conflict to peace in the Great
Lakes region is fully attainable, but only with strong
and inclusive national ownership, vibrant cooperation
between the countries of the region and a long-term
commitment to, and collaboration with, that region on
the part of the wider international community, including
the United Nations. As those critical conditions are
secured, they will ensure that development accelerates
and local communities enjoy the full benefits of the
extraordinary human, material and natural resources of
the Great Lakes region.
The political instability and conflicts in the
region have a considerable international dimension,
and therefore require a concerted effort to promote
sustainable peace and development. In that context,
we would like to reiterate our full support for the steps
taken by the Security Council and the international
community, and we commend the United Nations, the
African Union and the European Union for their efforts
aimed at stabilizing the situation on the ground, while
maintaining full respect for the political independence,
national sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
States Members of the United Nations.
Peacekeeping continues to be one of the most
important activities of the United Nations. It is a

16-0778055/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

significant mechanism paving the way for sustainable
security, peace and development in States trying
to overcome crisis and destabilization. We also
believe in the importance of the Organization’s
peacebuilding activities in the region, and as a member
of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, we fully support the Commission’s
dedicated efforts to help to improve the situation in
the Great Lakes region, including through sharing our
own experience of reforming State institutions. We
would like to take this opportunity to commend the
Angolan delegation, in its capacity as a co-facilitator
with Australia, for its important role in the ongoing
negotiations for comprehensive General Assembly and
Security Council draft resolutions related to the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture.
Despite the fact that 20 per cent of my country’s
territory remains under illegal foreign military
occupation, and that hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons and refugees from Georgia, victims
of ethnic cleansing, are denied the right to return to their
homes, we as a country are committed to international
peace efforts across the globe. Georgia has extensive
experience as a contributor to international security
and stability, including on the African continent. In
2014, a Georgian military contingent took part in the
EU-led operation in the Central African Republic,
whose aim was to support regional and international
efforts to restore stability there and to promote a
political transformation process. The following year,
Georgia continued to participate in the ongoing EU-led
missions in the Central African Republic and Mali. As a
participant in the world leaders’ summit on peacekeeping
last September, we continue to look for ways to enhance
our support to United Nations peacekeeping.
We find it encouraging that the Pact on Security,
Stability and Development, adopted in Nairobi in 2006
at the second Summit of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, clearly outlines four
major areas of cooperation in the region — peace and
security, development and good governance, economic
development and regional integration, and humanitarian
and social issues. I would like to recall that an
auspicious turning point in the consolidation of peace
and stability in the region was the signing, in Addis
Ababa on 24 February 2013, of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region by 11 countries and four
important regional and international institutions,
56/64

21/03/2016

and the Security Council’s subsequent adoption of
resolution 2098 (2013). The full implementation of
both the Framework and resolution 2098 (2013) will
help to stabilize the situation on the ground and, more
important, pave the way for addressing the root causes
of the cycle of conflict in the countries of the Great
Lakes region.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
of Georgia’s continued commitment to the international
community’s sustained efforts to achieve lasting
peace and security in the Great Lakes region, with the
meaningful participation of all interested actors at the
local, national, regional and international levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): I would
like to congratulate you and the Angolan delegation,
Mr. President, on your presidency of the Council this
month, and to thank you for organizing today’s very
timely and relevant open debate.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Great Lakes region are now at a critical juncture as
they move towards a more peaceful and democratic
societies based on sustainable development. The lack of
consensus on key issues such as the electoral calendar
makes it unclear whether the presidential election can
be held in November, as the Constitution mandates, in
a peaceful and democratic way. The security situation
is still fragile, with rising political tensions and
ongoing attacks from armed groups like the Forces
Démocratiques de libération du Rwanda. Moreover, the
economic downturn caused by low international prices
for raw materials is undermining the foundation of
development and peace.
Against this backdrop, a comprehensive development
strategy that links peace, security and development for
the effective implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region is essential. In that sense,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s recent participation
in the Great Lakes Private Sector Investment Conference
in Kinshasa and the establishment of the United Nations
Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework 2016-2017
are highly commendable in that they have created
new momentum for this comprehensive approach. The
Republic of Korea would like to underline two points.
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

First, security, political stability, democratic
institution-building and governance must be the
bedrock for sustainable development. Above all, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
should fulfil its primary responsibilities to protect and
serve its own people by undertaking extensive reforms
in the areas of security and governance and promoting
democratization and reconciliation. In particular, we
look forward to seeing tangible outcomes in security
sector reform, such as the establishment of a rapid
reaction force that can more quickly and effectively
engage in conflict and protect civilians. We believe
that these efforts will also contribute to materializing
the gradual and progressive exit strategy of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). We
also urge the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the political parties to engage in
inclusive dialogue to reach consensus on the issues
pertaining to the election process.
Secondly, regional stakeholders should formulate
an effective mechanism for sustainable economic
development and co-prosperity. In particular, a
sound and effective mechanism for natural resource
management is essential to break the link between
natural resources and conflict, and transform
natural resources into a strong engine for economic
development and co-prosperity. Regional stakeholders
need to develop a model for creating regional or global
value chains that exploit, process and export natural
resources in a way that helps local, national and
regional economies. At the same time, the countries
of the region should increase efforts to create a more
favourable environment for foreign investments by
accelerating economic integration.
The Republic of Korea has made constructive
contributions that focus on building the capacity of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
the areas of water, public health, and rural development.
It has been carrying out various development assistance
projects that draw upon Korea’s unique experience of
having achieved successful economic development
within just a half century through, among others, the
Saemaul Undong, or New Village Movement. The
Saemaul Undong, which greatly contributed to rural
development in Korea in the 1970s with community-led
comprehensive resource mobilization based on a can-do
spirit, can be shared with many other African countries
in the context of the contemporary situation. In addition,

S/PV.7653

our sustainable mine development and reclamation
training programme for officials of the Ministry of
Mines aims to assist the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in developing a sustainable
mechanism for natural resource management. We are
also running various other training programmes for
Government officials of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi in the areas of
justice, e-Government and human resource development
with a view to lending support to the strengthening of
institutional capacity and governance in the region. The
Republic of Korea also contributed to the protection of
civilians and human rights in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo by providing $1 million of budgetary
support to the joint protection teams of the Joint Human
Rights Office under MONUSCO in 2014.
Finally, I would like to reiterate my Government’s
full support for the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit,
and MONUSCO. We appreciate their relentless
efforts for sustainable peace and development in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. The
Republic of Korea will continue to play a constructive
role in achieving this important goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): First,
I wish to extend warm thanks to Angola for having
taken the initiative to organize this high-level meeting
on the situation in the Great Lakes region, and for the
quality and timeliness of the concept note before us
(S/2016,223, annex). I also thank the ministers here
for their presence, which reflects their interest in the
region, and commend the briefers for their rich and
informative statements.
For two decades now, the majority of the countries
of the Great Lakes region have been prey to political
instability, lengthy wars and recurring conflict. The
succession of crises has had disastrous consequences,
resulting in loss of life, population displacement, the
destruction of basic infrastructure and the disruption of
economic channels. Despite regional initiatives to help
resolve these multifaceted crises, populations continue
to live in inhuman conditions that are often perceived as
a curse to be borne rather than a problem to be solved.
This disastrous situation is at odds with the immense
riches that abound in the region.

16-0778057/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

The existence of historically close ethnic,
cultural, social and political ties among the peoples
of the region, as well as the porosity or proximity
of borders, further complicate and exacerbate the
situation. Forced population movements, economic
malaise and widespread violence, as well as their
fallout across borders, exacerbate tensions between
States considerably. In the region, borders have become
veritable sieves that contribute increasingly to the
spread of conflict, as opposed to geographical barriers
that act as obstacles to threats to the stability of States.
The commitment of the international community in
the region, demonstrated in particular by the Council
and by the deployment of the largest United Nations
peacekeeping operation, should have made it possible
to halt the spiral of violence in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but the country remains the
theatre of clashes among dozens of Congolese and
foreign armed groups for reasons based on ethnicity,
land or control over significant mineral resources. Here,
I would like to mention a worrying trend illustrated
by the growing interconnection between the criminal
activities of armed groups operating in the Great
Lakes region, such as the Lord’s Resistance Army,
and terrorist groups operating in the Sahel and, more
recently, in West Africa. This phenomenon is a threat
to the security of the entire continent, for which there is
growing evidence.
It is therefore our collective duty to do our utmost
to evaluate and analyse the root causes of the tragedy
suffered by the region for over 20 years. In our view,
with regard to the complex dynamics of the conflict
in the Great Lakes region, it is essential to adopt and
implement multidimensional approaches centred on the
definitive neutralization of negative forces in the region,
the effective implementation of regional agreements,
the strengthening of political dialogue, the continuation
of and emphasis on peacebuilding efforts in the region,
the promotion of economic interdependence among
the various countries and strengthened coordination of
external actors.
The armed groups that remain active in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo are the greatest
threat to peace and stability in the region. Lasting
peace cannot be restored so long as insecurity persists
in the east. Only the timely disarmament of those armed
groups will reduce tensions and restore confidence to
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region. To that end, a message of unity and firmness
58/64

21/03/2016

from the international community would help support
the efforts of actors who are sincerely committed to the
cause of lasting peace in the Great Lakes region.
In that respect, we welcome the recent signing of the
agreement between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations for the
resumption of military cooperation between the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the fight
against armed groups.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region has entered its third year but its implementation
remains limited, although we note the existence of
several encouraging signals. It is up to the signatories
to the agreement to honour their commitments to
revitalizing the political momentum created by vthe
Framework agreement. It is only through cooperation
among stakeholders from across the region that the
Framework agreement will pave the way for a concrete
improvement in the security situation and living
conditions in the Great Lakes region. Moreover, it
remains crucial that the signatories of the Framework
agreement establish the most appropriate enforcement
mechanisms to prevent conflicts, restore peace and
enforce agreements.
The implementation of the Framework agreement
must be promoted and supervized by the highest organs
of the Regional Follow-up Mechanism at the level of
Heads of State and Government. Only the involvement
of the latter will be able to ensure the necessary
political will and sustained commitment of all Member
States. I commend the significant progress made by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the implementation
of its commitments under the Framework agreement.
Conflict resolution in the Great Lakes region
requires not only resolving security challenges but
also addressing their root causes by giving priority
to the promotion of good governance and the rule of
law. Peacebuilding is the indispensable foundation of
political stability and economic development in the
subregion, and the role played by the international
community is crucial in that respect. It is therefore
always necessary for development partners to support
and pursue recent initiatives towards democratization
by enhancing their intervention strategies. The
good functioning of electoral processes is also a
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

key aspect for peace and stability. We must work to
ensure a transparent and credible electoral process
in countries that organize elections, while respecting
the Constitution and the electoral calendar. While
the Government is responsible for ensuring that the
elections are credible and transparent, the support of
the international community remains crucial.
It is important for countries of the region to
cooperate in the restoration of peaceful dialogue and
cordial relations among States. Any reconciliation
and reconstruction initiative in the region requires the
stimulation of positive developments to reassure the
affected countries that their security and economic
interests have more to gain through support for
stability and improved relations with neighbours. In
this regard, it would be useful for the region to continue
regional cooperation in the four key areas of peace and
security, democracy and good governance, economic
development, and humanitarian and social protection.
If all the region’s peoples are to enjoy the dividends
of peace, it is essential to promote economic integration
as a means to strengthen the links among the countries
of the region and to benefit the common interest through
the promotion of peace, stability and cooperation.
One way to do this is to streamline and strengthen
the capacity of existing economic blocs in the region,
such as the Economic Community of the Great Lakes
Countries, and to intensify economic integration not
only in terms of reduced tariff barriers, but also in
such areas as migration and population flows, trade
facilitation and investment. Economic integration could
also be achieved by promoting cross-border community
cooperation initiatives that strengthen the links among
local communities in border regions, and allowing
them to face challenges and seize opportunities of
mutual interest.
Although the Great Lakes region enjoys the
sustained commitment of the international community,
the latter remains fragmented. Most peace initiatives in
the region have not taken account of the complexity of
the conflict and its consequences, not only nationally,
but also at the regional and international levels. We
must therefore continue to exploit synergies and to
coordinate initiatives to maximize the contribution of
international partners to the implementation of various
peace and development initiatives in the region.
We welcome the launch today of the new United
Nations Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework

S/PV.7653

2016-2017, which offers great hope for a better future
of prosperity and development in the Great Lakes
region, and we call on all stakeholders to contribute
to the realization of this ambitious programme
of transformation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for convening this debate, which comes at a time
when the Great Lakes region is at a crossroads.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
Major efforts have been made in this traditionally
fragile region to fight illegal revenue from mineral
wealth and to promote a return to peace. Yet we cannot
be sure that these efforts will bear fruit. Germany
remains committed to supporting the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) and its
member States in their efforts to foster peace, stability
and development in the region. Since 2004, the German
Government has contributed significantly to various
projects in the region, wishing to promote transparency
and control of the mining sector. The current three-year
phase amounts to nearly $30 million.
Germany supports the ICGLR secretariat and
in particular the Regional Initiative on Natural
Resources, which aims at breaking the link between
mineral revenues and conflict financing. At the core
of the Resource Initiative is a regional certification
mechanism for selected natural resources, namely,
cassiterite, wolframite, coltan and gold. In order to
embed these efforts in wider peacebuilding activities
in the region, Germany is also currently in the process
of deploying an expert on the natural resource sector
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo to the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
In addition, Germany cooperates with selected
ICGLR member States. For example, support is
provided to the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
ensure the good governance of its mining sector and
to implement a national certification system for the
artisanal and small-scale mining sector. This project
not only addresses the issue of illegal exploitation,
but also seeks to promote better living conditions for
artisanal miners by improving their environmental and
social working conditions.

16-0778059/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

21/03/2016

The link between natural resources and conflict
is not the only challenge to the prevailing conflicts
across the Great Lakes region. As highlighted by the
report of the Peacebuilding Commission, progress in
development is also critical to preventing both lapse and
relapse into conflict. That is why Germany supports
peacebuilding efforts in the Great Lakes region through
targeted development cooperation programmes. For
example, since 2008 more than $100 million have been
disbursed to a peace Fund in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which hopes to deliver a tangible peace
dividend to the people of eastern Congo. More than half
a million Congolese have already benefitted from the
peace fundamental, which finances the construction
of labour-intensive infrastructure and activities that
stimulate the agricultural sector, all of which will give
a boost to the local economy. By focusing on locally
relevant drivers of conflict, the peace fund contributes
to the implementation of the revised International
Security and Stabilization Support Strategy in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

potential for growth, which desperately needs to be
tapped in order to improve the livelihoods of the
peoples of the region. In that regard, I join my colleague
from Morocco in welcoming today’s launch of the
United Nations Great Lakes Strategic Framework for
2016-2017, which should contribute to that goal.

Germany also reaffirms its full support for
MONUSCO, to which it will continue to provide
civilian expertise, and to the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region. We welcome
the steps that MONUSCO has taken to increase its
efficiency and effectiveness, agree with the assessment
that MONUSCO’s political role should be strengthened,
and look forward to the results of the comprehensive
and collaborative multi-phase review. Germany will
remain committed to the developments and continue
to support efforts to increase peace and stability in
the Great Lakes region. This includes our continued
strong engagement in opposition to poaching and illicit
wildlife trafficking as co-chair, together with Gabon,
of the respective Group of Friends here in New York.

Poland remains committed to support all United
Nations activities aimed at conflict prevention and the
promotion of dialogue instead of violence. The most
pressing concerns have to do with the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially in
the face of the difficulties following the scheduled
electoral process. At the same time, we welcome the
positive signals from the Central African Republic,
which proves that transition and conflict mitigation
can be attained with the consistent involvement of the
international community.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for convening today’s debate, as well as for
Angola’s constructive engagement in the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union. We would like,
however, to provide some additional remarks from our
national perspective.
It is widely acknowledged that the Great Lakes
region possesses enormous, and largely underdeveloped,
60/64

One of the issues Poland considers central to our
debate is how best to transition from the initial phase
of sustaining peace to long-term socioeconomic
development. Key challenges to development in the
Great Lakes region are well defined. Poland, with its
complicated history, can be a good example of how
to conduct a transformation — in our case, from a
foreign-imposed communist regime — to democracy,
a market economy and an open society. We know what
it means to lose independence, what it means to fight
for freedom and what it means to rebuild an economy.
We are sharing our experience through our special Go
Africa programme, which was developed as a bridge
between Poland and African continent.

We support United Nations efforts with regard to
the protection of civilians in the region and beyond.
One example of such efforts was the establishemt of a
dedicated pillar within the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In the context of the protection of civilians,
Poland recognizes the great importance of the Kigali
Principles, adopted in 2015 and aimed at protecting the
most vulnerable. We intend to sign on to the Principles
in the near future.
We take note of the leading role of the pan-African
and regional organizations in conflict prevention and
pledge our full support. Regional organizations are
important stakeholders in United Nations activities
to address conflicts. It is therefore crucial to explore
ways to address issues of a regional dimension, as well
as modalities for cooperation and joint programming
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

between regional organization such as the African
Unioin, the East African Community, the Souther
African Development Community, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
In conclusion, let me stress that we favour the
approach of African solutions for African problems.
At the same time, we encourage our African
friends to increase their involvement in different
initiatives and activities within the African Peace and
Security Architecture.
The President: I now give the floor to the
represenative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today’s debate, which addresses important
issues that deserve our attention and consideration.
I would like to align myself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union.
In my statement, I would like to focus on two issues
that are highlighted in the concept note (S/2016/223,
annex) prepared for this debate. The first is the role
that elections play in contributing to durable peace,
reconciliation and development. The holding of regular,
inclusive and transparent elections is vital for credible
democratic governance. Crucial to the success of
any electoral process is the political environment in
which elections take place, and creating a conducive
environment involves working closely with a wide
range of stakeholders.
Unfortunately, the environment in which last July’s
presidential elections took place in Burundi could not be
judged as conducive to inclusive and credible elections.
The situation in the country is now characterized by
pervasive violence, human rights abuses and forced
displacement. We would urge the Government of
Burundi, in the interest of its people, to move forward
urgently on an inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue,
which is essential to restoring peace and stability.
We are also following closely the situation in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, particularly in the
light of the upcoming elections in the country. We have
taken note of the comments made by the African Union
and the United Nations in stressing the importance of
peaceful, transparent and timely elections, which would
serve to consolidate much of the progress made in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo over the past decade.
In this pre-electoral period, it is especially important

S/PV.7653

that the rule of law and human rights be respected and
that arrangements respect constitutional provisions.
More broadly, we recall that the African Charter on
Democracy, Elections and Governance provides clear
standards for governance. We urge all Governments
in the Great Lakes region, as elsewhere in Africa,
to adhere to those standards in order to build truly
inclusive and resilient democracies, the foundation for
durable economic and social development.
The second issue I would like to address is the
critical role of women in conflict prevention, peace
negotiations, peacebuilding and governance. As
noted in the three high level reviews in 2015, and at
the Security Council debate (see S/PV.7533) held here
last October, the participation of women is key to
sustainable peace. Women must participate and have an
opportunity to demonstrate leadership in all areas of
peace and security — as mediators and interlocutors, as
peacebuilders and as active participants in economic,
social and political spheres. From our own experience
of conflict on the island of Ireland, we know first-hand
the importance of the promotion and empowerment of
women as peacebuilders in opening up a pathway to
sustainable peace.
Finally, the Great Lakes region has many examples
of the particular impact of conflict on women and girls,
including the devastating impact of sexual violence. We
remain deeply concerned about grave reports, in both
scale and nature, of acts of sexual and gender-based
violence, as well as other human rights violations, in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular in
the east of the country. We are also concerned about
reports of sexual violence perpetrated by security forces
during house searches in Burundi. Such violations are
completely unacceptable and cannot be tolerated. We
encourage the authorities in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to further build on progress to combat
sexual violence and to continue to work to ensure the
full implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
2122 (2013).
Ireland strongly supports the work of Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General Said Djinnit and his
predecessor Mary Robinson. In particular, we welcome
his commitment to promote a participatory approach to
the development of gender-related policies. We believe
that engaging with a broad range of actors in support
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the

16-0778061/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

Region offers the best chance for success, and that
engaging with civil society will help address all issues
surrounding sexual and gender based violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Albania.
Mr. Nina (Albania): We appreciate the opportunity
to take the floor during this open debate on this very
important topic. We would like to thank the Angolan
presidency of the Security Council for choosing the
theme of the prevention and resolution of conflicts
in the Great Lakes region, as well as for the very
informative concept note (S/2016/223, annex) circulated
in preparation for this debate. We would like also to
thank the Special Envoy and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for their informative insights
on the situation in the Great Lakes region.
Albania aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. Allow me to make the
following remarks in my national capacity.
We are deeply concerned about the significant
deterioration of the situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where activities
by the Allied Democratic Forces and by the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, among other
groups, pose serious threats to security in the region
and beyond. Furthermore, we regret that civilians are
being caught up in the fighting and are being killed,
displaced, forcibly abducted or harassed, often on
the basis of ethnicity or perceived collaboration with
opposing groups — with an estimated more than
500 civilians killed since 2014 and more than 45,000
persons recently displaced.
In that context, we commend the steps and measures
taken by both the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the armed forces of the
country to strengthen the protection of civilians, and we
welcome their improved cooperation. However, further
actions are obviously needed towards that fundamental
objective, including through increased outreach and
early-warning activities in the region.
We furthermore welcome resolution 2211 (2015),
which provides that any future reconfiguration of
MONUSCO or its mandate be based on the evolution
of the situation on the ground and on the protection of
civilians, stabilization and the implementation of the
62/64

21/03/2016

Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, including
national reforms.
Previous experience in the region has shown that
the destiny of each of the region’s countries is deeply
intertwined with that of its neighbours. The crisis in
Burundi has only exacerbated the situation in that
context, as worrisome reports indicate that infiltration
by armed groups is fuelling further instability. Urgent
attention therefore needs to be paid to the regional
dynamics of the crisis in order to avoid escalation
and regionalization.
The potential for conflict to spread throughout
the region should neither be assumed nor ignored,
in particular by the Security Council. In that regard,
we welcome the steps taken by the United Nations
Stabilization Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in ensuring that contingency
plans are in place in case of an eventual escalation.
While any meaningful resolution will require a creative
combination of factors, the countries of the region,
supported by the international community, can become
key players and have the potential to comprehensively
address those regional dynamics before they escalate.
We welcome the holding of the first Great Lakes
Private Sector Investment Conference, which took
place in Kinshasa on 24 and 25 February and which
was attended by the Secretary-General, to provide a
platform for a public-private dialogue on promoting
responsible investment in the region and enhanced
networking opportunities between regional and
international stakeholders. However, responsible
investment cannot be achieved without addressing the
issue of the illegal exploitation of minerals and natural
resources. Nowhere is that such exploitation more wellestablished and more dramatic than in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where that
trade is worth an estimated $1.25 billion annually.
Important lessons have been learned in past years
by realizing the fact that instability in the Great Lakes
countries has been financed by illegal mineral sourcing
and trading, prompting concrete measures such as
the Regional Initiative on Natural Resources. Illegal
exploitation and trade in natural resources in the Great
Lakes is very complex. The needed measures to address
it should necessarily include actions against impunity,
improved governance, reforming security forces, the
sustainable management of natural resources and
promoting livelihood programmes. By taking those
16-07780

21/03/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7653

measures, the natural resources of the mineral-rich
Great Lakes region will have the potential to become
a very powerful tool to achieve durable peace,
reconciliation and development.

must also look beyond the traditional peace and security
dimension and search for solutions to the root causes of
conflict. As our contribution to this debate, we wish to
highlight the following points.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has made
good socioeconomic progress in the past decade, in
particular since the adoption of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. The upcoming elections
in that country are of a crucial importance. The holding
of peaceful, transparent, smooth and timely elections
will greatly contribute to consolidating the progress
made in the country over more than a decade. The
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo should
have an opportunity to have their voices heard through
a democratically elected Government.

First, the Kingdom of Thailand believes that peace
cannot be sustained in the absence of economic recovery
and sustainable and inclusive development. The Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework, in our view,
provides a suitable platform for concerted efforts at
all levels to address peace, security and development
in a comprehensive manner. The Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has committed to
furthering economic development. The region has
committed to deepening economic integration. And the
international community has committed to supporting
the implementation of economic development and
the regional integration agenda. Therefore, we stress
the need for the full and timely implementation of
the Framework. We also welcome today’s launch of
the Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework 20162017, which outlines the United Nations development
approach in support of the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework.

Albania welcomed the joint press statement of
16 February on the political dialogue in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo issued by the African Union,
the United Nations, the European Union and the
International Organisation of La Francophonie, which
emphasized the necessity for an inclusive political
dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
urge all Congolese political actors to spare no effort,
within the framework of the country’s Constitution, to
ensure the successful holding of elections, with a view
of further advancing the progress made so far.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): Let me first express my
delegation’s deepest appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely meeting. My appreciatiaon
also goes to all the briefers for their respective remarks,
which reaffirmed the international community’s
commitment to resolving the conflicts in the Great
Lakes region. Today’s open debate provides an
opportunity to examine the current political situation
in the subregion and serves as encouragement to the
parties concerned and their international partners to
recommit their efforts to address outstanding issues
and implement the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region.
As rightly pointed out in your concept note
(S/2016/223, annex), Sir, the underlying causes of
conflict in the Great Lakes region are complex and
multifaceted. In our view, efforts directed at ending
instability and violence alone will be insufficient. We

Secondly, the Great Lakes Region is rich in natural
resources, be it gold, charcoal, timber, wildlife or
water. However, such endowment has also been one of
the sources of instability in the region. The Security
Council has recognized the linkages between the
armed conflicts in the region and the illicit exploitation
of natural resources by armed groups and criminal
networks. That has resulted in a number of sanctions
being imposed on targeted individuals. While
recognizing the purposes of such sanctions, we are
of the view that the Council should take into account
potential unintended consequences, such as adverse
humanitarian impacts and national economic costs,
when imposing natural resources-related sanctions. In
addition to stemming illicit exploitation, we are also
of the view that effective governance can potentially
turn natural resources from being a driver of conflict
to a catalyst for development and shared prosperity.
Such governance cannot be ensured without the full
commitment and participation of the Governments of
the countries of the Great Lakes region, the extractive
industry and the relevant international actors.
Thirdly, regional and subregional organizations
can play a crucial role as partners of the United Nations
and the conflict-affected countries in their efforts to
prevent and resolve conflicts. We commend the African

16-0778063/64

S/PV.7653

Maintenance of international peace and security

Union and the International Conference on Great Lakes
Region for their constructive and continued commitment
and for their contribution to foster sustainable peace
and development in the region.
Fourthly, the effective prevention and resolution
of conflicts require the participation of all the relevant
stakeholders in the political and peace processes
in an inclusive manner. As evidenced in the report
(S/2015/716) on the global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), only in that way can we
ensure the meaningful empowerment and participation
of women. As a strong supporter of the women and
peace and security agenda, the Kingdom of Thailand
advocates a greater role for women at all stages of the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. We also look forward to further discussing

64/64

21/03/2016

this important issue at next week’s open debate on
the role of women in the prevention and resolution of
conflict in Africa.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, allow me reiterate the Kingdom of
Thailand’s readiness to share with the countries of the
Great Lakes region its humble experience and practices
on development and on the management of natural
resources, as well as on peacebuilding, which could
be applied in the context of the region. I also wish to
reiterate the Royal Thai Government’s commitment to
supporting the countries of the region, both bilaterally
and multilaterally, in their efforts to achieve durable
peace and sustainable development.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

16-07780
