A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly

^ги«м.
X/RES/45/50
13 December 1990

Forty-fifth session
Agenda item 47

RESOLUTIOH ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
(on the report of the First Committee (A/45/769)]

45/50.

Amendment of the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Testa in
the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 44/106 of 15 December 1989,
Reiterating its conviction that a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty is the
highest-priority measure for the cessation of the nuclear arms race and for the
achievement of the objective of nuclear disarmament,
. .*

Besalling PlgO its resolution 1910 (XVIIl) of 27 November 1963, in which it
noted with approval the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in
Outer Space and under Water, 1/ signed on 5 August 1963, and reguested the
Conference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament 4J to continue with a
sense of urgency its negotiations to achieve the objectives set forth in the
preamble to the Treaty,
Recalling further that more than one third of the parties to the Treaty have
requested the Depositary Governments to convene a conference to consider an
amendment that would convert the Treaty into a comprehensive test-ban treaty.

1/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 480, No. 6964.

2/
The Committee on Disarmament was redesignated the Conference on
Disarmament as from 7 February 1984.

90-35636

2947Z (E)

АУRES/45/50
Page 2

Beiteratinq also its conviction tbat such a conference will facilitate the
attainment of the objectives set forth in the Treaty and thus serve to strengthen
it,
Hotinq with satisfaction that the meeting for the organization of the
Amendment Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty Banning Huclear Weapon
Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Hater was held in New York from
29 Kay to 8 June 1990, and taking note of the report of that meeting, 1/
1.
Notes with satisfaction that the Amendment Conference of the States
Parties to the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer
Space and under Water will be held in New York from 7 to 18 January 1991;
2.
Calls upon all parties to the Treaty to participate in, and to contribute
to the success of, the Amendment Conference for the achievement of a comprehensive
nuclear-test ban at an early date, as an indispensable measure towards
implementation of their undertakings in the preamble to the Treaty;
3.
Reiterates its conviction that, pending the conclusion of a comprehensive
nuclear-test-ban treaty, the nuclear-weapon States should suspend all nuclear-test
explosions through an agreed moratorium or unilateral moratoria;
4.
Recommends that arrangements be made to ensure that intensive efforts
continue, under the auspices of the Amendment Conference, until a comprehensive
nuclear-test-ban treaty is achieved;
5.
Recommends also that the Amendment Conference establish a working group,
or other means it deems appropriate, to study, inter alia, the organization of
control, institutional mechanisms and legal aspects of a comprehensive
nuclear-test-ban treaty and to report its conclusions to the Conference;
6.
Stresses the importance of ensuring adequate co-ordination among the
various negotiating forums dealing with a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty;
7.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-sixth session
the item entitled "Amendment of the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the
Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water".
54th Plenary meeting

4 December 199Q

2/

PTBT/CONF/l.
