S/PV.8354

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8354th meeting

Monday, 17 September 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cohen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Woldegerima
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alahmad
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2018/824)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-28821 (E)
*1828821*

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

aspects of civilian efforts in the country will be placed
on the table for review and mutual commitment.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2018/824)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Belgium,
Canada, Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Italy, Pakistan, Turkey and Uzbekistan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and Mr. Ramiz Bakhtiar,
Afghan youth representative.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency, Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/824, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yamamoto.
Mr. Yamamoto: It is a time for important
decisions in Afghanistan. These decisions will affect
the fundamental fabric of the society and the future of
Afghanistan. The Afghan people are scheduled to cast
their votes on 20 October to choose their parliamentary
representatives for the first time since 2010. Strategic
decisions, underpinned by a national consensus, will
need to be taken to guide the next steps towards peace.
On 28 November in Geneva, the Government of
Afghanistan and the United Nations will co-chair a
ministerial conference on Afghanistan, at which all
2/34

17/09/2018

Just over a month from now, the Afghan people
are scheduled to go to the polls. I have met many
Afghans across the country who have impressed upon
me their desire to exercise their right to elect their
representatives. Many will face considerable risks to
do that. Operationally and technically, the preparations
are on track, yet I remain very concerned that political
challenges could jeopardize the tight timelines and derail
the elections unless all political leaders are engaged
constructively and peacefully to ensure that elections
are held on time. Security is also a serious concern.
From a technical point of view alone, elections are
possible. The candidate lists were finalized in time to
enable the printing of ballot papers to meet the deadline.
The recruitment of the election officials is on track. The
Independent Election Commission (IEC) announced
that more than 9 million people had registered to vote.
Many opposition parties remain sceptical about that
number, citing both the security concerns that would
have prevented many people from registering and
alleging fraud. Several safeguards for the verification of
voter lists and fraud prevention measures are being put
in place. Despite those measures, scepticism remains.
Over the past few days, supporters of a coalition of
political parties have started to block several provincial
election commission offices, demanding that additional
safeguards be put in place. Such actions hinder the work
of the IEC and jeopardize the holding of the elections
on time. Political concerns must be addressed through
institutional mechanisms, not through blockades.
Regardless of the reforms that are being
implemented, the parliamentary elections will
undoubtedly be a major test for Afghanistan’s
young democratic institutions. Almost one-third of
Afghanistan’s more than 7,000 polling centres will
not open due to insecurity. That raises concerns about
inclusivity. The main question is therefore not whether
the elections will be imperfect but how Afghanistan’s
electoral institutions will manage such limitations.
In my communications with the political actors
in Afghanistan, I have consistently stressed three key
points. First, continued international support should
not be taken for granted. That is also true for the
continuation of the constitutional order. Secondly, there
must be an awareness that the parliamentary elections
have implications beyond selecting parliamentarians,
18-28821

17/09/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

including for the presidential election in April 2019. We
are aware of the real possibility of fraud taking place, as
well as allegations of fraud, which may have the tactical
purpose of discrediting the already difficult elections.
The Afghan institutions must combat both. Thirdly, I
urge all political actors and institutions to perform their
duties, to act responsibly and to think of the Afghan
people, bearing in mind the country’s bitter past.
At this critical juncture, the Independent Election
Commission, as the lead institution on elections,
will be expected to discharge its function with the
highest degree of integrity, with professionalism and
with full accountability to the Afghan people. The
Afghan institutions and political leaders have a shared
responsibility for the success of the elections. I also
urge the IEC to redouble its efforts to reach out to the
public in order to raise awareness of that important
process. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) will do everything possible
within its mandate and with the resources available to
support a successful electoral process.
President Ghani’s offer to the Taliban in February
this year to engage in talks without preconditions
created unprecedented political space for peace,
culminating in a temporary ceasefire in June. It showed
that reconciliation was possible. That newfound
momentum was further supported by numerous
citizen mobilizations, demonstrating the desire for
a peaceful future. The second ceasefire, proposed
by the Government in August, was unfortunately not
reciprocated by the Taliban. Peace processes rarely
move along straight lines. Setbacks were to be expected.
However, I believe that all actors recognized the craving
of the Afghan people for peace and the undeniable need
for a peace process. Whatever setbacks may lie ahead,
we are in a better position now than at any time in the
past 17 years to commence a process leading to talks
for a negotiated end to the conflict.
The most difficult phases lie ahead. They will
require resilience and persistence on the part of all
sides. The efforts of the Afghan Government, which
we hope will be reciprocated by the Taliban, need
to be reinforced by the coordinated approach of the
regional and other key countries to move forward. I
urge all sides to agree on concrete measures to build
confidence towards more structured talks. Such key
confidence-building steps could include prisoner
releases and their treatment, as well as measures at the
technical level in fields such as agriculture, education

S/PV. 8354

and health in contested areas. They could lead to the
cessation of violence, or at least a significant reduction.
All sides must realize that there is no military solution
to the conflict. I also wish to underline the importance
of ensuring the equal participation and full involvement
of women in all efforts for the promotion, establishment
and maintenance of peace and security.
The recent attack on the provincial capital of
Ghazni and the frequent suicide attacks in Kabul and
elsewhere remind us of the terrible toll on civilian lives
and livelihoods. In the first six months of this year,
UNAMA recorded the highest number of civilian deaths
since the Mission started to track civilian casualties. In
recent weeks, we have also seen a continuation of the
disturbing pattern of attacks targeting the Shia Muslim
community. Each death is an individual tragedy, but it is
also a tragedy for the country. Reconciliation becomes
harder with each life lost.
Insecurity is also taking its toll on journalists
and aid workers. This year alone, 13 journalists have
lost their lives and many more have been wounded.
That is the highest number of deaths in any country.
I urge the Government to take additional measures to
enhance their protection. Also this year, 23 aid workers
have lost their lives, 37 have been injured and 74 have
been abducted, making Afghanistan the second most
dangerous country in which the profession conducts its
work, while 2.2 million people are suffering from the
country’s worst drought in years.
Two months from now, the Afghan Government
and its international partners will gather in Geneva
at the ministerial level in order to discuss all aspects
of civilian efforts in Afghanistan. That is the biennial
opportunity, at the ministerial level, to follow up on the
mutual commitment made in Bonn in 2011. The Geneva
ministerial conference will be held at the mid-point of
the transformation decade, which ends in 2024. Together
with the long-term international commitments in the
security field, the Geneva ministerial conference will
signal sustained political commitment to Afghanistan
provided that the Afghan side lives up to its commitment
to reforms and development. The Afghan Government
committed to the delivery of six benchmarks, namely,
first, the holding of parliamentary elections; secondly,
advancing its anti-corruption efforts; thirdly, reforming
the security sector; fourthly, meeting the International
Monetary Fund benchmarks; fifthly, promoting private
sector development; and, sixthly, the development of
national priority programmes. The Geneva conference

18-288213/34

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

will also provide an opportunity for the international
community to further clarify its expectations regarding
the peace process and the ways in which it can support
such a process.
We recently lost an icon of the international
community. In 2001, former Secretary-General Kofi
Annan began his Nobel Peace Prize speech with a few
simple words. He said: “Today, in Afghanistan, a girl
will be born.” That girl is now almost a woman who
will soon be old enough to vote, to attend university
and to pursue the vocation of her dreams. Will she be
able to? I am sure that that girl will be watching closely
the developments of the next few months.
The President: I thank Mr. Yamamoto for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bakhtiar.
Mr. Bakhtiar: It is a great honour to speak in the
Security Council in my capacity as the Afghan Youth
Representative to the United Nations at a time when
many Afghans feel forgotten by the international
community and overwhelmed by a merciless war. The
Council is communicating an important message to our
people by giving a young Afghan this platform as well
as expressing support for the active participation of
youth in decision-making, in line with resolution 2250
(2015) and 2419 (2018).
I realize that this is an opportunity for me, as
someone living and working in that country as a
youth activist, to draw attention to the more complex
and nuanced reality of Afghanistan. Afghanistan has
suffered so much and for so long. It is our reality. I am
pleased to say that it is also a reality that our resilience,
progress and aspirations keep us focused on working
for a better tomorrow.
We are not a failed nation; we are a resilient nation
that has been tested and challenged in a way very few
other nations have ever been. We ourselves are not only
the victims of global terrorism; we are also fighting it
on behalf of all others. Afghans are at the front lines of
the battle against our common enemy.
The young generation of Afghanistan shares
common values and interests with our global partners
and friends that allow us to strengthen and deepen our
partnership with our friends in the region and with our
allies throughout the world.
4/34

17/09/2018

Two thirds of Afghanistan’s population is under the
age of 25. These young people barely remember the time
of the Taliban, let alone previous regimes. They belong
to a new Afghanistan. They have ambitions similar to
those of their fellow youth in other parts of the world.
The youth of Afghanistan are different in their way of
thinking, in their approach and in the way they define
and see our relationship with the world in the next 10
to 20 years. They are true partners to the rest of the
world; they do not just expect permanent dependency
on it but are trying hard to achieve interdependency,
trust and cooperation.
Our ambition is to make our country a hub for
regional connectivity and a land of opportunities. We
want the world to explore our culture and music and
learn our history. We were a nation that embraced
diversity as an asset and respected our religious beliefs.
Our generation is committed to reviving our historical
values once again.
The young generation of Afghanistan has been
the key driver of many of the successes of the past
17 years. The media is one shining example. In 2001,
independent media were virtually non-existent. Today
Afghan journalists are doing heroic work under
incredibly difficult circumstances. Afghan media play
an increasingly significant role in giving a voice to
voiceless Afghans and in holding power to account.
We have lost 53 journalists in a little less than four
years. Before coming to New York, I lost two of my
colleagues and friends from TOLOnews TV, Samim
Faramarz and Ramiz Ahmadi, in twin bombings as they
were reporting live from a blast site. Their colleagues
were simultaneously mourning, reporting and looking
after their families. That is our reality of both pain
and strength.
We are certain that Afghanistan will never go back
to the past, because there are thousands of like-minded
youth who are hopeful and are working fearlessly to
remake their country with their own hands, and they
have the hope that the international community will not
abandon them halfway.
Terrorism has affected all Afghans. More than
anyone else we want peace in our country. We are
holding the fort with our resilience and hope. We expect
the Council to focus on the real causes of terrorism and
force all regional players to play a constructive role
in Afghanistan.
18-28821

17/09/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

A few days ago, Kabul lost 17-year-old Rahila, who
was killed by a suicide bomber along with 47 other
students in an educational centre. She had written in
her diary about her dreams and future goals:
“I can be the Rahila that society desperately needs
in its pursuit of prosperity and progress. This
society will overcome its current crisis through
solutions drawn from the knowledge and education
of its youth”.
A few days after Rahila was killed just for going to
school, her brother established a library under her name
in Kabul to complete his sister’s dream of educating
girls in Afghanistan. That is a clear demonstration of
Afghan resolve.
In another attempt at peace, earlier this year a
caravan from the southern province of Helmand started
walking — barefoot — to Kabul, demanding peace.
One of the members of the Helmand Peace March is
22-year-old Zaheer Ahmad Zindani, who was blinded
five years ago by a roadside bomb. In August 2018, I
met with the caravan in Kabul, and they asked me to
convey this message:
“Afghans are now going through the deadliest days,
weeks, years and decades. We have lost our finest
ones to this bloody war. But we want peace, and
peace in Afghanistan cannot come without the
support and the will of the international community,
in particular the United Nations. We therefore
call on all countries involved with the issue of
Afghanistan not to spend resources and human
capital on the excesses of war but on bringing longlasting peace to Afghanistan”.
The caravan is still walking and just reached
Mazar-e-Sharif. They have said that they will not stop
walking until peace has been achieved. That is the
resolve and resilience of our generation.
Our generation also believes in democracy. We
expect our elections to happen next month. We fear
that because of various challenges the elections will
trigger nationwide unrest. The Council has a key role in
keeping our Government focused on national priorities,
including holding acceptable elections, fighting
corruption and supporting our security forces in their
tough fight.
Let me say by way of conclusion that I drafted
my speech on 9/11, but in 2018. This brought to mind
the terrorists’ most heinous attack on the World Trade

S/PV. 8354

Center Twin Towers. This should be a reminder of the
fact that terrorism is a global phenomenon that threatens
us all. We all have the responsibility to ensure that such
an atrocity never happens again. This can be ensured
when we all shoulder our share of responsibility and
fight against terrorism together.
On behalf of all Afghans, I am grateful for everyone’s
sacrifices and contributions in rebuilding Afghanistan.
The President: I thank Mr. Bhaktiar for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Let me begin by
conveying our best wishes for a successful Council
presidency in September and our gratitude to the
United States for having convened today’s debate on
Afghanistan. We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Yamamoto for his comprehensive
briefing. We are particularly pleased by the presence
of Mr. Ramiz Bakhtiar, Afghanistan’s first-ever United
Nations Youth Representative. We were pleased to see
him address the Council today and reflect the voice of
our youth on the overall situation in the country. His
merit-based selection as our United Nations Youth
Representative is a manifestation of how far our
younger generation has come in becoming proactive
agents of change in society.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council takes
place at a crucial moment, as we draw near to the
parliamentary elections scheduled for next month and
the international Geneva Conference on Afghanistan
in November, to be followed by the anticipated
presidential elections, in April 2019. If all goes well,
by the middle of next year we should have completed
our political transition, with a new Parliament and a
new Government.
Meanwhile, our security forces are leading the
national struggle against terrorist and extremist groups,
which have increased their brutality against our people
as part of a renewed attempt to take even more innocent
lives, including those of journalists and aid workers,
and subvert our progress.
As guardians of our territorial integrity, our
national security forces continue to grow in size,
strength and professionalism. Moreover, in addition to
the substantial increase of our special forces, we are
also working to triple the size of our air force by 2020.
This, together with our ongoing reform, will have a

18-288215/34

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

profound impact in terms of enhancing our fight against
international terrorism.
In the broader context, and despite the difficult
security environment, we remain on track to solidify
gains in different areas, including governance and
development. This is due primarily to the strength and
resilience of our people in defying complex challenges,
as they have so courageously done throughout the
course of our nation’s history; and secondly, to the
continued support of our many friends and allies in the
international community.
The core objective of our enduring partnership with
the international community is based on achieving a
sustainable peace that is seen as just and comprehensive.
As we take stock of the status of peace efforts through
new outreach to the Taliban, we need to draw the right
lessons from the history of engagement with that group.
This is essential to ensure that we are indeed on the
right track as we move forward.
Following our sustained efforts, this year at the
Kabul process conference in February we launched a
reinvigorated and more flexible peace plan that presented
unprecedented incentives that were unanticipated even
by the Taliban. It included unconditional talks and
measures for their return to and reintegration into society.
Lately, through increased diplomatic engagement with
various partners, we have strengthened regional and
international consensus in support of peace efforts. The
successive civil mobilizations and gatherings of Islamic
scholars in Kabul, Jakarta and Jeddah helped to enable
and welcome the first-ever temporary ceasefire with
the Taliban in June. Nevertheless, despite that brief lull
in fighting, the Taliban rejected the second ceasefire
proposed by us and welcomed by the Council. Making
real progress in peace efforts will not be possible
unless the consistent pattern of manipulating, misusing
opportunities and using deception for strategic gains
comes to an end.
Afghanistan stands fully committed to engaging
in a genuine peace process with tangible results for
our people. However, the guiding principle in moving
forward dictates that the fundamental factors that have
prevented peace efforts from gaining traction must first
be adequately detected and then addressed. All along,
we have underscored the importance of regional support
for our peace efforts, with a specific role for Pakistan.
Advancing the peace process is a key element of the
recently signed Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for
6/34

17/09/2018

Peace and Solidarity. We welcome last Saturday’s visit
of Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi to Kabul,
where he expressed his Government’s readiness to
support peace and stability in Afghanistan. The key
determinant in validating that commitment will be the
full and effective implementation of the AfghanistanPakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity.
For nearly a quarter of a century, Afghanistan has
been the site of what I term the “geographical genocide”
of certain circles within our region. The expectation is
that my country should either become their “trusted”
agent or be weakened, bled and represented as the
horrific face of terror around the world, devoid of its
independence, advancement, rich culture and history.
The erratic positions of the Taliban in the peace
talks, their leaderless profile, factional structure and
brutal attacks are used to pursue this policy. Such
genocide, with casualties of more than 10,000 a year
and traumatizing millions — as we have heard in the
presentation by our youth representative — has had
a negative impact on almost everything else in our
country, including governance, economy, electoral
process, anti-corruption, counter-narcotics and so on.
The important thing is that we either address the root
causes or continue to talk about their consequences.
Afghanistan has clearly asserted that regional
and international support is vital to the success of the
Afghan-led peace process. We welcome all coordinated
efforts leading to direct talks that can generate concrete
results, rather than a repeat of the past. We are keenly
following the interactions of some of our partners with
the Taliban, which are being coordinated with the
Afghan Government.
Let me take this opportunity to express a word of
thanks to all partners, inside and outside our region,
who are supporting our peace process. Such efforts,
rendered in a manner that reinforces our ownership and
leadership of the process, remain essential.
Other key issues are the upcoming elections, which
will determine our future stability. Efforts are under
way to ensure that the elections are free, fair, inclusive
and transparent, in accordance with the will of our
people. The successful electoral outcome will have a
profound impact on the future positive trajectory of
Afghanistan. Our people expect us to deliver on this
national process by addressing legitimate concerns
and preventing fraud and insecurity from jeopardizing
the process.
18-28821

17/09/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

We welcome the Security Council’s new emphasis on
the imperative of transparent elections, as emphasized
in its presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/15) and
press statements issued in July and August. This is a
welcome development, acknowledged by the people
and Government of Afghanistan. Furthermore, our
national unity and political stability provide the best
guarantee for the long-term stability of our country. In
this light, through a broad national dialogue, we need
to work on all outstanding issues related to upcoming
elections and win the trust of most stakeholders. We
know full well that successful elections and achieving
other important national objectives can best be realized
in a spirit of unity and understanding.
The Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan
in November will mark a new chapter in relations with
our international partners. Geneva will be a chance for
us to brief the international community on progress
made against the benchmarks of the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework. More
broadly, it will explore the way forward with respect
to peace efforts and the regional economic cooperation
agenda, which is one of the main achievements of the
National Unity Government.
The endorsement of a new mutual accountability
framework will refine the nature of our cooperation
to make it more impactful for our people, through the
improvement of development aid from international
donors and effective project completion in the context
of our national development strategy. The preparatory
meeting for the Ministerial Conference — co-chaired
by Foreign Minister Rabbani, Finance Minister Qayumi
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto — will be held here in New York on Sunday.
We look forward to seeing everyone there.
We have always placed special emphasis on
achieving an environment in our region, where various
neighbours work in tandem, in a spirit of mutual trust
and confidence for win-win cooperation. We have done
so believing that only such an approach will lead to
success in overcoming common transnational threats
and challenges. We continue to widen our network
of bilateral arrangements with regional countries,
including Central Asian States. In the same spirit, we
recognize the enormous economic and other potentials
that are yet to be fully utilized.
That is precisely the reason behind various Afghanled initiatives, such as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process

S/PV. 8354

and the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan (RECCA). New memberships in the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process signal growing interest among
the broader region. We hope the review and renewal
of the confidence-building measures will enable
each to make progress at a more equal and similar
pace. Furthermore, the RECCA process has achieved
phenomenal success in advancing regional connectivity
and infrastructure development, turning our country
into a platform of cordiality for all.
In conclusion, let us bear in mind that we,
collectively, stand at a crossroads in our strategic
journey for peace and stability in Afghanistan and, more
broadly, for global security. In that regard, the start of
our partnership with the international community in
2001 generated a contract aimed at securing a stable
future for our current and future generations. Together,
we have come a long way, reaching the last stage of the
transformation decade for self-reliance. Let us complete
this vital journey with greater resolve and commitment.
The President: I now give the floor to the members
of the Security Council.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
would like to start by thanking Special Representative
Yamamoto for his briefing and Ambassador Saikal for
his statement.
We also warmly welcome Ramiz Bakhtiar as the
first youth representative for Afghanistan, and thank
the United States presidency for inviting him. Ramiz
was elected in June as part of a joint initiative by
Afghanistan and the Kingdom of the Netherlands. We
are very pleased to see Ramiz here today to give Afghan
youth a voice and have it be heard on a global stage.
It is important that the Council fully take the youth
perspective into account, as we agreed in resolution
2419 (2018), on youth, peace and security. Let the
briefing of Ramiz be the start of a new normal in which
we do not only talk about the future generation, but also
let the future generation participate in the talking.
Allow me to focus on three issues today: the
upcoming elections, Afghanistan’s long-term reform
agenda and the importance of youth.
The importance of the Afghan parliamentary
elections on 20 October and presidential elections on
20 April next year cannot be overstated. It is absolutely
critical that the elections be free, transparent and
inclusive, and that they include the active involvement

18-288217/34

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

of youth and women, both as voters and as candidates.
Afghanistan and the Independent Election Commission
will have to do their utmost to ensure that the elections
take place in an orderly and credible way. Political
actors from across the political spectrum have to remain
engaged with the political process in a constructive
and peaceful manner, while they uphold the highest
democratic standards. Threats of disengagement or
boycotts are not in the interest of the Afghan people.
For successful elections, it is also indispensable to
have a secure environment. We are deeply concerned
by the recent spike in violence, following the score of
tragic terrorist attacks and the unjustifiable offensives
of the Taliban. The displayed contempt for the lives of
innocent civilians is unacceptable, and we condemn it in
the strongest terms. We urge the Taliban to reciprocate
the offer of the Afghan Government to engage in
direct peace negotiations. There is no alternative to an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process.
My second point concerns Afghanistan’s long-term
reform agenda. If Afghanistan is to enjoy durable peace
and prosperity, reliable and resilient public institutions
need to be in place. Afghanistan’s transformation
decade will soon reach its halfway mark, and the
upcoming Geneva Ministerial Conference will provide
the opportunity to assess progress and to align priorities
for the coming period.
To achieve the agreed objectives, the Afghan
Government will need to step up its efforts to end
corruption, strengthen governance and the rule of
law, and guarantee respect for human rights, with
an important support role for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), of
course. Such reforms will provide a new generation
with the opportunity to contribute to a more just,
stable and unified Afghanistan. We look forward to the
participation of all interested countries in the Geneva
Conference, expressing their full solidarity and support
for Afghanistan.
Allow me to zoom in on the importance of involving
youth in the discussions that fundamentally shape their
future. Ramiz and so many of his Afghan peers are
determined to contribute to the future of Afghanistan.
That sends a very hopeful and powerful message. In a
country where more than 63 per cent of the population is
under 25, the ambition and commitment of young people
represent one of Afghanistan’s greatest opportunities.
8/34

17/09/2018

Their active involvement in addressing the challenges
that Afghanistan faces is key.
In conclusion, the voice of Afghanistan’s people,
including its youth, is clear — we need a workable
peace deal. That will require political courage. It will
require perseverance. On the Council’s side, it will
require continued unity in its support. Galvanizing the
momentum of the Afghan-owned peace process is our
collective responsibility. The briefings by the Special
Representative and Ramiz gave us important food for
thought in that regard, including by reminding us of the
significance of investing in Afghanistan’s youth on the
road to peace and stability.
Finally, I want to thank the Special Representative
and his team for their tremendous efforts in assisting
Afghanistan, often in difficult circumstances. They
deserve our full support.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation welcomes the progress we have seen in
the electoral process in Afghanistan. We are also hopeful
about the fact that 8.9 million Afghans, including more
than 3 million women, will be able to exercise their
democratic right to vote in the upcoming parliamentary
and district council elections on 20 October.
We highlight the resolve of Afghan women and
men to participate in their electoral process with a
participative and inclusive spirit, while expressing
their desire to bolster the conditions necessary in order
to ensure credible elections in the framework of their
own fully sovereign, democratic practices without any
external intervention, and with the full participation
of women and minority groups, including all ethnic,
religious and linguistic groups, both as voters and
as candidates.
We also express our full support and recognition for
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), which, in close coordination
with the Government of Afghanistan, has been
supporting the organization of the elections through
technical assistance and other forms of collaboration.
We hope that the electoral process will be carried out
in a secure and stable environment. The participation
of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces,
which have shown leadership in the maintenance of
security in Afghanistan, is critical in that regard.
In that order of priorities, we take note of the fact
that violence diminished during the Eid al-Fitr ceasefire
18-28821

17/09/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

period. We regret that during the week of that holiday,
UNAMA nonetheless recorded 285 incidents and that,
in the weeks following the ceasefire, armed clashes
with the Taliban increased once again.
We hope that the effects of the conflict will not
exacerbate the situation of civil society, which in the
first semester of 2018 suffered 1,692 deaths. The attacks
on civilian infrastructure, schools, hospitals and media
and communications offices highlight the violence to
which Afghan society is subject. Bolivia calls on all
parties to fulfil their obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
in order to prevent attacks on the civilian population
and civilian infrastructure.
On the other hand, serious restrictions on obtaining
redress in cases of sexual and gender-based violence,
along with the high prevailing degree of impunity,
highlight the need to ensure the promotion and
protection of human rights. We believe that the Afghan
authorities should take all the measures needed to assist
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission
to play its fundamental role as an effective and
independent institution.
Finally, and as we have noted previously, we
condemn in the strongest terms the terrorist attacks
that took place on 5 September in Kabul, which were
claimed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
and on 11 September in Nangarhar, both of which
resulted in the death of at least 61 people and an as-yet
undetermined number of wounded. Bolivia reiterates
that any act of terrorism is criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of its motivation, andwherever, whenever
and by whomever it is committed. The international
community as a whole must join forces to cooperate
with Afghanistan in combating this evil within the
framework of respect for its sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and, through
him, the entire team in the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan for the work they do. I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
reminding us of the Kofi Annan story about the young
girl. It is good to be reminded of the human dimension.
It is therefore doubly pleasurable to be able to welcome
Mr. Bakhtiar and hear his perspective, as well as that of
the Afghan ambassador.

S/PV. 8354

Like other speakers, I would like to begin by
condemning the recent terrorist attacks, including
those in Nangarhar, and offering our condolences
to all the families of those killed and wounded. We
need to continue all our efforts to support the Afghan
forces as they seek to combat those who would destroy
communities and the lives of innocent, ordinary
Afghan civilians.
Today’s debate is an important one. It is the last of
the quarterly debates before the parliamentary elections
on 20 October. I would like to focus on those elections
in my statement today. Mr. Yamamoto highlighted
the challenges of organizing these elections on time.
We are also very grateful for the work of his team in
supporting the Afghan authorities. All political leaders
in Afghanistan should work to improve the process, not
to undermine it. We call on them to cooperate to this
end. At the moment, a number of critical issues on the
elections remain unresolved.
First, with respect to the voter registration lists,
the election staff in Kabul has put a lot of effort into
compiling and verifying the lists of those who have
registered to vote. These lists should be published at
the local level as early as possible, with the proper
complaints mechanism in place to give the Afghan
people time to check their details and register
any complaints.
Secondly, with regard to communications,
an effective communications strategy from the
election-management bodies explaining the progress
that has been made and what further efforts are
under way is important for the confidence of the
Afghan electorate.
Thirdly, with respect to the security of voters,
elections officials and election materials, my
Government calls on all actors to respect the safety and
lives of civilians who take part in the elections, and
calls on those actors to refrain from violent disruption.
We commend the bravery of the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces for their work, and
we know that it is a difficult time for them. We call
on those illegally blockading provincial offices of
the Independent Election Commission to disperse
peacefully. Elections are only five weeks away, and it is
critical that preparations be allowed to go ahead.
Turning to wider matters, I had the honour to be
British Ambassador to Afghanistan in 2015 and 2016,

18-288219/34

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

so I would like to tell Mr. Bakhtiar and Ambassador
Saikal that I remain an optimist about their beautiful
but troubled country. Given what Afghanistan has
suffered, given her state of development — she is one of
the poorest countries in the world — and given that the
main threat to Afghan security comes from insurgents
who are supported from outside Afghanistan, I think
we are all prepared for this to take a long time. The
international community has been prepared for that and
has prepared longer-term strategies.
The Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan,
which a number of speakers have mentioned, will, we
believe, be an important moment for the Government
of Afghanistan to reflect on progress made so far, but
also to recommit to the necessary reforms, which are
required to drive the sustainable and inclusive growth
the Afghan people deserve over the remainder of
the transformation decade. My Government is fully
committed to the Conference and to playing its part in
preparations that are now under way.
That said, it is important that, in all the security,
economic, human rights and development challenges
that the Afghan people face, all sectors of Afghan
society and citizenry come together to do the following
things: to strengthen good governance, to uphold the
rule of law and human rights, including the right to
health, the education of women and girls, and above
all, to be tolerant. I arrived in Kabul a week after the
very sad killing of Farkhunda Malikzada, and I have
never forgotten the intolerance and brutality that led
to that sad outcome. Afghan communities need to
invest in the future. They need to tackle corruption
at all levels, engage in the economic liberalization
necessary to attract foreign direct investment, and
make tangible progress with their regional partners on
regional cooperation.
We heard from the Afghan ambassador and from
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
about the peace process with Pakistan. We wish that
process well. It goes without saying that peace is the
only viable way forward for Afghanistan. We very
much support the National Unity Government in its
efforts in this regard. We hope that all other States
will do their utmost to support the Government. The
temporary ceasefire brought about by President Ghani
was a very important moment, and it is regrettable
that the Taliban have not responded to his subsequent
offers. The Taliban need to demonstrate that their really
do have the heart of Afghanistan as their main concern
10/34

17/09/2018

and that their concern is for the people of Afghanistan.
They need to respond positively to the important offers
made by President Ghani in February.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, for his analysis of the processes taking
place in Afghanistan. We listened closely to the
statements delivered by the Ambassador of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan, Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, and by
Mr. Bakhtiar. We concur with many of the assessments
contained in the relevant quarterly report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/824). For our part, we wish
to note the following.
We are profoundly alarmed at the security situation
in Afghanistan. The Taliban movement controls nearly
half of the country, periodically seizing new districts,
including in the north. We note that its fighters have
a capacity to stage large-scale, coordinated and wellprepared operations. A stark example of this fact are the
days-long attacks against the strategically important
Ghazni province, the large-scale attacks against Ghor,
Farah and Sari Pul, and the difficult situations that have
unfolded in Paktia, Helmand, Faryab, Samangan, Herat
and Kunduz. Against that backdrop, we are especially
troubled by the state of the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces, which incur unprecedented losses
on a daily basis.
Our attention remains closely focused on the surge
of terrorist activity by the Afghan wing of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), whose ranks are
growing largely due to foreign fighters with battlefield
experience from Syria and Iraq. According to our
sources, the number of ISIL adherents may be as high
as 10,000. The danger is further compounded by their
growing ideological, propagandistic and recruitment
activity, which makes skillful use of information and
communication technology. Despite reports about
fighters being routed and their partial surrender to
Government forces in Jawzjan in August, they still
retain footholds in provinces of the north and northeast, from where they seek to gain traction in the
country. We see a threat both to our borders and to
those of our Central Asian neighbhours. The Taliban
also sporadically joins the fight against ISIL, largely
in the north and east of Afghanistan, which points to
the fact that the ISIL threat is recognized both by the
authorities in Kabul and by the Taliban. We must stress
18-28821

17/09/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

that the fight against the terrorists in Afghanistan
would be far more effective if regional and international
efforts were combined.
With respect to Afghanistan and other conflicts,
what remains relevant is our initiative to establish
a wide-ranging counter-terrorist coalition. It is
necessary to shed light on the situation regarding the
unmarked helicopter flights in northern Afghanistan,
which provide both weaponry and munitions to ISIL
adherents. We are surprised by the fact that there has
been no response to those events, including from the
command of the NATO contingent stationed there. We
believe that attempts to sweep this issue under the rug
are not acceptable. We are troubled by reports about
attempts by the Afghan wing of ISIL to reach agreement
with the Taliban movement and other organizations to
coordinate operations. Moreover, contacts are being
strengthened between ISIL and representatives of the
Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement. In the light of
the deteriorating security situation in Afghanistan, we
deem it necessary to proactively leverage the Security
Council’s counter-terrorism sanctions mechanisms.
We advocate the placement of additional barriers to
pre-empt terrorist activity in that country. It is important
to specifically emphasize the sanctioning of individuals
and entities who are complicit in ISIL operations.
We are troubled at the unbridled growth in
narcotics production. Narcotics provide significant
financial support for terrorists in Afghanistan. In that
connection, we are confounded at the fact that the issue
of Afghan narcotics is completely disregarded in the
final observations of the report. We believe that it is
important for this to be prioritized. It is the thrust of
our practical measures, including through the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO). The Russian
Federation spares no effort in supporting the work of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
in that regard, including providing regular assistance
to the UNODC-led Paris Pact Initiative, which seeks
to comprehensively prevent Afghan opium production,
the regional UNODC programme for Afghanistan and
neighbouring countries and the alternative development
programme in Badakhshan province. We are pleased at
the implementation of our initiative to train narcotics
police officers from Afghanistan, Pakistan and Central
Asian countries, as well as the joint Domodedovo project
with Japan to form a canine unit for Afghanistan, which

S/PV. 8354

we trust will serve as a key tool in the fight against
narcotics in the country.
We note with regret that the 17-year, large-scale
military presence of NATO and United States troops
has not served to stabilize the military and political
situation in the country. What is clear is that the approach
of using force to exert pressure has not brought about
the desired results; it only escalates the conflict. We
believe that there is no military solution to the crisis
in Afghanistan. The only way to resolve the crisis is
through pan-Afghan consensus achieved through
political and diplomatic means. That is especially
urgent at the current juncture on the eve of elections,
which should serve as a step towards the unification
of the country. We support the policy of Kabul and the
country’s social and political forces to achieve that
end. We believe that negotiations need to be conducted
under the leadership of the Afghan people themselves.
We reaffirm our willingness to lend our fullest support.
We welcome international and regional efforts to
assist Afghanistan in establishing a peace process.
However, it is paramount that there be no competition
in that regard: it is not about building fiefdoms. We
must instead build an optimal platform for international
support for establishing a peace process in Afghanistan
by engaging the stakeholders. Such a vision is
advanced by the Moscow format of consultations with
Afghanistan, a meeting of which we plan to hold with
the participation of representatives of the Taliban,
following the formulation of a consolidated position on
the matter in Kabul. We trust that the United States will
be involved. The invitation still stands.
We note the growing understanding worldwide of
the importance of the regional context to any Afghan
settlement. We note in particular the renewed SCOAfghanistan Contact Group. We see sound potential
for scaling up counter-narcotics engagement between
Afghanistan and the CSTO.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) continues to play an important
role in coordinating international assistance to
Afghanistan. We commend the selfless and courageous
efforts UNAMA personnel.
Russia and Afghanistan are linked together by
historical, friendly, open relations based on trust. We
genuinely hope to see swift stabilization in the country,
for it to get back on track to sustainable development. On

18-2882111/34

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

that basis, we stand ready to engage with Afghanistan
and with regional and international partners.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Our delegation wishes to thank Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for the comprehensive and detailed report
(S/2018/824) on developments in the situation in
Afghanistan and for the valuable information provided
in his briefing here today. We also thank Mr. Ramiz
Bakhtiar, Afghan youth representative, and welcome
his participation in this important debate and his very
constructive statement on the situation in Afghanistan.
First of all, we would like to convey our deepest
condolences to the people and the Government of
Afghanistan following the most recent outrageous
terrorist attacks — yet again, let us recognize them as
acts of cowardice — in Kabul and Nangarhar on 5 and
11 September, respectively.
We are highly dismayed and concerned about the
security situation in Afghanistan. The country has
once again been shaken by a wave of bloody terrorist
attacks that have claimed the lives of approximately
1,692 Afghan civilians, in the short period of only six
months, as reflected in the report under discussion,
from January to June. The increase in suicide
and air attacks — of 38 per cent and 46 per cent,
respectively — as compared to the same period in 2017
is alarming. Indeed, the number of fatalities reported
this year by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has exceeded 5,000. It is
unacceptable and inconceivable to remain indifferent to
such barbaric acts, especially since they have greatest
impact on the most vulnerable sector of the population.
A convergence of factors clearly hinders the
realization of the peace and security the Afghan people
seek. However, as we have discussed at length in this
Chamber, a solution to Afghanistan’s conflicts can be
found only through effective, constructive and direct
political negotiations among the relevant parties,
as well as the holding of transparent and inclusive
elections whereby Afghans determine the political and
socioeconomic system most fitting to their customs
and culture and favourable to the interests and wellbeing of the Afghan people. Allow me to make some
observations regarding some factors contributing to the
instability and insecurity in Afghanistan.
First, on the political front — and in no way do
I wish to minimize the progress and achievements of
12/34

17/09/2018

the Afghan Government, the international community
and other regional and international actors with
respect to peace agreements and other accords — we
believe that the status quo in Afghanistan has not been
improved to date because some of the parties involved
in the conflict and their respective partners have put
their interests before those of the Afghan people. All
negotiations must be focused solely and exclusively on
seeking solutions to the real problems that Afghanistan
is facing related to security, stability, the prosperity
of the Afghan people and the promotion of national
reconciliation as a fundamental way of resolving the
problems of the Afghan people.
We must bear in mind that there will always be a
party that does not believe its interests and the interests
of the Afghan people are being met. Therefore, it is
no coincidence that, as the elections on 20 October
approach, we are seeing an increase in attacks and
efforts not only to boycott the elections, but also to
paralyse a democratic political process through the
political mobilization of opposition groups, occupation
and closure of the facilities of the Independent Electoral
Commission in some provinces, among other things.
As they are not practices that are worthy of anyone
wishing to govern the country democratically, we urge
all parties to participate in a meaningful way in the
political process aimed at bringing about lasting peace
and stability for the people of Afghanistan.
The Government of Equatorial Guinea commends
the Afghan Government for the positive progress made
towards holding the elections despite the difficulties
that are arising. We encourage the Government not
to waver in its diligent efforts to conduct successful
elections, which we believe will represent a positive
change for the Afghan people. We also welcome
President Ghani’s new call for a ceasefire. We believe
that demonstrates his real commitment to achieving
peace and stability in Afghanistan. We call on all armed
groups, in particular the Taliban, to respond positively
to the appeals of President Ghani and the Government
to refrain from committing violent actions and to come
to the negotiating table.
Secondly, attacks against public facilities, as have
been noted in the most recent attacks, are particularly
alarming. For our delegation, the chilling numbers of
civilians killed and wounded so far in 2018 remain
cause for dismay. Amid those horrifying statistics, the
proportion of children and women killed and wounded
and the ongoing extreme damage inflicted on civilians
18-28821

17/09/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

by constant suicide bombings and other improvised
explosive device attacks is extremely worrying.
We therefore again urge all parties to the conflict
to take every possible measure to protect civilians,
especially women and children, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and fundamental human
rights standards.
Another factor that we believe is increasing
instability and insecurity among the Afghan people, and
which also concerns us, is the significant increase in
opium production. We are aware of the close relationship
between the cultivation and trafficking of opium and
terrorism. In that context, we commend the counternarcotics operations carried out by the Government,
with the support of the international community and
in close cooperation with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, which resulted in a high number of
narcotics seizures, the arrest of drug traffickers and the
closure of heroin laboratories, among other successes.
Thirdly, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to
have a debate on the situation in Afghanistan without
addressing the issue of humanitarian assistance. Based
on information from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, two thirds of Afghanistan
is suffering from an unusually severe drought, which
has caused more than 100,000 people to leave their
homes in search of water. That situation, together with
the prevalence of diseases such as polio and others,
constitutes a combination of serious consequences, and
we must urgently find the most effective way to provide
humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
acknowledges and is grateful for the crucial role played
by the UNAMA and all United Nations agencies, as
well as the role that countries of the region are playing
in support of the Afghan people, to foster peace and
reconciliation, monitor and promote human rights and
help enhance the credibility, integrity, inclusiveness
and sustainability of the electoral process, as well as
to ensure better coordination of the assistance of the
international community in Afghanistan.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
We are also grateful for the briefings by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tadamichi
Yamamoto and Ramiz Bakhtiar, representative of
Afghan youth. We also thank Ambassador Saikal
for his statement. We would also like to welcome the

S/PV. 8354

appointment of Ms. Ingrid Hayden as Deputy Special
Representative for the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Peru notes with concern the complex security
situation in Afghanistan. We vigorously condemn the
continued terrorist attacks against the population and
civilian infrastructure. We express our solidarity with
the victims and their families of the most recent attacks
carried out by Da’esh in Kabul and Nangarhar.
We stress the need to address terrorism in a
comprehensive manner, including tackling its root
causes. Terrorists must be held accountable for their
crimes. Their links with transnational organized crime,
in particular illicit drug trafficking, must be identified
and combated. We consider it of the utmost importance
that the political class remain united, in view of the
upcoming parliamentary and district council elections,
in order to guarantee the stability and governability of
the country and, based on that, to overcome the serious
challenges that the country faces.
We note with concern the threats of electoral
boycott by some political sectors, and we agree with
the Secretary-General on the need to participate
responsibly and constructively in the ongoing process.
We hope that all political forces, and citizens in general,
will be able to participate massively in the elections, in
safe conditions and in the spirit of democratic unity.
We would like to highlight the Government’s
commitment to women’s empowerment, and the support
provided by UNAMA in that area. We believe it is
particularly important to promote greater participation
by women and young people, such as Ramiz Bakhtiar,
in the political life of the country, in accordance with
resolution 2419 (2018), in order to build a shared vision
for the future and to combat violent extremism.
We would also like to highlight President Ghani’s
initiative to promote direct negotiations with the
Taliban. However, it is regrettable that the Taliban did
not respect the ceasefire proposed by the Government.
We believe that intra-Afghan dialogue, supported by
the international community and the countries of the
region, offers the only viable path towards sustainable
peace in the country. In that connection, we look forward
to the convening of a ministerial conference in Geneva
in November so that the international community can
revitalize its commitment to peace and development
in Afghanistan.

18-2882113/34

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

We underscore the need to strengthen Afghanistan’s
defence and security capabilities to reduce the
country’s external dependence. Similarly, we stress
the importance of supporting the Government’s efforts
to modernize and boost the economy and generate
decent employment for young people, who represent
60 per cent of the population and often fall prey to
violent extremism and drug trafficking. In that regard,
we note with concern the humanitarian crisis and the
displacement of people caused by the drought that is
besetting the country. Nearly 1.5 million people require
assistance. I would like to conclude by highlighting
the work being done by UNAMA, including on the
humanitarian front.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We are grateful to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto for his briefing and personal contribution
to achieving the goal of peace and prosperity in
Afghanistan. We applaud the work and dedication of
his able team. We are also grateful to the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Mahmoud
Saikal, and Afghan youth representative Ramiz
Bakhtiar for their statements.
The recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/824) provides a realistic assessment and
important insights into the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
United Nations country team. It includes constructive
recommendations that the United Nations system and
the international community need to implement right
away. At this critical juncture, it would enable us to
leverage the comparative advantage of global and
regional stakeholders in support of reconstruction and
redevelopment in Afghanistan. My delegation would
like to make the following key points.
First, with regard to the political process, we share
the view of Kabul that the process should be Afghanled and Afghan-owned. Kazakhstan firmly supports
the reconciliation and reintegration efforts undertaken
by the Government of Afghanistan and its continued
commitment to addressing the increasing political,
economic and security challenges. That is strong
testimony of Afghanistan’s aspirations to achieve
national unity and stability, which could contribute to
regional security. We welcome President Ghani’s recent
ceasefire initiative and regret that counterparts have
not accepted it. That means that hopes for peaceful
elections is under threat. We are equally concerned
about the statements made by some political parties
14/34

17/09/2018

in Afghanistan that intend to boycott the elections.
Therefore, we encourage the Government to work with
political parties and encourage them to participate in
the elections. On the other hand, it should not lead to
a delay in the holding of the elections, as it would lead
to further deterioration of the situation in Afghanistan.
On the security track, despite some noteworthy
developments, the situation is fragile and volatile and
continues to deteriorate, in particular in the northern
provinces. Major losses have been incurred among the
civilian population, law enforcement and the military
as a result of terrorist acts and clashes by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant/Da’esh and the Taliban. It
is cause for serious concern as it could have a negative
impact on the holding of free and successful elections
in the country. We therefore urge the Government to
implement its progressive strategies, such as the plan
on security sector reform and many others in other
areas, which, in our view, will further strengthen the
capacity of national institutions.
With regard to international cooperation, my
delegation commends the ongoing efforts to counter
various threats, including the scourge of terrorism,
trafficking and narcotics in Afghanistan. We believe
that at this stage it remains imperative that the United
Nations and the international community continue to
provide assistance to Afghanistan. We will further
support the Kabul process, the efforts of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) and regional
initiatives, as well as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process and the Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan. We also welcome the
work of our partners from Central Asia, in particular
the holding of the Tashkent conference in March and
the efforts of the Russian Federation on the Moscow
format, while underlining the importance of the SCO
Afghanistan Contact Group and the AfghanistanPakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity. We have
great hopes for the forthcoming Geneva ministerial
conference on Afghanistan, which will ensure that
the Government of Afghanistan is on track to deliver
on its reform commitments and discuss prospects for
international support.
On the development track, we are heartened to see
that it is the policy of the Afghan Government’s to put
emphasis on social and economic development. The
core of our efforts is to help Afghanistan become an
attractive partner with great potential. In that vein, we
believe it is necessary to proceed in line with provisions
18-28821

17/09/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

of this year’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/1) on
prevention and sustaining peace and the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2018/2) on modelling regional
partnership in Afghanistan and Central Asia. The
country needs joint projects, job creation and regional
connectivity. All Central Asian States are committed
to long-term cooperation with our Afghan partners and
intraregional connectivity in the areas of infrastructure,
transit and transport, energy and other fields.
It is necessary to ensure that Afghanistan
be included in our region’s trade and economic
cooperation efforts as part of a new model of relations.
My delegation therefore proposes a new strategy, based
on the interlinkages of development and security,
combined with a revamped regional approach and an
innovative whole-of-system United Nations approach to
enhance efficiency, transparency and accountability. It
is based on our assumption that economic development
will create the prerequisites for a political settlement
and a solution to security issues. In that regard, we
support all projects to empower that idea, such as the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India
pipeline,
the Lapis Lazuli Corridor and the One Belt-One Road
initiative, which could not only bring about economic
growth and prosperity, but could also enhance security
and stability in the region. Kazakhstan will continue
to contribute to bilateral, regional and multilateral
action for the recovery, stability, peace and progress
of Afghanistan.
With regard to the human dimension, Kazakhstan
is deeply convinced that women, along with youth,
occupy a central place in the entire cycle of conflict
prevention. In that vein, earlier this month in Astana,
we organized a regional conference on the theme
“Empowering women in Afghanistan”, which focused
on achieving sustainable economic growth by expanding
the capabilities of Afghan women and developing their
business activities through regional cooperation, with
emphasis on the role of education and new knowledge.
Its outcome declaration envisages ways of improving
the living and educational conditions of Afghan
women and girls, as well as expanding their rights and
opportunities, including in the political and economic
spheres. As for results, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and the
European Union will soon launch a joint pilot project
to provide training for Afghan women in Kazakh
and Uzbek universities. In addition, the Government
of Kazakhstan has decided to allocate additional
scholarships for Afghan women for the period 2019-

S/PV. 8354

2020, which is a continuation of Kazakhstan’s initiative
to educate 1,000 Afghan civilian specialists through a
$50 million special educational programme.
The plight of Afghan children remains severely
affected by the escalation of the conflict. To that
end, the Government of Afghanistan has taken many
commendable steps to ensure that its national security
forces are child-free. It is also promoting age-assessment
guidelines that we hope will be widely implemented.
However, Kazakhstan is alarmed about the fact that
the current reporting period again recorded a high
number of child casualties, with the use of boys who
were reportedly recruited by terrorist organizations.
We therefore welcome the joint efforts of UNAMA and
UNICEF to address that challenge.
Finally, my country is pleased that UNAMA, the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community have continued to maintain a close
partnership, which is vital to ensuring sustainable
peace and stability in the country. Kazakhstan will
continue to support the brotherly people of Afghanistan
in fulfilling their aspirations for peace, prosperity
and security, and believes that the timely holding of
parliamentary elections will promote the conditions for
achieving such goals.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, allow me to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, and
Ambassador Saikal for their enlightening briefings on
peace efforts and the electoral process. I would also like
to warmly thank Mr. Ramiz Bakhtiar for his briefing,
which clearly illustrated the essential role played by
Afghan youth in building a peaceful, democratic, just
and united society. In Afghanistan and elsewhere,
young people must be fully recognized as agents of
sociopolitical change and as key partners in efforts to
bring about peace and development. I will make three
points today.
First, with regard to the security situation, the
conflict in Afghanistan remains one of the deadliest
and most violent on the Security Council’s agenda.
France is very concerned about the increasing number
of foreign terrorist fighters in Afghanistan, as well as
by the one-upmanship of the Taliban and the Islamic
State in the Khorasan Province, marked by a recent
increase in the number of terrorist attacks, in Kabul
in particular. We again condemn such attacks, in the
strongest terms, and reiterate our solidarity with the

18-2882115/34

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

victims of terrorism and their families. France also
commends the courage and the determination of the
Afghan forces, who were instrumental in retaking
the town of Ghazni on 10 August. Nonetheless, such
clashes confirm that terrorist groups are determined
to continue their harassment in order to destabilize
the country at a critical time, by creating a climate of
perpetual insecurity and by seeking to undermine the
Afghan forces and the authority of the Government just
ahead of the elections.
We are also concerned about the continued increase
in drug trafficking, which fuels Taliban insurgency
and threatens the lives of thousands of Afghans. The
presentation of a draft regional strategy by Afghanistan
in July in Vienna marks the renewed commitment of
the Afghan authorities to combating opiate production
and trafficking, which deserves to be highlighted. We
call on the countries of the region to resolutely commit
to fighting such trafficking at all levels. We look to the
Afghan Government to continue the important efforts
needed to curb drug production, with the support of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, regional
partners and the international community, within the
framework of the principle of shared responsibility,
including the Paris Pact Initiative.
Secondly, the parliamentary and local elections
scheduled for 20 October constitute a major challenge,
given the context that I have just mentioned. France
attaches great importance to the democratic process and
the holding of free, transparent and credible elections.
It is essential that the Afghan population be able to
express itself and be represented in the Government.
All stakeholders must continue to work to ensure the
broadest possible participation of the population in the
elections, especially women. We are concerned about
the many questions that remain about the preparations
for the elections, which may compromise their integrity.
We also remain concerned about the low number
of candidates in some provinces for district council
elections, since a plurality of candidates is an essential
criterion for holding credible elections. In that regard,
we support the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) alongside the
various Afghan stakeholders and the series of measures
to combat fraud, promote trust and ensure the inclusivity
and security of the elections.
Thirdly, concerning peace efforts, the seriousness
of the security situation and the human cost of the
conflict should serve to encourage renewed efforts to
16/34

17/09/2018

achieve lasting peace. Progress has been made, notably
through the peace offer presented by President Ghani
at the second Kabul Conference, on 28 February, and
then with the ceasefire for the Eid Al-Fitr holiday
and the unilateral Eid Al-Adha ceasefire proposal.
France urges the Taliban to respond to those gestures
of openness. A lasting solution in Afghanistan can be
only political in nature, negotiated through an inclusive
Afghan-led process for Afghans. In that respect, it is
essential to consult the Afghan population, including
young Afghans, in order to take into account their
expectations. Beyond Afghanistan, it is important that
all States in the region unambiguously support the
objective of peace.
The violence and power struggles have lasted far
too long. Time for cooperation has come with a view
towards peace, democratic good governance and
development, which are incumbent upon the Afghan
people to achieve, with the support of the international
community. The Afghan authorities and UNAMA can
count on the steadfast support of France in pursuit of that
goal, as well as the unity of the Security Council, which
is a critical and indispensable asset to make headway.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Tadamichi Yamamoto for his
briefing. I am appreciative of the tremendous amount
of work that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has carried out under his
leadership. I listened very attentively to the statements
made by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Saikal, and by the civil society youth
representative, Mr. Bakhtiar.
At present, the political process in Afghanistan
has entered a critical stage. The security situation is of
great concern, and the humanitarian situation is facing
challenges. Peace and development in Afghanistan
have important bearing on the vital interests of the
Afghan people and the security, stability, development
and prosperity of the region. China applauds the efforts
of the Afghan Government to safeguard national
stability, promote national reconciliation and facilitate
economic development. We are appreciative of the
Government’s unremitting efforts. The international
community should continue to provide firm support
for Afghanistan.
First, we must provide firm support to ensure that
major elections in Afghanistan are held smoothly.
Afghanistan will hold parliamentary elections in
18-28821

17/09/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

October and presidential elections in April of next year.
Those will be major events in the political process in
Afghanistan. As electoral preparations enter a critical
stage, all political parties in Afghanistan should
strengthen unity, assume national political stability
as a shared responsibility and resolve differences
through dialogue and consultations. The international
community must truly respect the right of the Afghan
people to choose their own political system and
development path, and provide tailored assistance
to the Afghan Government in order to improve its
governance capacity.
Secondly, we must help improve the security
situation in Afghanistan. The number of civilian
casualties caused by the conflict in Afghanistan
reached a record high in the first half of this year. The
international community should continue to support
the capacity-building of the Afghan National Security
Forces, jointly respond effectively to such threats as
terrorism, transnational organized crime and drug
trafficking and help Afghanistan meet those challenges
through efforts at the regional level. The Taliban
should be urged to respond positively to the Afghan
Government’s conditional ceasefire and peace initiative
in an effort to achieve lasting peace and stability in
the country.
Thirdly, we need to pay greater attention to the
humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan and take measures
to ease the situation. The recent drought has affected
the livelihoods of approximately 1.4 million people in
Afghanistan, thereby exacerbating the already grave
humanitarian situation. The international community
should provide emergency humanitarian assistance to
the Afghan people in terms of, inter alia, industrial
and residential water supply, food and medical care,
and alleviate the humanitarian plight brought on by the
drought. Humanitarian support should continue to be
given to Afghan refugees and their host countries.
Fourthly, we must promote Afghanistan’s
economic development and regional cooperation.
Afghanistan boasts rich resources and a strategic
geographical location, and there are broad prospects for
its participation in regional economic cooperation. The
international community, on the basis of Afghanistan’s
national development strategy and specific needs,
should help the country to unlock its development
potential and continue to deepen its integration into
regional economic cooperation.

S/PV. 8354

The relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council have positively affirmed
the importance of the Belt and Road Initiative in the
promotion of economic development in Afghanistan and
regional cooperation. It is our hope that all the relevant
parties will jointly promote the development of the
Belt and Road Initiative, strengthen regional economic
cooperation and interconnectivity and help Afghanistan
achieve its economic and social development. We look
forward to positive outcomes at the Geneva ministerial
conference on Afghanistan to be held in November.
China and Afghanistan enjoy long-standing good
neighbourly relations. China hopes that Afghanistan
will achieve peace, security, stability and development
at an early date. The Qingdao Declaration of the
Council of Heads of State of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) reaffirms that the SCO member
States will continue to provide support to the
Afghan Government and its people in promoting the
political process, safeguarding security, advancing
economic development and combating terrorism and
narcotics trafficking.
China will continue to strengthen cooperation
with Afghanistan and other regional countries
through various mechanisms, such as the tripartite
dialogue among China, Afghanistan and Pakistan;
the Quadrilateral Coordination Group, consisting of
Pakistan, Afghanistan, China and the United States;
and the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group, in order to
jointly respond to terrorist threats and promote regional
peace, stability and development.
China will continue to help Afghanistan in
leveraging its own strength in its participation in the Belt
and Road Initiative and regional economic cooperation.
China will also promote the complementarity between
the Belt and Road Initiative and other regional
cooperation initiatives. Together with the international
community, China will work tirelessly to promote an
early attainment of peace, stability and development
in Afghanistan.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his
very informative briefing, as well as for his report
on developments in Afghanistan. Special words of
gratitude should also be forwarded to the courageous
and dedicated team of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which supports

18-2882117/34

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

governance, development and reconciliation in
Afghanistan. I also welcome the presentation made by
Ambassador Saikal.
We greatly appreciate the strong motivation and
passion demonstrated by Mr. Ramiz Bakhtiar in his
briefing. The young generation of Afghans embodies
hope for the peaceful and sustainable development
of the country. The international community should
encourage and provide them with effective assistance
on their way to a brighter future, without suffering
or innocent casualties of violence. When we consider
the profound role of the young generation in the
reconstruction and development process taking place
in Afghanistan, we cannot forget how important it is to
allow broad access to education.
Poland reiterates the significance of the peace
process, which should be continued through
constructive dialogue. In that regard, we recognize
President Ghani’s numerous efforts aimed at peaceful
conflict resolution as an important step forward. We
count on the representatives of Taliban groups to
respond positively to the offer of peace talks and to take
part in an inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace process.
Having said that, we cannot turn a blind eye to
the unspoken suffering of the civilian population,
especially the women and children of Ghazni in recent
weeks. We call for unrestricted access for humanitarian
assistance, which is critically needed. We believe that
all parties involved should allow aid workers to ease
the pain and tragedy of innocent people affected by
military operations. Good governance and successful
institution-building require adherence to the rules and
the procedures that enable all citizens to participate
in the democratic process. Poland welcomes the
commitment demonstrated by the Afghan Government
to conducting transparent, inclusive and credible
parliamentary and district council elections. We note
that the initiated process faces such challenges as the
low number of candidate nominations. That needs to be
overcome by the authorities.
The high priority for us remains the wide
participation of women, both as candidates and as voters.
We see it as a fundamental condition for enhancing
peace and security. Poland calls on the Government of
Afghanistan to put a particular focus on challenges to
women’s participation in the forthcoming parliamentary
and district council elections. Efforts need to be
18/34

17/09/2018

undertaken urgently by international partners in order
to provide concrete support for women’s groups so as to
ensure women’s full participation in every aspect of the
electoral process.
The continued violent acts of hostile insurgent
groups reminds us of the fundamental importance of
maintaining Afghanistan’s institutions, specifically
those that have the task of ensuring the security and
defence of the country and its people. Poland supports
and encourages the Afghan Government to continue its
efforts to improve the capability of the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces. Those undertakings
require determination and engagement, which we will
continue to support through training and advisory
activities in the framework of the NATO-led Resolute
Support Mission.
Finally, Poland is concerned over the continued
grave violations against children in conflict. Children
comprised more than half of civilian casualties
documented by UNAMA in aerial strikes and 25 per
cent of all civilian casualties during the reporting
period. Attacks on schools and mosques accounted
for 75 per cent of election-related security incidents.
We call on all parties to cease attacks on and military
use of schools, and to end attacks on medical facilities
and personnel.
Mr. Alahmad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and Mr. Ramiz
Bakhtiar, the Afghanistan youth representative, for
their comprehensive briefings today. I would also like
to take this opportunity to renew the support of the
State of Kuwait for all the sincere efforts exerted by
Mr. Yamamoto and the members of UNAMA under the
difficult circumstances they face there. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his quarterly report (S/2018/824),
which sheds light on the situation in Afghanistan over
the past three months
This meeting is being convened only one month
prior to the holding of the parliamentary elections in
Afghanistan. Therefore, I will focus in my statement on
two main issues linked to the items we are discussing
today, namely, political developments and the
security situation.
First, with regard to the political developments, the
phase in which Afghanistan is currently passing is a
18-28821

17/09/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8354

very critical and delicate one. It is a phase in which
we are witnessing intensified consultations among the
political parties. We are also witnessing the continued
preparations by the electoral management bodies to
hold parliamentary elections on 20 October. In that
regard, we would like first to commend the vital role
of UNAMA and the electoral management bodies in
finalizing the lists of voters and candidates and setting
up voting centres. We also welcome the signing by the
United Nations and the electoral management bodies on
25 July of a revised Electoral Support Project document,
with the donors pledging an additional $57 million in
financial support.

Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
the latest report of the Secretary-General underlines
the continued instability of the security situation in
Afghanistan. Over the past period, we all witnessed
the significant increase in terrorist operations due to
the proximity of the parliamentary elections. It is with
concern that we have followed the continuing clashes
between Afghan forces and armed groups, such as
the Taliban movement and the terrorist group Da’esh,
the latest of which was an attempt by the Taliban to
overrun the city of Ghazni on 10 August. That attempt
caused numerous casualties among unarmed civilians,
including many women and children.

The overall number of 9 million registered men
and women voters is a clear demonstration of the desire
of the Afghan people to opt for the path of democracy
despite the security threats to their lives. We salute the
courage of the Afghan people, who emphasize once
again that the political solution in Afghanistan must be
Afghan-led and determined by the Afghan people.

We are fully aware that increased acts of violence
and threats are nothing but desperate attempts by
elements that do not believe in democracy or human
rights, and do not even wish to see stability and security
in the country. They think that through those terrorist
acts, which target educational and sports centres as well
as gathering places, they will be able to terrorize voters
and delay the electoral process next October. We hope
that the Afghan authorities will redouble their efforts
to protect public utilities and fight those stray groups.
At the same time, we welcome the commitment of our
NATO allies to support the non-combatant mission and
provide financial support to the Afghan forces until the
year 2024.

As we discuss political developments, we should
underscore the importance of national reconciliation
and the peace process in Afghanistan. We follow
closely the ongoing political action in the various
Afghan provinces, and the political alliances that have
been formed in order to prepare for the upcoming
elections. We hope that such action, which involves all
political parties, will contribute to reducing tensions
and giving priority to national interests above partisan
ones. Strengthening national interests has been and
continues to be essential. It is of the utmost importance
for the Government and all parties to prioritize longterm interests in order to put an end to the Afghan
conflict and achieve sustainable peace and stability
in Afghanistan.
Likewise, the international community must
continue to encourage and support these goals in
order to reach a comprehensive political settlement in
Afghanistan. We welcome the assistance provided by
the countries of the region and the relevant regional
mechanisms, especially the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, which has convened a special meeting
on Afghanistan during the past week to reiterate its
support to the Afghani Government to bring peace,
security and harmony among all the segments of
the Afghani people, including its call to the Taliban
movement to get involved in a direct, peaceful and
unconditional dialogue.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait renews its
support to Afghanistan to achieve lasting peace and
stability through a diplomatic negotiated settlement.
We stand with Afghanistan in its war against terrorism
and support its unrelenting efforts to spread its
authority and sovereignty over its entire territory. We
also emphasize that confronting the threat of terrorism
lies in the collective commitment to fight and combat
this scourge within the framework of the international
strategy to combat terrorism.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to thank Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for presenting
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2018/824). We would also like to thank
the Ambassador of Afghanistan and Mr. Ramiz Bhaktiar,
representing Afghan youth, for their excellent briefings.
With one month to go until the legislative and
district elections, my delegation welcomes the progress

18-2882119/34

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

made by the Independent Election Commission in the
implementation of the electoral process, specifically by
appointing a new Chief Electoral Officer; finalizing the
electoral lists and beginning to digitize them; concluding
the receipt candidatures; gender mainstreaming in
order to increase women’s participation in the elections
and adopting measures that will allow the media, civil
society and political parties to observe and monitor the
elections. Côte d’Ivoire also notes the commitment and
efforts of the Independent Electoral Commission and
UNAMA to organize the elections in a timely manner.
Lastly, we also welcome the financial assistance
provided by certain countries to those bodies to ensure
the proper implementation of the electoral calendar.
Despite those few major advances, my delegation
remains concerned about the sociopolitical and security
situation in Afghanistan, which could jeopardize the
holding of elections in conditions that would guarantee
its smooth functioning and credibility.
With regrd to the sociopolitical situation, as the
Independent Electoral Commission is preparing to
finalize the digitization of voter lists — an important
step for the transparency of the electoral process — its
headquarters in Kabul and local commissions in eight
other provinces were closed due to events organized
by individuals whose candidatures were rejected.
Amid those tensions, my country urges the Afghan
authorities, political actors and all stakeholders to work
together to seek the necessary compromises to hold
fair, transparent and credible elections on 20 October
in a peaceful environment.
In addition, Côte d’Ivoire notes with regret the
limited progress made in the implementation of the
peace agreement between the Government and the
Hezb-e Islami political party. We are concerned about
the negative effects that those delays could have on the
start of negotiations for a peace agreement with armed
groups in the country.
The deteriorating security situation resulting from
the Taliban attacks on the Afghan security forces and
those by the local branch of Islamic State against the
civilian population could jeopardize the participation
of many Afghans in the upcoming polls. It is therefore
important to strengthen support for the efforts of
the Afghan security forces from the international
community and the countries contributing to the NATO
Resolute Support Mission in order to address the threats
posed by armed groups and curb the level of violence
20/34

17/09/2018

in the country. In that regard, my delegation notes
with satisfaction the commitment of the contributing
countries to the Resolute Support Mission to maintain
their presence in the country — if need be — as well
as their funding pledges for the Afghan security forces
up until 2024. We encourage all forces engaged in
Afghanistan to further strengthen joint operations
with the country’s defence and security forces in the
provinces most affected by insecurity, where the
conduct of elections is at risk of being undermined.
Some recent positive developments are helping to
maintain hope for the restoration of peace and stability
in Afghanistan. They include the cessation of hostilities
between the Afghan armed forces and the Taliban during
Eid al-Fitr festivities; meetings between Taliban leaders
and Afghan political authorities during that period;
the meeting of 3,000 religious leaders in Kabul to call
the Taliban to the negotiating table with the Afghan
political authorities; the increased involvement of civil
society in the search for peace through demonstrations
and marches and the pooling of initiatives within the
framework of regional cooperation to promote the quest
for solutions to the Afghan crisis.
Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes the adoption of the
Afghan national peace and reconciliation strategy
presented by the High Peace Council, as well as the
measures taken by the Government of Afghanistan to
implement the national action plan on peace, security
and women’s empowerment.
My country welcomes the progress made by the
Afghan Government in its fight against corruption and
its quest to reduce the dependence of its economy on
foreign aid. We also encourage it to continue its efforts
to combat drug trafficking, which serves as a source of
financing for terrorism.
My delegation also calls for enhanced cooperation
between the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the relevant
regional organizations in order to strengthen regional
capacities for peace and development.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms the central
role of the Kabul process, which remains to this day the
benchmark for achieving lasting peace in Afghanistan.
Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We would like to
thank the Secretary General for his comprehensive
18-28821

17/09/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

report on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2018/824) and
the activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We appreciate the briefing
by Special Representative Yamamoto and are grateful to
Ambassador Saikal and Mr. Bakhtiar for their remarks.
There is no doubt that Afghanistan still faces
multiple and complex challenges to its security,
stability and development. Its people continue to pay
a heavy price for the instability and violence, not least
from the use of indiscriminate improvised explosive
devices — the leading cause of civilian casualties
during the first half of this year. We reiterate our strong
condemnation of the recent terrorist attacks in Kabul
and other parts of the country. Once again, we must take
this opportunity to express our sympathy and solidarity
with the people and the Government of Afghanistan for
the loss of a high number of civilian lives.
The long-term security and stability of Afghanistan
can be ensured only through a comprehensive and
inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation
and political process. We reiterate our appreciation for
the proposal by President Ghani for direct negotiations
with the Taliban. We note that it has been receiving
broad and strong support from Afghans and the
international community. However, that will not make
any difference unless and until the Taliban accepts
the offer and engages in direct peace talks without
any preconditions.
The holding of peaceful and democratic
parliamentary and district council elections within the
proposed time frame is indeed important, as Special
Representative Yamamoto said. The peaceful conduct
of any electoral process is critical to enabling people
to exercise their right to vote freely, without fear or
threat of insecurity, but implementing an inclusive
and credible electoral process in that context remains
a challenge.
There has certainly been progress in the preparation
for the elections, but there is a need to accelerate those
efforts and build confidence in the electoral process
through the involvement and participation of all
relevant stakeholders. That is key to ensuring the timely
and successful holding of the elections. All Afghan
stakeholders have very important responsibilities
in that regard. We hope they will demonstrate the
necessary political will and commitment to contribute
their part for the sake of lasting peace and stability
in Afghanistan.

S/PV. 8354

The peace and security challenge faced by
Afghanistan cannot be effectively addressed
without sustained and inclusive economic growth
and development. That is why the National Unity
Government needs the coordinated and comprehensive
support of the international community. We must
provide every support to encourage and assist the
Government in its political reforms and the national
development priorities laid out in the Afghanistan
National Peace and Development Framework. It is vital
that the international community sustain its engagement
and deliver on its commitments. We sincerely hope that
the Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan will
provide an opportunity for the international community
to renew its political commitments to Afghanistan and
encourage their implementation.
The continued engagement of the United Nations in
support of Afghanistan is absolutely vital at this critical
juncture. We commend UNAMA’s active engagement
with the Government and the people of Afghanistan,
in line with its mandate. We hope it will continue to
maintain and extend its efforts to promote and support
peace talk initiatives, reconciliation and dialogue,
as well as its support for the social and economic
development of Afghanistan.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Yamamoto for his briefing and for the important
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in Afghanistan.
I would also like to thank Mr. Ramiz Bakhtiar
for sharing his valuable insights this afternoon. With
more than 60 per cent of the population in Afghanistan
estimated to be under 25-years old, the future clearly
lies in the hands of the youth. In line with resolution
2419 (2018), on youth, peace and security, young people
should be actively and meaningfully engaged in all
decision-making processes, including in the Council.
The only viable solution to the conflict in
Afghanistan is an Afghan-owned and -led peace process.
In that regard, we commend the unprecedented steps
taken by the Afghan Government this year. It is deeply
regrettable that the Taliban did not accept the offer of
a bilateral ceasefire, and we join others in urging the
Taliban to cease all violence and to immediately engage
in talks with the Government. A peace process must
be inclusive, involving both women and youth, if any
agreement is to be sustainable.

18-2882121/34

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

17/09/2018

As stated by others, the upcoming elections will be
decisive for the future of Afghanistan. The ability to
ensure credible elections will be a test of the Afghan
reform agenda and is crucial for achieving long-term
stability and for strengthening democracy. It is a shared
responsibility of the Government, the opposition and
the electoral management bodies to create the necessary
conditions. Responsible institutions must address
unresolved preparatory issues without further delay.
Any attempt to obstruct the electoral management
bodies from carrying out their work is unacceptable.
Adequate security measures need to be taken to prevent
attacks on the elections and the electoral preparations.
Women and men must be able to safely run for elected
office, campaign freely and, of course, vote. Special
attention should be given to ensuring that women in
remote and rural areas are also able to vote. UNAMA
has a clear mandate to promote women’s participation,
and we encourage close cooperation with relevant
actors, including UN-Women, in this work.

In that context, UNAMA’s continued documentation of
civilian casualties is important.

Coherent and coordinated international support for
national peace efforts in Afghanistan is critical. All
stakeholders, especially the neighbours, must now act
on their commitment to supporting a political solution.
The role of UNAMA in backing those efforts remains
important. The Geneva Ministerial Conference
on Afghanistan in November will be an important
opportunity to bring key stakeholders together. The
Conference should focus on evaluating the reform
agenda that has been mutually agreed by Afghanistan
and the international community, including the conduct
of the parliamentary elections, anti-corruption efforts
and the implementation of the National Action Plan for
the implementation of Council resolution 1325 (2000).

Last week, a man wearing a vest armed with
explosives walked into a crowd protesting a corrupt
local police commander in eastern Afghanistan. The
man blew himself up and killed around 70 other people.
Hundreds more were wounded. Earlier that same day,
a 14-year-old boy was killed and four others were
wounded when two bombs went off in front of a school
in Jalalabad.

The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan
is worsening. Due to conflict and drought, about
4.2 million people now need humanitarian assistance.
The situation has also led to an increase in internally
displaced people. Safe and unhindered access is critical.
It is also essential to ensure close coordination between
humanitarian and development efforts, including on
climate-change mitigation.
The continuous, horrendous attacks in Kabul and
around the country, including targeted attacks on girls’
schools, religious minorities and journalists, must
be condemned in the strongest terms. All attacks on
civilians, including those against humanitarian and
development workers, are unacceptable. All parties must
comply with their obligations under international law.
22/34

With continuous attacks on civilians and a
worsening humanitarian situation, the challenges
in Afghanistan can sometimes seem overwhelming.
But renewed momentum for a peace process and the
upcoming elections offer opportunities to change the
trajectory. We should jointly seize that opportunity.
As a long-standing friend and partner to the people of
Afghanistan, Sweden will continue to do its part.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United States.
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Yamamoto for his briefing and are particularly
grateful to Afghan youth representative Ramiz Bakhtiar
for sharing the critical and important perspective of
youth and civil society in Afghanistan, and especially
regarding the upcoming elections.

This is the dangerous and difficult situation that
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the people of Afghanistan confront as
Afghanistan approaches parliamentary elections in
October. Violent extremist groups are attempting to sow
fear and distrust among the Afghan people. No doubt,
their attacks will intensify. It seems they would like to
return to the zero-sum, tribal violence of the civil war
in the 1990s, which paved the way for the tyrannical
rule of the Taliban.
The United States fully supports and hopes
for timely, credible, and transparent parliamentary
elections in Afghanistan on 20 October, as well as
subsequent elections when the Afghan people will
choose their president in April 2019. But timely and
credible elections will not come about easily. Building
a democracy necessarily involves creating trust and
confidence among the people in the integrity of the
system, along with belief in the ability and willingness
of those who are elected to improve the lives of the
people. As a first step in that process, there must be
18-28821

17/09/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8354

voter registration that is as accurate and transparent
as possible, ensuring that women have the opportunity
to participate and have their voices heard. And most
fundamentally, it depends on the safety of those who
would campaign, register and vote in the elections.

on Afghanistan later this year, which will provide an
important opportunity for the international community
to reaffirm its commitment to assisting Afghanistan in
its efforts to secure a better future. This afternoon, I
will focus on three key issues in this regard.

Today, preparations for the parliamentary and
presidential elections in Afghanistan are at a critical
stage. UNAMA plays an essential role in supporting
Afghanistan’s electoral commissions as they prepare
for the vote. We want to specifically recognize and
thank Special Representative Yamamoto and his team
for their hard work under very difficult conditions. As
part of the preparation for timely and credible elections,
the United States welcomes the efforts of the Afghan
Government to advance a peace process with the
Taliban. The people of Afghanistan are calling for peace.
President Ghani has responded to their call. The ball is
now in the Taliban’s court. They must come to the table
and enter into peace talks without preconditions.

First, with regard to the upcoming elections in the
country, we are about one month away from the holding
of parliamentary elections in Afghanistan, which are
scheduled for 20 October. The successful holding of
these elections is important for all of our efforts aimed
at helping Afghanistan achieve stability, security and
prosperity. However, severe and frequent criticism of
the election process is becoming a source of concern,
as this may lead to circumstances that could result in
the disenfranchisement of a large number of voters. The
deteriorating security situation might also give way to
similar results. We still hope that effective and swift
measures will be taken to rectify this situation.

The Taliban face a decision — they can grow
obsolete in the old Afghanistan or they can thrive in
a new one. Not just the Taliban, but all of us, are at an
inflection point in the Afghan conflict. A prosperous
and secure future for Afghanistan can be created only
by and through the will of its people. This is the goal
to which the Security Council, international donors and
the international community more broadly must devote
themselves in the critical weeks and months ahead.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would like to express
our appreciation to Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his briefing, and Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal,
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for his
statement. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2018/824).
Today we are meeting at yet another critical
juncture for Afghanistan. As we approach the midpoint
of the transformation decade, significant progress in the
country has been achieved on multiple fronts, including
in the political, economic and security fields. However,
complex challenges remain to be addressed for the
establishment and consolidation of peace, security
and prosperity in Afghanistan. We look forward to
the holding of the Geneva Ministerial Conference

The fragmented political environment in
Afghanistan continues to be another point of concern.
We call upon all members of the National Unity
Government, as well as other prominent political
actors, to act together and join efforts aimed at holding
credible elections and advancing the peace process.
That brings me to my second point, on the efforts
for establishing sustained peace and reconciliation. An
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation
process remains central to achieving long-lasting peace
in the country. We welcome the encouraging steps
that were recently taken by the Afghan Government
to this effect. In this regard, we were pleased that the
temporary ceasefire during Eid al-Fitr was respected.
This unprecedented development vividly displayed the
sincere aspiration of the Afghan people for peace. It is
regrettable that a similar ceasefire could not be repeated
during Eid al-Adha. I would like to reiterate that Turkey
continues to stand ready to contribute to the Afghanled and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation efforts.
The security, stability and prosperity of Afghanistan
are of key importance for neighbouring countries and
the region, as well as for the maintenance of global
peace and security.
My third and last point is on the need to strengthen
regional cooperation efforts. We believe that the need
to address the challenges that Afghanistan continues
to face remains an important priority for countries of
the region and the international community as a whole.
Building and consolidating a genuine atmosphere of trust

18-2882123/34

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

and cooperation remains essential for strengthening
regional collaboration efforts in a mutually beneficial
manner. Our vision for Afghanistan continues to be a
peaceful, secure and stable country that enjoys good and
cooperative relations with its neighbours while being
at the centre of major regional cooperation projects in
infrastructure, trade and transportation.
With this understanding, Turkey continues
to contribute to regional cooperation efforts for
Afghanistan. We are pleased to co-chair the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process this year, together with
Afghanistan, in line with our continued support. The
second senior officials meeting of the Process will take
place here in New York on 28 September, at the margins
of the high-level week of the General Assembly. Review
of the implementation of the confidence-building
measures within the framework of the Process will be
one of the agenda items. We look forward to a fruitful
discussion at this meeting.
Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity to commend the work that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan is carrying
out under the leadership of Special Representative
Yamamoto in assisting the Afghan Government and
people in their endeavours to achieve a stable, peaceful
and prosperous Afghanistan. I would also like to
reiterate Turkey’s commitment to continuing to stand
by the Government of Afghanistan and our Afghan
brothers and sisters as long as our help is needed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I, too, should like to begin
by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Yamamoto for his briefing.
The situation in Afghanistan remains a source of
concern for the entire international community. A long
war continues, exacerbated by terrorism, ethnic and
regional tensions, and a fragile economy. The Afghan
people continue their epic suffering, with another
record-high period in civilian casualties, attested
by the Secretary General’s report (S/2018/824). As
Human Rights Watch put it, “civilians are losing the
war in Afghanistan”. The recent upsurge in violence
has compounded the prolonged suffering of the Afghan
people. We strongly condemn all terrorist attacks
in Afghanistan. There can be no justification for the
indiscriminate killing of innocent children, women
and men.
24/34

17/09/2018

Apart from Afghanistan itself, no country has
suffered more from the four decades of war, turmoil and
foreign interventions in Afghanistan, and no country
has more to gain from peace there, than mine, Pakistan.
For many years, Imran Khan, Pakistan’s recently
elected Prime Minister, has declared that peace in
Afghanistan can be restored only through a negotiated
political settlement between the principal parties. In
his very first address to the nation after the elections,
Prime Minister Khan reaffirmed Pakistan’s support for
peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan was also the first country to be visited
by Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Hussain Qureshi
over the last weekend, which is a clear signal of the
importance that our new Government attaches to its
relations with Afghanistan and of its commitment
to promoting peace and stability in that country. His
message in Kabul was that Pakistan remained ready
to play a constructive role in facilitating peace and
reconciliation in Afghanistan.
There are some signs that a negotiated end to
Afghanistan’s protracted war may be possible. Hopes for
peace received a boost last June when President Ashraf
Ghani announced a ceasefire on the religious festival of
Eid al-Fitr, and the Afghan Taliban did the same. For a
few days, the ceasefire was comprehensively observed
across the country by the Government and the Tehrik-e
Taliban Afghanistan. Apart from the general desire for
peace, the ceasefire affirmed that peace was possible if
the principal parties in Afghanistan desired it.
Pakistan welcomes the Trump Administration’s
acknowledgement that a negotiated political settlement
is the best option for bringing its longest war to an end.
Pakistan has urged this course of action for well over
a decade. The United Nations and the international
community have consistently declared that there is
no military solution to the conflict and that it must be
ended through a negotiated political settlement.
Agreement on launching a negotiating process is,
however, neither simple nor easy. Several past attempts
have been aborted by unilateral actions. There is little
trust between the main antagonists. Preconditions have
been set by some of the main parties to commence
and continue a dialogue process. The principal
responsibility for seizing the moment rests on the
parties directly involved in the Afghan conflict. Unless
they display flexibility, serious negotiations for a
political settlement could be further delayed. To create
18-28821

17/09/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

an environment for peace talks, all sides should agree
on a de-escalation of violence, if not a cessation of
violence. For its part, Pakistan will actively encourage,
support and facilitate all efforts to launch a credible
and serious peace process.
A negotiated peace and national reconciliation is
all the more essential to enable the Afghan people and
the international community to confront and eliminate
the growing presence of Da’esh in Afghanistan. Da’esh
and a number of terrorist groups operating under its
umbrella, including the Tehrik-i-Taliban and Jamaatul-Ahrar, pose a threat to Afghanistan, its neighbours
and, indeed, to the world. We agree with the Russian
delegation that an international effort is needed to
defeat Da’esh in Afghanistan.
Cooperation between Pakistan and Afghanistan
is a vital component of the endeavour to realize
peace and security within Afghanistan and the entire
region. Strengthening bilateral relations is a priority
for my country’s new Government. The AfghanistanPakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity provides
a framework for comprehensive and structured
engagement between our two countries. The inaugural
session of that body was held in Kabul in July, and
the operationalization of its five working groups
will enable us address all bilateral issues, including
broadening economic interaction, border management
and refugee repatriation.
We have taken a number of initiatives to support
Afghanistan’s economic development. At Kabul’s
request, Pakistan waived regulatory duties on imports
from Afghanistan. As a result, a substantial increase in
Afghan exports to Pakistan has been recorded in 2018.
We are also ready to extend all possible support
to Kabul to overcome the growing challenge posed
by illicit drug production and trade. The international
community, too, should do more to help Afghanistan
in developing a comprehensive strategy to address
that problem.
Finally, let me say that the bonds of blood, language,
faith, geography and history that bind the peoples of
Pakistan and Afghanistan to each other are immutable
and unbreakable. Our destinies are, and will always
remain, intertwined. Cooperation between Pakistan
and Afghanistan is in the mutual and vital interests of
both countries. We stand committed to working with
the Afghan Government for the improvement of our

S/PV. 8354

bilateral relationship and for the promotion of peace and
stability — in both our countries and across the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): I would first like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his informative briefing
on the situation in Afghanistan. I also express my
sincere appreciation to Mr. Ramiz Bakhtiar for his
briefing. I now follow him on Twitter, and so I know
that today was both exciting and nerve-wracking for
him, but I must tell him that I hope we live up to his
expectations and, by extension, to the aspirations of all
Afghan youth.
I will cover three points today: the situation of
youth, the Geneva Ministerial Conference and the
upcoming parliamentary elections.
With regard to youth, Canada commends the
Security Council for having focused this quarterly
debate on this topic. As many other have noted, in a
country where over 60 per cent of the population
is under the age of 25, involving young people and
including their views in identifying solutions is more
important than ever. If Canada is elected to serve on
the Security Council for the period 2021-2022, we can
be counted upon to support a continued and expanded
effort to regularly include youth voices in such debates.
In Afghanistan, it is clear that equitable access to social
services, including education, remains an essential
component of supporting youth. That is especially
important for girls and young people from ethnic and
religious minorities.
The progress made since 2001 in terms of child
enrolment in schools is nothing short of remarkable.
Nevertheless, approximately 4 million children, most
of them girls, remain outside of school today. Their
enormous untapped potential prompted the Afghan
Ministry of Education to work with Canada and other
donors to develop a community-based policy that
increases access to education in rural and remote
locations. Leading that policy, Canada is proud to have
helped establish more than 9,200 community-based
schools serving 273,000 students, over 80 per cent of
whom are girls.
(spoke in French)
Canada looks forward to participating in the
forthcoming Geneva Ministerial Conference on

18-2882125/34

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan, to be held in November, and will be
paying keen attention to the Afghan Government’s own
assessment of progress made to date and its planned
approach to address remaining obstacles. We hope to
hear more about how they intend to continue increasing
the participation of women in public affairs and
reducing gender-based violence. We hope to learn more
about the implementation of its policies to strengthen
budget transparency and increase Government
accountability, especially in the security sector. And
we eagerly await an update on its efforts to enhance
Government capacity to deliver services and ensure
good governance. All of those areas will be critical for
the success of the transformation decade.
The forthcoming parliamentary elections are
another important milestone. It was my personal
privilege to be in Afghanistan ahead of the historic
presidential elections in 2004 and to help organize
training for staff of the new Afghan Parliament in
2006. I met many incredible volunteers, officials and
politicians from across Afghanistan and was struck
then, as now, by the depth of their commitment to
their country and the remarkable diversity of their
perspective and experience.
(spoke in English)
Canada remains fully committed to supporting
Afghanistan as it seeks to leverage that diversity,
including by advancing the full participation of women
and marginalized communities in the upconubg
elections. As is the case everywhere, women’s full
and equal participation in decision-making processes
strengthens both the processes and the decisions
themselves, leading to better, more sustainable results.
In that regard, I commend the Independent Election
Commission for its gender policy and for its concrete
efforts to enhance women’s political participation. I
also want to cite the tremendous efforts of civil society
actors like the Transparent Election Foundation of
Afghanistan and the Afghan Women’s Education
Center for promoting the rights of women and girls and
of ethnic and religious minorities.
We likewise welcome the work of the United
Nations and other partners to distribute ballots in
rural areas ahead of the elections. We encourage the
Afghan national authorities to continue to actively
address irregularities and to promote and protect the
rights of those in rural communities, especially women
candidates and voters, to participate in civic affairs and
26/34

17/09/2018

political life. Their inclusion is essential to the integrity
of the elections.
As Afghanistan approaches the half-way mark of
its transformation decade, the Secretary-General is
right to point to the urgent need for political leaders to
demonstrate unity of purpose in guiding Afghanistan
towards greater stability and self-reliance. We look
to the Afghan Government to lead, as no doubt do
Afghanistan’s young people. Canada will continue to
work with the Afghan Government, our United Nations
and international partners and with civil society in this
effort — because we know that, by working together,
we can help young people like Mr. Bakhtiar build a
peaceful, inclusive and resilient Afghanistan, which he
embodies so vividly for us all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank the United States
presidency for having convened the present debate on
the situation in Afghanistan. I also thank Ambassador
Mahmoud Saikal, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for his thoughtful presentation; young
Ramiz Bakhtiar, the first youth envoy of Afghanistan,
for his passionate call to the Security Council to support
the aspirations of Afghanistan’s young people; and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Yamamoto, for his briefing.
The recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/824) and the statements made earlier today
portray the deteriorating security situation resulting
from the growing insurgency, linked with criminal
and terrorist networks. The challenges posed by the
deteriorating situation do not mean we should simply
accept the death toll as inevitable. Rather, they should
stir us to strengthen our collective spirit of support to
the Government and the people of Afghanistan and the
brave Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
to counter the inhumanity of those who have banded
together to ruthlessly brutalize the lives of the ordinary
people of Afghanistan.
The Security Council deals with multiple conflict
situations. Many of them are addressed many times
over each quarter. The situation in Afghanistan, by
any measure, now warrants that the business-asusual approach followed to date be reviewed. The
Council’s manner of addressing the issue through
quarterly debates and an annual resolution may have
served the purpose in the past. The present situation
18-28821

17/09/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

requires greater attention to examine whether it is
commensurate with the danger to regional peace and
security emanating from the conflict in Afghanistan.
During the past few months, we have followed with
hope and anticipation the various peace efforts and
overtures by the Government and people of Afghanistan
towards bringing peace to their war-torn country. The
Taliban, unfortunately, have rejected the recent calls
for a ceasefire by the Afghan Government and civil
society, including various religious leaders. In fact,
they have tended to treat such overtures with growing
disdain and have increased their offensive operations as
the country prepares for parliamentary elections.
All of us know and believe that there is no military
solution to the issue. Yet the Taliban, aided by its
supporters, continue to pursue military operations and
to perpetrate violence and destruction, such as the recent
attack in Ghazni, over several parts of Afghanistan.
Those offensives are planned and launched by those
who are harboured in safe havens in the neighbourhood
of Afghanistan. Those sanctuaries have provided
safety for years for the dark agendas of ideologically
and operationally fused terror networks like the
Taliban, the Haqqani Network, Da’esh, Al-Qaida and
its proscribed affiliates, such as the Lashkar-e-Tayyiba
and Jaish-e-Mohammed. The agendas of those
organizations draw financial sustenance not only from
extortion and forced levies and taxes, but also benefit
significantly from criminal networks operating drug
cartels and stealing Afghanistan’s natural resources. By
some estimates, 60 per cent of the Taliban’s revenues
are from the drug trade. Poppy cultivation is said to be
the largest cash crop in Taliban-controlled areas.
Resolution 2405 (2018), adopted earlier this year,
focuses on linkages among extremism, terrorism, drug
production and illegal exploitation of Afghanistan’s
natural resources. However, it falls short of expectations
in striving to cripple the Taliban’s drug trade. The
Secretary-General’s current report also fails to address
that very key issue in an adequate matter.
Let us not forget that templates are available for
curbing illicit trade by terrorist networks. For example,
it is estimated that, when targeted, the Islamic State’s
oil revenues fell over by nearly 90 per cent over three
years, from a monthly high of $50 million to just
$4 million. By contrast, the opium produced in Talibancontrolled areas is estimated to account for 85 per cent
of global illicit production, valued between $1.5 billion

S/PV. 8354

and $3 billion. We feel it is time for the Council to try
to replicate the success of the international community
against the Islamic State’s illicit business in Syria and
Iraq by similarly crippling the Taliban’s illicit drug
trade. We hope that this important subject will be
addressed by the Secretary-General in his next report,
and by the Council thereafter.
India is willing to work with all countries in the
region and beyond, while keeping Afghan priorities at
the forefront, so as to bring about a lasting solution for
the situation. Afghans should lead those efforts, not
only between Governments but with civil society and
business as stakeholders. India stands ready to support
Afghanistan in every way it can. Our focus remains on
the economic pillar of stability and reliable connectivity
for the people of Afghanistan. We strongly believe that
the lack of connectivity directly impacts the economic,
security and political situation in Afghanistan, and we
want to address that crucial issue for the benefit of the
Afghan people.
For its part, it is time for the Council to look beyond
routine consideration to chart a more innovative way
forward, so that the spiral of violence that is affecting
the life of common Afghans is reversed.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of
the Delegation of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28
member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2018/804), and
Special Representative Yamamoto and Afghan youth
representative Bakthiar for their briefings. I also thank
our good friend Ambassador Saikal for his statement.
The political and security landscape has witnessed
many changes since President Ghani’s unprecedented
peace offer at the meeting of the Kabul process in
February. The European Union has wholeheartedly
welcomed the Kabul initiative, which has greatly
increased the chance of the holding of talks led by
the Afghan Government on a genuine peace process.

18-2882127/34

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

President Ghani’s offer of a ceasefire in mid-June
generated additional momentum for peace and
showed every Afghan and the entire world that peace
is possible. Grassroots movements for peace were
another manifestation of the Afghan desire for peace
and stability.
Unfortunately, in recent weeks we have observed
an increase in violence, including the Taliban’s attack
on Ghazni. That resulted in further suffering for
the Afghan population. The Taliban also registered
substantial numbers of casualties in different provinces,
underlining the tremendous costs of a strategy that
seeks advantage in the battlefield rather than entering
peace talks. Reckless spoilers of peace also remain
active, in particular the Islamic State.
The European Union remains a steadfast supporter
and promoter of peace. We will continue to help broaden
the political consensus for peace by cooperating
closely with the United Nations, whose assistance and
facilitation remain essential. The European Union
reiterates its willingness to actively accompany that
process, while underlining in particular the regional
dimension of any successful peace process. A stable
and prosperous Afghanistan is in the interests of all its
neighbours. The EU will consider all available incentives
and constraints to help foster such a development.
We are now looking forward to the Geneva
ministerial conference on Afghanistan. In the spirit
of the Brussels Conference of 2016, we expect Geneva
to be another key moment in support for the Afghan
Government’s reform agenda and to send a strong
message on peace. The Afghan Government must
demonstrate progress on the implementation of the
reform package it committed to during the Brussels
Conference. We also look forward to the Geneva
mutual accountability framework, which should set
concrete and measurable indicators for further reforms.
All those reforms are consubstantial with peace efforts.
Peace, self-reliance and regional cooperation
and connectivity should be our guiding principles
at Geneva. We see in particular the need to agree on
lasting anti-corruption measures, for which we look
forward to an updated set of concrete and measurable
indicators. In the same vein, we will emphasize credible
implementing measures on human rights, reinforcing
relevant legislation.
In July, the EU disbursed the second tranche of
the State Building Contract for Afghanistan — in the
28/34

17/09/2018

amount of €98 million. We hope that will contribute
to further advancing economic growth and job creation
for the benefit of the Afghan people.
On 20 October, Afghanistan will organize
parliamentary elections. It is an important event, longawaited by the Afghan population. Those elections must
take place in a democratic, transparent and credible
way. It will also be a test case for the presidential
elections in 2019. We encourage the Afghan authorities
to continue improving the electoral governance system.
Much remains to be done, both at the technical level
and in the political sphere. With regard to the latter, the
EU calls on all parties and political representatives to
respect the electoral process and its institutions.
The EU and its member States will continue to work
together in support of the Afghan electoral process.
We have committed €15.5 million to assist with the
parliamentary elections under the coordination of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). The EU will also deploy an election experts
mission for the parliamentary elections.
We applaud the readiness of the Afghan Government
to engage on all youth-related matters, including in the
light of the implementation of resolution 2419 (2018),
on youth and peace and security. Considering the needs
of that most sizeable age group, the youth perspective
deserves the fullest attention, including in terms of
political participation.
The European Union continues its structured
dialogue with Afghanistan under the Cooperation
Agreement on Partnership and Development. We
are following up on the results of the meeting of the
EU-Afghanistan Special Working Group on Human
Rights, Good Governance and Migration held on
5 May in Kabul. We encourage the Afghan authorities
to continue to implement the relevant legislation, with
particular focus on areas such as the elimination of
violence against women, the use of the national action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
the protection of children and the prevention of torture
and ill treatment.
The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the high level of civilian casualties and the
increasing number of displaced people. The EU calls on
all parties to protect the civilian population, especially
women and children. In that regard, we support efforts
by the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission to provide
further training, advice and assistance for the Afghan
18-28821

17/09/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

security forces and institutions. We need to continue
to protect the vital role of humanitarian agencies and
respect their impartiality and humanitarian space in
addressing the most urgent needs of the most vulnerable.
In conclusion, this is a very important moment for
Afghanistan. We should not lose the positive momentum
for peace generated in June. The three-month conditional
ceasefire proposed by President Ghani in August is still
valid. We encourage all parties to the conflict, starting
with the Taliban, to respond positively.
Lastly, the European Union strongly acknowledges
the crucial role played by UNAMA and all United
Nations agencies in supporting the Afghan people.
The European Union remains committed to working
alongside UNAMA and international partners to
achieve a democratic and self-sustainable Afghanistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement
just made on behalf of the European Union.
I would like to comment briefly on three points:
the peace process, elections and the role of Afghan
youth. However, first of all, allow me to thank Special
Representative Yamamoto, not only for his briefing,
but also for his tireless efforts to bring about peace
in Afghanistan.
I would also like to express our deepest condolences
to the Afghan people and their Government following
the recent terrorist attacks. In particular, I condemn the
recent wave of horrific attacks on schools and children.
Impunity for the perpetrators of such crimes is out of
the question.
First of all, with regard to the peace process, the
Kabul process, supported by the Tashkent conference,
must form the basis for a comprehensive and inclusive
Afghan-led and Afghan-controlled peace process. It
is essential that the international community and the
countries of the region provide coordinated support
to the Government’s efforts. In that regard, we also
welcome the recent progress made on the AfghanistanPakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity, as well
as the support expressed by Prime Minister Khan of
Pakistan following his recent election.
Despite the recent and courageous peace initiatives
taken by President Ghani and his National Unity

S/PV. 8354

Government, violence continues unabated. There have
never been so many civilian casualties since 2009.
We deplore the fact that the Taliban leaders have not
responded positively to the Government’s overtures.
We call on them to participate in peace negotiations. In
addition, we are also deeply concerned about the lack of
humanitarian access.
With regard to the elections, Belgium commends
the Government on its substantial efforts to organize
free, credible and inclusive elections to be held on
20 October. We commend the people of Afghanistan
for having the courage to register for the elections
despite the major security challenges. We welcome
the considerable efforts of the electoral authorities
to ensure the transparency of the process and call
for close and constructive cooperation among the
Government, opposition parties and the Independent
Election Commission. Political leaders are responsible
for helping to build trust in the process. Belgium calls
on the Taliban not to sabotage the electoral process
through violence or other forms of intimidation. With
regard to inclusiveness, we note that women account
for approximately 15 per cent of the candidates for
the lower house of Parliament and 34 per cent of the
9.5 million registered voters. We welcome the approval
of the Independent Election Commission’s gender
policy and hope that it will lead to greater number of
women participating in the process.
Insecurity, poverty and unemployment continue to
have a serious impact on Afghan youth. Drought has
affected livelihoods and led to additional population
displacements. The impatience of the Afghan people,
in particular their youth, for lasting peace is becoming
increasingly clear. Recent civil society initiatives
demonstrate the willingness and constructive spirit of
young Afghans, who are increasingly calling for lasting
peace and are ready to assume their responsibility
during the elections. I again deplore the recent attacks
on schools, which infringe upon the fundamental right
of young people to education and demonstrate the
importance of the swift and full implementation of
the Safe Schools Declaration. Belgium welcomes the
criminalization of child-related offences in the new
penal code. The measure is essential for protecting the
most vulnerable members of society. Belgium calls
on the Afghan Government to implement the new
legislation. We are also very concerned about the use
of child soldiers and reports of the sexual abuse of boys
and of violence against women.

18-2882129/34

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

In conclusion, we attach great importance to peace
in Afghanistan, its economic prosperity and relations
with its neighbours and the rest of the world. Like our
European partners, we will follow developments with
interest and attention in the coming months.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Ms. Zappia (Italy): Italy fully aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to express our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2018/824), and to Special
Representative Yamamoto for his comprehensive
briefing and dedication. I would also like to recognize
Mr. Ramiz Bakhtiar and thank him for sharing his
experience and perspective with us. We, too, will start
following him on Twitter.
Italy supports the ongoing efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan to defeat terrorism and
violent extremism. We remain concerned about the
continuing fragility of the security situation and the
alarming number of civilian casualties. Together with
its allies and partners, Italy has renewed its active
commitment to the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission as a Framework Nation and will also remain
one of the main contributors to capacity-building
efforts in support of the Afghan National Security and
Defence Forces. Such commitments are underscored
by the shared understanding that the only road to
lasting peace in Afghanistan is through reconciliation
leading to a political settlement. We commend the
Government’s courageous initiative in that regard,
which we fully support. However, the fact that the most
recent ceasefire was not reciprocated by the Taliban
demonstrates that the road to peace is still long. Efforts
to bring about peace in Afghanistan will require
patience, determination and unity of purpose.
We underline once again the crucial facilitation
efforts of international and, especially, regional
stakeholders, who can help foster the conditions for an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation process.
The Government’s efforts to advance reconciliation
are taking place against a backdrop full of significant
milestones in Afghanistan, with parliamentary elections
on 20 October and presidential elections in 2019. It has
been eight years since the last parliamentary elections.
We cannot overstate the importance that the men and
women of Afghanistan be able to cast their vote in a
credible, transparent and inclusive manner. We hope
30/34

17/09/2018

that all political forces will remain fully engaged in that
process, and we support the active involvement of civil
society groups in ensuring that the vote is free and fair.
The Government’s commitments in the electoral
sphere are part of the broader efforts to effectively
implement much-needed reforms in a wide range of
areas, such as women’s empowerment, good governance
and anti-corruption. In pursuing the reform agenda,
the needs and the potential of Afghan youth must be
fully taken into consideration. Evaluating the progress
on that reform agenda will be the cornerstone of the
Geneva Ministerial Conference in November. Italy
looks forward to the conference as an opportunity to
draw a comprehensive assessment of the state of play in
the partnership for peace and prosperity agreed between
the Government of Afghanistan and the international
donors two years ago in Brussels.
In closing, allow me to reiterate Italy’s appreciation
for the exceptional work carried out by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, under
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto’s leadership, in an environment that
continues to pose numerous challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uzbekistan.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): First of all, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening the
quarterly debate on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as well as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto
and Mr. Ramiz Bakhtiar for their briefings.
In Uzbekistan we are continuing to closely follow
the situation in Afghanistan, given the upcoming
parliamentary elections, because the prospects of stable
and sustainable development in Central Asia are directly
intertwined with the achievement of durable peace
in that country. Given the circumstances, Uzbekistan
strives to make its own contribution to the international
community’s efforts in advancing the peace process in
Afghanistan. As some of my colleagues have mentioned
today, Uzbekistan hosted an international conference
on Afghanistan in March, entitled “Afghanistan:
Peace Process, Security Cooperation And Regional
Connectivity”, which was convened at the joint
initiative of Uzbekistan’s President Shavkat Mirziyoyev
and Afghanistan’s President Ashraf Ghani.
18-28821

17/09/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

At the end of the conference, high-ranking officials
from 21 States and leading international organizations,
such as the United Nations, the European Union, NATO
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, adopted
the Tashkent Declaration, which calls for the full
support of the international community for the Afghan
Government’s proposal to launch direct negotiations
with the Taliban, without any preconditions, in an effort
to achieve a comprehensive peace agreement.
The participants in the conference urged the
Taliban to accept that proposal and to start an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. It was
specifically underlined that all parties would benefit
from a comprehensive peace process, which should
also guarantee the inclusion of the Taliban in the
political process as a legitimate political player. In
turn, the Taliban movement should recognize its own
responsibility for peace and stability in the country,
renounce violence and cut ties with international
terrorists groups, as well as respect equal rights for all
Afghans, in accordance with the main provisions of
the Constitution.
As a practical step in facilitating a peace process
in Afghanistan and in implementing the Tashkent
Declaration, the Uzbek side recently held negotiations
with representatives of the Taliban from the movement’s
Qatar-based political commission. During the meeting
held in Tashkent on 7 August, the Uzbek side underlined
the importance of enforcing a ceasefire and its extension
for the delivery of humanitarian assistance, as well as
the implementation of large-scale economic projects in
the country.
One should underline that Uzbekistan closely
coordinates with the highest leadership of Afghanistan
all of its efforts pertaining to negotiations and contacts
with the Taliban movement. The Uzbek side conducts
prior consultations with the Afghan authorities on its
meetings or negotiations with the Taliban and informs
them about their outcomes. In particular, on 28 August
a delegation of Uzbekistan, led by Minister for Foreign
Affairs Abdulaziz Kamilov, visited Afghanistan and
held a number of meetings, including with President
Ghani, Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah, National
Security Adviser Hamdullah Mohib and Deputy
Foreign Minister Nasir Andisha. The Afghan side has
been fully briefed on the outcomes of the Tashkent
negotiations with the Taliban.

S/PV. 8354

From Uzbekistan’s perspective, contacts with
the Taliban are a necessary prerequisite to creating
conditions for the peace process in Afghanistan and to
encouraging the Taliban to take up direct talks with the
Government. In Tashkent, we strongly believe that peace
in Afghanistan can be achieved only through national
reconciliation, with the involvement in the negotiation
process of the representatives of the Taliban movement.
In concluding my remarks, I would like to emphasize
that ultimate peace on Afghan soil would open up new
opportunities and bring real benefits to all States of the
greater Eurasian continent. It would advance common
security and stability, create conditions favourable to
the construction of highways and railroads, the laying
of pipelines and the development of regional and
transregional trade, thereby contributing to ensuring
peace and stability in that vast region.
Uzbekistan will therefore continue its efforts
to support the earliest launch of the peace process
between the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan and the Taliban movement, without any
preconditions, aimed at creating a peaceful future for
all people of Afghanistan. In that regard, Uzbekistan
remains committed to continue close collaboration with
the United Nations, the Government of Afghanistan
and other stakeholders in advancing the peace process
in the country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Germany aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
In my own statement, I would like to focus on three
issues in particular.
First, I would like to speak on the elections, as
so many previous speakers have done. Preparations
are taking place amid enormous challenges in terms
of logistics, security and the political climate. For
the first time, Afghan institutions are taking on those
challenges on their own, and thanks to their efforts,
preparations are largely on track today — at least in a
technical sense, as we learned in the briefing — despite
all obstacles. It is crucial that those parliamentary
elections, which have been postponed several times,
do take place. Equally important is that they must be
held in a timely, free, fair and transparent manner. The
Afghan people deserve no less, just as they deserve

18-2882131/34

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

more progress in fighting corruption, establishing the
rule of law and respecting human rights.
Secondly, with respect to the peace process, with
its offer of unconditional talks and the unprecedented
June ceasefire, the Afghan Government has shown
great courage for the sake of peace, even while the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces are
putting their lives at risk to defend Afghan citizens
against attacks every day. Those acts of statesmanship
on the part of President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah command our respect. Efforts should now be
focused on initiating direct talks between the Afghan
Government and the Taliban. Confidence-building
measures, such as ceasefires, are useful, but the Taliban
must not be allowed to garner international credit while
running away from the negotiating table.
The countries of the region, many of which have
already spoken today, can contribute greatly. In
particular, the policy statements issued by the new
Pakistani Government have raised hopes. We have seen
some encouraging signs. There is now an opportunity
to end the conflict in Afghanistan if Afghans and the
international community lend their united support.
Thirdly and lastly, with regard to the importance of
Afghanistan’s young generation, we watched with great
satisfaction as Mr. Bakthiar — the first-ever Afghan
youth representative to the United Nations — so aptly
briefed the Council today. I thank him very much
for that. The average age in Afghanistan, as we have
already heard today, is just a little more than 18. More
than 40 per cent of its population is under the age of
14. Against that background, it is a truism that children
and young people play a tremendously important
role in Afghan society. It is also true that we need to
increase efforts in basic education, child protection
and including younger people in the political process,
especially younger women. We see encouraging signs
in that regard, but more has to be done.
Germany actively contributes to academic
infrastructure and formation in Afghanistan. In
the field of information technology (IT), Germany
supported the creation of several university IT centres,
an IT department at the Ministry of Higher Education,
and the IT Competence Centre of Afghanistan in Kabul,
as well as the establishment of a computer science
master’s programme for Afghan lecturers, to offer a
few examples.
32/34

17/09/2018

In conclusion, Germany continues to support the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and commends the Head of UNAMA for
his great work, as well as the United Nations agencies
working in Afghanistan. Germany remains deeply
committed to the Afghan people, in close cooperation
with the Afghan Government and our international
partners. We will certainly make this issue a focus of
our upcoming term as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): With one month to
go, Australia is encouraged by preparations for
Afghanistan’s parliamentary elections. We urge the
Government of Afghanistan to maintain its focus on
delivering an inclusive and credible electoral process
that will accurately reflect the will of the Afghan people.
We also acknowledge the bravery and commitment of
the Afghan people, who by registering have asserted
their right to participate in free and democratic elections
despite intimidation, threats and, tragically, violence.
Consistent with our support for Afghanistan’s security
and development, Australia will contribute $5 million
to the United Nations Electoral Support Project to assist
with the holding of the 2018 parliamentary elections
and the 2019 presidential elections.
As reflected in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/824), 2018 has been an especially bloody year.
The continuing cost of the conflict, borne by civilians
and the Afghan security forces alike, continues to
deepen the wounds of a country tired of war. We deeply
regret the continuing violence outlined in the report,
and condemn the brutal and illegitimate attacks by
insurgent groups, Daesh-inspired groups, Al-Qaida,
its affiliates and other terrorist groups operating in
Afghanistan. Together with our allies and partners in
the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission, Australia
is committed to supporting Afghanistan to meet the
challenges posed by those groups.
Australia welcomes Afghan Government leadership
in seeking dialogue with the Taliban as an important
step towards ending the conflict. President Ghani’s
offer in February of negotiations without preconditions,
his unilateral June ceasefire and his August invitation
to the Taliban to join an extended ceasefire are bold and
unprecedented steps. We reaffirm Australia’s support
for the Kabul process, and encourage Afghanistan to
18-28821

17/09/2018

The situation in Afghanistan

use it to draw together peace initiatives into a coherent,
coordinated, non-partisan pathway to a sustainable
Afghan-owned and -led political settlement. We call on
the Taliban to honourably reciprocate the Government’s
ceasefire offer so as to reduce violence and create space
for a broad-based and inclusive political process.
We stand with Afghanistan as it works to build
on the political and popular momentum for peace.
The hundreds of courageous Afghans marching from
Helmand to Kabul during Ramadan is a powerful
symbol of hope that should drive current and future
Afghan Governments to set aside political differences
to deliver on the people’s priority of a more secure
future. We further call on Afghanistan’s neighbours
to do all they can to encourage the Taliban to come to
the negotiating table. Pakistan especially could have an
important role in bringing about a negotiated peace in
Afghanistan by taking sustained and decisive measures
against insurgent groups that threaten regional peace
and stability.
We note, in addition to many other challenges, that
Afghanistan is facing an imminent food shortage that
would affect two thirds of the country. An estimated
1.3 million people are likely to need emergency food
and nutrition assistance. Australia will continue to
help respond, including through our recent multi-year
funding commitment to support the World Food
Programme in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, Australia continues to value the
role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan under the able leadership of Mr. Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, in coordinating the United Nations
and broader international efforts in Afghanistan. We
appreciate the United Nations hosting the forthcoming
Geneva ministerial conference on Afghanistan and
look forward to the conference — halfway through
the transformation decade — as an opportunity to take
stock of Afghanistan’s progress and to reaffirm our
shared commitments to peace and development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): We
extend our gratitude for the organization of this
meeting. We also extend our gratitude to Ambassador
Saikal of Afghanistan for his statement. I should also
like to thank Mr. Yamamoto, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of

S/PV. 8354

the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his briefing.
At a time when Afghanistan is experiencing
such severe hardships, what it needs most is further
robust and sustained international support. That is
of the utmost importance in order to respond to the
country’s existing challenges, achieve lasting peace
and stability in Afghanistan and the region and promote
its sustainable socioeconomic development. As a
neighbouring country, Iran continues to contribute to
and support the promotion of Afghanistan’s stability,
political-security conditions and socioeconomic
development. Certain efforts are under way to
ensure that such a contribution is carried out in an
institutionalized and sustained manner.
We also continue our endeavours to promote
regional efforts in support of peace, stability and
development in Afghanistan. In that regard, the
development plan for Iran’s Chabahar port will indeed
have a significant impact on the promotion of trade and
economic cooperation with Afghanistan. Any attempt
to disrupt that vital project will play only into the hands
of those who do not want peace and progress for the
Afghan people.
Security remains Afghanistan’s major challenge. It is
one of the main requirements for long-term stability and
socioeconomic development in Afghanistan. Therefore,
enhancing its security situation should be pursued as a
high priority. In that context, counter-terrorism efforts
must have the highest priority. The recent terrorist acts,
which claimed the lives of innocent civilians, further
prove that the threat of terrorist groups, including
Daesh, should not be underestimated. Iran will continue
to support Afghanistan’s Government in its struggle
against terrorist groups. The need for sustained regional
and international support in countering terrorists in
Afghanistan is crucial. However, it needs to be achieved
in a realistic manner.
Another source of concern in the security field
in Afghanistan is the increase in civilian casualties.
That includes the targeting of Shia communities and
religious sites, resulting in high civilian casualties.
That trend needs to be thwarted.
To enhance democracy, political institutions and
national unity in Afghanistan, every effort should be
made to ensure that the upcoming elections are held
and result in success for the country. Iran will continue
its constructive role in that regard.

18-2882133/34

S/PV.8354

The situation in Afghanistan

We continue to support and commend the dedicated
work of UNAMA and United Nations agencies in
providing development and reconstruction assistance to
Afghanistan. Sustained ownership and partnership with
the Afghan Government are needed in order to utilize
the best potential of UNAMA and the United Nations
system to deliver the necessary services in priority
areas, as advised by Afghanistan’s Government.
Despite the progress achieved, there remain
challenges and threats in Afghanistan that need further

34/34

17/09/2018

sustained international support. In that context, we
welcome the convening of the Geneva ministerial
conference on Afghanistan that is to take place in
November. The international community should
remain resolute in securing a stable and prosperous
Afghanistan. In turn, Iran will continue its full support
to the fraternal people and Government of Afghanistan
in their endeavour to achieve lasting peace and
prosperity in their country. That is what they deserve.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

18-28821
