S/2021/1106

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 January 2022
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to Mali and the
Niger, 23–25 October 2021
I. Introduction
1.
The members of the Security Council carried out a mission to Mali and the Niger
from 23 to 25 October 2021, co-led by France, Kenya and the Niger. The trip, which
was undertaken during the Council presidency of Kenya, was the first since the
beginning of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
2.
The primary purpose of the Security Council mission to Mali was to reiterate
the Council’s support for the political transition in the country, the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, and the development and
implementation of a strategy to stabilize the centre of the country. The visit was
further aimed at taking stock of the operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel and discussing possible ways to strengthen the effectiveness of
the tools put in place by the international community to support the Joint Force. The
overall goal of the visit to the Niger was to take stock of the challenges faced by the
country in the security, development and humanitarian domains, to learn from its
experience with regard to the consolidation of peace and the strengthening of
democratization, and to exchange views on how the Council can provide support in
facing the ongoing challenges in the Niger and the broader Sahel region.
3.
In Mali, the members of the Security Council met with members of the
transitional Government of Mali, including the transitional President, Colonel Assimi
Goïta; the Prime Minister, Choguel Maïga; the signatory armed groups;
representatives of civil society; the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Mali and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), El Ghassim Wane; and representatives of the United
Nations country team. In the Niger, the Council members met with t he President,
Mohamed Bazoum; the Prime Minister, Mahamadou Ouhoumoudou; the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Hassoumi Massoudou; other government officials; the Commander
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, Major General Oumar Bikimo;
and the United Nations country team. A ceremony in tribute to those who had lost
their lives combating terrorism was held in Niamey.

22-00053 (E)

250122

*2200053*

S/2021/1106

II. Mali
A.

Key issues
Political transition
4.
The transitional President expressed his Government’s commitment to the return
of constitutional rule in the country. He explained that gaining the confidence of the
Malian people and promoting reconciliation would be the priority and that it would be
achieved by improving the security situation and initiating some key reforms. In that
regard, he underlined the challenges that he considered his Government to be facing
in order to organize the elections on 27 February 2022 and stated that the upcoming
national dialogue on reform (Assises nationales de la refondation), to be held from
October to December 2021, would prove essential to bring Malians together and set
the path for taking Malian aspirations into account. That point was also highlighted by
some civil society interlocutors who further called upon the international community
and MINUSMA to support the political resolution of the crisis by ensuring that the
participants in the dialogue could legitimately represent the Malian people.
5.
Echoing the transitional President’s focus on the importance of the national
dialogue on reform, the Prime Minister stressed the urgency of engaging in the fight
against impunity and corruption and undertaking profound political, institutional and
security reforms. The national dialogue would represent a unique opportun ity for all
Malian political and social stakeholders to redefine the parameters of a “new” Mali.
Members of the transitional Government outlined the efforts and the bottom -up
approach in reaching political consensus on contentious issues relating to the el ectoral
process. The Prime Minister said that the dialogue, the recommendations of which
would be binding for all, should serve to define the timeline and framework for the
upcoming elections.
6.
The transitional authorities expressed the hope that the na tional dialogue on
reform would bring about a social pact between the State and the population for
sustainable peace in Mali, a sentiment echoed by several Malian interlocutors. While
supporting a timely political transition, some civil society representat ives argued that
the exact timing of elections did not matter to many segments of the population as
long as there was momentum for the elections to be organized. Some were of the view
that the national dialogue could provide an appropriate forum for women, including
those belonging to the signatory movements, to enhance their political legitimacy.
The Special Representative for Mali highlighted that, through his good offices and in
conjunction with the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
the African Union, MINUSMA would continue to advocate frank dialogue among
national stakeholders in order to reach political consensus on the way forward while
working to ensure greater synergy in the efforts between Mali and its partners towards
the shared goal of a return to constitutional rule and the promise of lasting stability.
7.
The members of the Security Council highlighted their willingness to hear
directly from Malian interlocutors on how better to support Mali and work with
national authorities. They reiterated their call for the Malian transitional authorities
to achieve the political transition and the return to constitutional order within the
agreed timeline set out in the transition charter and in accordance with the
commitments of the transitional authorities and the decisions of ECOWAS of 30 May
2021 and of 16 September 2021. The Council stressed the need for a minimum level
of national consensus, both on the reforms to be undertaken and on the conditions for
the proper holding of elections. It further called upon all Malian stakeholders to
prioritize building trust, engaging in dialogue and being willing to make compromises
in order to achieve those objectives.

2/10

22-00053

S/2021/1106

8.
The members of the Security Council reiterated their support for the mediat ion
efforts of ECOWAS and the African Union and encouraged the continuation of
dialogue between Mali and ECOWAS. Reiterating its call for the Malian authorities
to respect the deadline of 27 February 2022 for elections, ECOWAS informed the
delegation that the organization was awaiting the presentation of an electoral calendar
by the end of October and that, if necessary, an extraordinary summit would be
convened to take appropriate measures. Some Council members urged the Malian
authorities to adhere to the election timeline to which they had previously committed
with ECOWAS. During the Council’s visit to the region, the transitional Government
of Mali declared the Special Representative of ECOWAS in Mali persona non grata
and gave him 72 hours to leave the country. Meanwhile, the representative of the
African Union described the Union’s priorities as supporting the political transition
within the framework of the local monitoring committee, improving the security
situation and promoting development.
Implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
9.
All Malian stakeholders reaffirmed their willingness to participate in the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali to reach a
comprehensive and sustainable settlement of the recurring crisis. The Prime Minister
commended the continued dialogue between signatory parties within the framework
of the Agreement. The members of the Security Council recalled their firm
commitment to the implementation of the Agreement and welcomed the steps taken
in advancing that implementation but regretted its slow pace.
10. The Security Council was encouraged by the expressed commitment of the
transitional Government to enact constitutional reforms in furtherance of the
Agreement and called upon all the parties to the Agreement to work together towards
the completion of the exercise during the 18-month transition process. The Council
was also encouraged by the openness of the signatory parties to the international
mediation team, under the leadership of Algeria, playing a more active role, including
by exercising the team’s arbitration role. The members of the Council met with
women representatives of the signatory armed groups and reiterated the importance
of ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in all of the
Agreement’s implementing mechanisms.
11. The Ambassador of Algeria to Mali, the leader of the international mediation
team, mentioned that, while significant progress had been made on the
implementation of the Agreement, important issues remained to be finalized. The
Security Council welcomed the renewed commitment of the transit ional authorities
to expediting the implementation of the Agreement, including the transitional
Government’s recent proposal to integrate 13,000 former rebel combatants into the
army in the coming months. The Council stressed the great importance that it a ttached
to the early conclusion of the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and called upon the signatory movements to extend the necessary
cooperation. It also underscored that results were needed with regard to the
decentralization process in and development of the north. The Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad and the Platform (Fahad wing) coalitions of armed groups
deplored that, six years after the signing of the Agreement, peace dividends were
sparse. They stressed that the development component had registered very little
progress, accentuating the imbalance between the northern and southern regions of
the country. Both groups linked the lack of progress to a perceived lack of political
will on the part of the Malian authorities.
12. The Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad reiterated its call for the
establishment of an independent commission of inquiry to shed light on the
assassination of Sidi Brahim Ould Sidatt, then Chair of the coalition, in April 2021. The
22-00053

3/10

S/2021/1106

Haballa wing of the Platform pleaded for more time to be granted to the transitional
Government to prepare and hold elections under the proper conditions. Meanwhile, the
Coordination des mouvements de l’inclusivité was particularly vocal about the low
level of representation of women in the peace process. The Ambassador of Algeria to
Mali made it clear that the Permanent Strategic Framework was a cross-movement
initiative and that it should not interfere with the implementation of the Agreement.
Security and governance
13. All Malian and international interlocutors expressed serious concern over the
security situation, with some voicing that Mali was at a crossroads. The transitional
Government noted the support of MINUSMA to Mali while calling for a more robust
mandate for the Mission to adapt to the escalating insecurity nationwide. The leadership
of MINUSMA highlighted the continued degradation of the security situation, with 500
incidents since the start of 2021, more than in any other full year. Regular attacks
targeted MINUSMA personnel, the Malian Defence and Security Forces and
international partners, with civilians bearing the brunt of the conflict. In many zones,
local communities now had no choice but to sign local agreements imposed by armed
groups dictating rigorous conditions linked to religious practice and zakat.
14. MINUSMA described the way in which the volatile context shaped local
perceptions and aspirations, which could be exploited. Populations aspired first and
foremost to achieve security, with sometimes unrealistic expectations of what
international actors could do. The criticisms emerging from this mismatch were often
fuelled on social media and by misinformation, which made it hard to communicate
the crucial impact of MINUSMA. Beyond security, populations also aspired to
achieve access to basic services, for which MINUSMA could play a supporting role
at most. Lastly, the population aspired to achieve improved governance, the serious
shortcomings of which were seen as the main contributing factor to the current crisis.
15. The situation in the centre of the country was depicted as particularly
problematic by Malian and international interlocutors, with devastating repercussions
for the population, in terms not only of displacement but also of education.
MINUSMA reported that about 250,000 children could not access schooling. There
was also a lack of State presence, with only 16 per cent of prefects and sub -prefects
deployed. MINUSMA was doing a great deal despite its limited resources, as it had
only two battalions and one formed police unit in an area hosting 30 per cent of the
Malian population. The members of the Security Council were encouraged by the
intention of the Malian transitional authorities to agree on a comprehensive,
politically led strategy to protect civilians, reduce intercommunal violence and
re-establish State presence and authority as well as basic social services in central
Mali. They urged the Malian transitional authorities to uphold their efforts to
effectively implement that strategy by the end of the Mission ’s current mandate.
16. The Acting Force Commander of MINUSMA provided more details on the
adaptation of the Force, noting that the MINUSMA military componen t was
protecting villages and critical infrastructure against constant threats, helping to avoid
new massacres in areas such as Ogossogou and Petaka and supporting the civilian
component. He stressed that those efforts would be strengthened by additional
capabilities, particularly in terms of quick reaction, specialized expertise with regard
to improvised explosive devices, air assets and, most importantly, the means to
achieve better situational awareness. The Police Commissioner of MINUSMA noted
the role of the United Nations police in protecting civilians, most notably through the
presence of formed police units and through important training and capacity -building
efforts directed towards Malian institutions, including in the form of the construction
and rehabilitation of infrastructure as well as co-location. The establishment of local
policing and security committees, as well as the promotion of the presence of women
as part of the State’s redeployment efforts, was also highlighted.
4/10

22-00053

S/2021/1106

17. The Security Council paid tribute to the 243 fallen MINUSMA peacekeepers, a
stark reminder of the sacrifices made over the past eight years in the search for peace
in Mali. The Special Representative for Mali gave a briefing on the hostile operational
environment of MINUSMA, with 162 peacekeepers killed in hostile incidents out of a
total of 240 deaths since 2013. Improvised explosive devices and mines were a
constant danger, having killed 81 peacekeepers and wounded 571 to date, while
frequent attacks against MINUSMA convoys and camps continued. In that context, the
Special Representative explained that the Mission was enhancing its efforts to protect
civilians while striving to improve the safety and security of peacekeepers. Moreover,
he saw the proposed increase in the uniformed personnel ceiling recommended by the
Secretary-General in his report of 15 July 2021 on the adaptation and authorized
strength of MINUSMA (S/2021/657) as an absolute necessity owing to the dangers
faced in the north and the lack of personnel in the centre, where MINUSMA protected
vulnerable populations and guarded key infrastructure such as bridges, which were
essential for mobility and the well-being of populations, while noting that it was up to
the Council to make a decision on the proposed increase and encouraging its members
to take Malian concerns into consideration. He highlighted the Mission ’s strong
concern about the safety of the peacekeepers deployed in Tessalit, Kidal and Aguelhok
following the reconfiguration of the Operation Barkhane force.
18. Turning to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, the High
Representative of the African Union for Mali and the Sahel said that the Security
Council should review the nature of support for the Force given the deteriorating
security situation. He asked the Council to consider the possibility of establishing a
logistical support office for the Force. He also reported that discussions were
continuing within the African Union on the possibility of deploying 3,000 troops in
support of the Force.
Human rights and humanitarian issues
19. In the context of heightened security and political challenges, some civil society
representatives and international interlocutors considered that h uman rights ranked
low in terms of government priorities. Members of the Security Council urged the
Malian transitional authorities to continue their efforts to combat impunity for
violations and abuses of human rights and violations of international human itarian law.
20. Malian and international interlocutors highlighted the important humanitarian
and economic repercussions of insecurity. MINUSMA offered an overview of the
difficult humanitarian situation, noting that 4.7 million Malians needed humanitaria n
assistance and that about 42 per cent of the population currently lived in extreme
poverty. There were approximately 400,000 internally displaced persons, half of
whom were in the centre of the country. The number of internally displaced persons
had more than doubled in the previous two years; of the total, 84 per cent were
children (64 per cent) and women (20 per cent). There were also 150,000 Malian
refugees in neighbouring countries.
21. MINUSMA deplored the new strategy of village encirclement used b y terrorist
groups, which was expected to significantly increase the number of Malians needing
humanitarian assistance for that reason (currently 1.3 million), as villagers were now
deprived of access to land. Beyond the attacks against development and hum anitarian
actors, vital infrastructure such as roads and bridges were now increasingly being
targeted, while only 31.5 per cent of the $563 million requested for the humanitarian
response plan had been financed. The Mission noted the active role played in
humanitarian aid delivery by Malian organizations, which were implementing 75 per
cent of projects in the centre. MINUSMA highlighted the fact that political instability
affected humanitarian efforts to advocate resources and underline the importance of
humanitarian access in Mali.
22-00053

5/10

S/2021/1106

22. Civil society representatives told the mission that a large part of the female
population of Mali lived under the yoke of violent extremist groups, and not only in
the centre of the country. In addition, the Security Council was told that reforms
related to the rights of women were being set aside at the government and legislative
levels, including the reform regarding gender-based violence which was recently
discontinued. Meanwhile, civil society representatives recalled that 70 per cent of
Malians were under the age of 40, making younger generations the primary victims
of the crisis in the country. As the situation continued to deteriorate, young people
were losing hope for a decent life and risked falling into radicalizatio n to violence.
23. According to the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the demographic
data for Mali put the population at 21 million. Around 52 per cent of the population
was under 15 (with one in two Malians under the age of 15). Therefore, one of the main
challenges was the closure of 1,664 schools out of a total of 6,137 owing to insecurity,
which affected the schooling of around 500,000 children. Meanwhile, women 15 to 49
years of age (women of reproductive age) represented around 21 per cent of the total
population. Of those, 72 per cent could not read or write. Other United Nations country
team members focused their presentations on the recruitment of children by armed
groups, access to the population and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Notably,
it was highlighted that the combined effects of the pandemic and the sociopolitical crisis
had led to a recession in the Malian economy and an acceleration of public debt in 2020.
The economic slowdown had brought an end to a decade of progress on p overty
reduction, pushing an additional 900,000 people into poverty.

B.

Observations
24. The visit to Mali was a further manifestation of the Security Council ’s
engagement on the country and determination to help Mali to overcome the challenges
confronting it. Members of the Council had travelled to Mali against the backdrop of
uncertainties about the timely holding of elections. They reiterated their call upon the
Malian transitional authorities to achieve the political transition, the return to
constitutional order and the handover of power to democratically elected civilian
authorities within the agreed timeline set out in the transition charter and in accorda nce
with the commitments of the transitional authorities and the decisions of ECOWAS of
30 May 2021 and of 16 September 2021. While noting the work done by the
transitional authorities to foster dialogue and lay the foundations for reforms, the
members of the Council reiterated the importance of respecting the timeline for the
organization of free and fair elections, as requested by ECOWAS, set out in Council
resolution 2584 (2021) and agreed by the transitional authorities. The members of the
Council urged the transitional authorities to present a timetable to that end.
25. The Security Council was encouraged by the recent commitments made by the
transitional authorities on advancing the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and urged the Malian transitional authorities and the
signatory armed groups to make further progress to effectively fulfil the priority
measures referred to in paragraph 4 of Council resolution 2584 (2021) before the end
of the current MINUSMA mandate. Despite collective efforts, the security situation
has deteriorated, and the political crisis persists. The Security Council vis it shed
further light on the importance of promoting a shared vision among Malians and their
partners that would form the basis for promoting inclusive dialogue, completing the
transition, fully implementing the Agreement and restoring security. Meanwhile,
according to its mandate, MINUSMA will continue to reassess and recalibrate its
approach in order to adapt to the development of the situation and support the Malian
people’s aspirations for peace and stability.

6/10

22-00053

S/2021/1106

III. Niger
A.

Key issues
Security situation
26. All of the interlocutors who met in Niamey highlighted that improving the security
situation was among the top priorities in the Niger. At his meeting with the members of
the Security Council, the President of the Niger stressed that the country retained control
of its territory but remained the target of external threats originating mainly from
neighbouring countries. He expressed serious concerns over the deteriorating security
situation in Mali, which affected the prospects of stability for the whole region. The
President further stated that no Nigerien nationals led the armed groups operating in the
region, making any possibility of dialogue unwarranted. He reported that the Nigerien
army had re-established forward outposts in the Liptako-Gourma region and was
developing mechanisms to protect civilians and stabilize the area.
27. Recalling that the Nigerien army had tripled in size since 2011 at significant
cost to the State budget, the President stressed the need for additional support t o
secure more troops, weapons, equipment (especially air assets) and technology. In
addition to strengthening its army, the Niger was prioritizing good governance to
confront the menace of terrorism. Noting that the country was moving progressively
towards a post-conflict scenario, he called for increased United Nations support to
tackle the challenges of that new phase.
28. The Prime Minister reiterated the country’s commitment to regional security and
to its own territorial integrity. In highlighting the challenges faced by the Niger in
ensuring the requisite funding for its security, he highlighted that the fight against
terrorism should be an international effort and called for additional support to the
country, which was at the front line of that struggle. He noted that the strategies and
policies of the Niger were aligned with the framework for international action of the
Coalition for the Sahel and its four complementary pillars.
29. The Minister for Foreign Affairs remarked that the Liptako-Gourma and Lake
Chad basin regions were the main epicentres of insecurity. He stated that, in the Lake
Chad basin region, the armed groups had been degraded and safe conditions had been
re-established to the extent that the Government of the Niger was proceeding with the
voluntary return of displaced people. He stressed that the Multinational Joint Task
Force had played a key role in addressing the terrorist threat in the area. The Force
funding mechanism, whereby one country (Nigeria) supported the Force operations
financially, had proved successful. The Minister noted that, in the Liptako -Gourma
region, the Jama’at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin currently constituted the main
threat, since the killing of senior members of Islamic State in the Greater Sahara,
including Adnan Abu Walid al-Sahrawi, had significantly weakened the group.
30. Regarding the cost of security, the Minister for Foreign Affairs stated that defence
and security spending had increased from 5 per cent of the State budget in 2010 to
almost 20 per cent in 2020, amounting to more than 2 per cent of gross domestic
product. He requested the Security Council to find a mechanism to provide lasting and
predictable funding for counter-terrorism efforts. He added that, with only a fraction of
the funds allocated to MINUSMA, the Niger could achieve remarkable results.
31. With regard to the situation in Mali, the President said that the increasing
political and security crisis deeply affected neighbouring countries. He noted that,
unlike the transitional authorities of Mali, the Government of the Niger enjoyed
democratic legitimacy, and he stressed the need for Bamako to better combat
terrorism and foster joint counter-terrorism operations. Considering the defiant

22-00053

7/10

S/2021/1106

posture of the transitional authorities regarding regional and international partners,
he expressed concern over the potential consequences of the posture for the effective
and sustainable operationalization of the Joint Force of the G5 Sahel. The Minister
for Foreign Affairs was sceptical about the goodwill of the transitional authorities
with regard to respecting the deadline of 27 February 2022 set by ECOWAS for the
holding of elections. Noting that meaningful reforms would take years to complete,
he questioned the rationale for prioritizing the national dialogue on reform and
condemned the expulsion of the Special Representative in Mali. In that context, he
reiterated the alignment of the Niger with ECOWAS and its attachment to the agreed
commitments, adding that an ambitious programme of reforms should only be
undertaken by a democratically elected Government.
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
32. The visit to the joint command mechanism in the central sector provided an
opportunity for the Commander of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel,
Major General Oumar Bikimo, and his staff to brief the Security Council members on
the operational context and the significant challenges faced by the Force. Regarding
the operational context, General Bikimo’s staff remarked that the western sector was
characterized by the presence of the Al Qaeda-affiliated Jama’at Nusrat al-Islam walMuslimin, led by Iyad Ag Ghaly, which was structured in multiple emirates. The
emirate of Macina, led by Amadou Koufa, had extended its influence from central
Mali towards the north-west up to the border with Mauritania. Over the past two
months, the security situation in the western sector had been calm. However, the
presence of armed groups had been reported in the vicinity of the Wagadou forest.
Armed groups had been spotted stocking up on food in the markets in preparation for
the winter season, which reduced mobility and the availability of food in that hard to-reach area.
33. The eastern sector had experienced increasing episodes of banditry following
the fall of the Libyan leader, Muammar Gaddafi. Owing to its size, low population
density and the wealth of its subsoil, with multiple artisanal gold-panning sites, the
area near the borders with Chad, Libya and the Niger remained coveted by armed
groups for the trafficking of people, drugs and weapons. However, a lull had been
registered in the activities of armed groups in the sector over the past two months.
Meanwhile, in the north, the threat posed by mercenaries from Libya persisted.
34. The central sector remained the most active zone of the Force ’s area of
operations. Jama’at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin was still present in the area around
the Boulikessi and towards the Foulséré forest and had extended its operations to the
north-west of Burkina Faso, where it had engaged in raids against the Burkinabe
defence and security forces. Islamic State in the Greater Sahara was concentrated
along the banks of the Niger River near the villages of Ou arara, Salata, Ouatagouna
and Tessit, engaging in exactions against civilian populations.
35. According to the Commander, the main challenges for the Joint Force included:
(a) strengthening command, liaison and coordination across the Force;
(b) guaranteeing the protection of operations, troops and equipment; (c) establishing
aerial capabilities; (d) establishing the Force’s intelligence and surveillance
capability; (e) guaranteeing the Force’s logistical autonomy; (f) increasing support to
the population; and (g) developing psychological operations . Considering the
challenges at hand, he explained that his vision for the Force campaign plan was
articulated along four axes: (a) strengthened operationalization of the Force, in terms
of both means and procedures, to destroy or degrade the armed groups; (b) the
establishment of structured cooperation with partners; (c) increased protection and
reactivity of the Force units; and (d) the raising of awareness of the Force and the
promotion of better integration between the Force and the local population.
8/10

22-00053

S/2021/1106

36. The Commander emphasized the complexity of the war that the Joint Force was
fighting and underlined the importance of building close collaboration with the
population. He stated that the Force was strengthening its mechanism to ensure human
rights compliance and the integration of a judiciary component into the military
operations of the Force. He thanked the international partners for their support and
underlined the need for the Force to build its own capacity in terms of logistical and
aerial support, surveillance and intelligence gathering. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs advocated the creation of a dedicated office to support the Force, and the
Commander said that he would support the creation of the office if the Security
Council so decided, a position echoed by some members of the Council. Others
reiterated their reservations about the United Nations funding a counter-terrorism
force, and encouraged alternative multilateral or bilateral support options.
Development and humanitarian challenges
37. The President gave a briefing on the ongoing efforts of the Government aimed
at facilitating the voluntary return of displaced people to Diffa. He acknowledged that
episodes of violence against returnees had occurred and reported that the Government
was working to guarantee a safe environment. He further reported that the Niger
intended to complete, by the end of December, the safe return to Nigeria of the
refugees hosted in Diffa and that collaboration to that effect was ongoing with the
authorities of the Nigerian State of Borno.
38. The President pointed to education as one of his top priorities and the solution to
the country’s main problems, notably with regard to development, poverty and record
demographic growth. He explained that promoting the education of women and girls
would contribute to ending early marriage and early pregnancy. Moreover, focusing on
education and vocational training would provide young people with skills for jobs and
allow them to escape the clutches of violent extremism. Stressing the importance of
international support to education and training, he remarked that the Niger was still
affected by the fallout of the international structural adjustment programmes adopted
in the 1980s and 1990s. Those programmes had led to a drastic reduction in personnel
in the public education sector, which did not match the increasingly high demand for
education driven by the country’s extraordinary population growth.
39. At a lunch hosted by the Resident Coordinator ad interim, Diana Ofwona,
Ms. Ofwona read a message from the Special Representative of the Secretary -General
for West Africa and the Sahel and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS), Annadif Khatir Mahamat Saleh, in which he conveyed the
importance of close cooperation within subregional organizations to tackle the enormous
challenges of the Sahel. In the message, he remarked that more needed to be done to
protect civilians and noted that weak governance, which was a driver of instability and
social unrest, must be addressed by democratic governments. That was the key to
restoring public confidence. The United Nations, through its integrated strategy for the
Sahel, and partners were supporting national Governments in addressing those issues.
40. The Resident Coordinator a.i. and the United Nations country team
representatives briefed the Security Council on the work of the Uni ted Nations in a
complex non-mission setting characterized by multiple security, development and
humanitarian challenges. Ms. Ofwona praised the collaboration between the United
Nations and the Government of the Niger and reported that the country team was
finalizing the new United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework,
reflecting the contributions of the United Nations system in the Niger and shaping the
configuration of United Nations assets required inside and outside the country. She
also briefed the Council members on the stabilization facilities, led by the United
Nations Development Programme, that had been established to support the restoration
of State authority in the Lake Chad basin and Liptako-Gourma regions.
22-00053

9/10

S/2021/1106

41. Against a backdrop of constrained access due to insecurity and low funding
levels, United Nations country team members informed the Security Council
representatives about the challenges faced by the United Nations in responding to the
growing needs stemming from the confluence of acute shocks, such as droughts,
seasonal flooding, cholera outbreaks and food shortages. The members further noted
that only 30 per cent of the humanitarian response was funded and that two thirds of
the beneficiaries could not be assisted. The members expressed concern about the
situation of children and young people, especially girls, who faced restrictions on
access to education for security reasons, mainly in the regions of Tillabéri, Diffa and
Tahoua, and expressed the urgent need for action and greater support for education,
particularly in the context of increased insecurity.
42. The United Nations country team also stated that, since the majority of the
country’s population depended on agriculture and livestock, the fallout from climate
change, notably increasing land degradation and unpredictable weather patterns, was
particularly severe in the Niger. Moreover, the impact of climate change was leading
to migration and the displacement of people and having an impact on the rights to
food, health and livelihood. Against that backdrop, the level of resources for the Niger
still did not correspond to the magnitude of the challenges at hand, and the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals could be at risk during the decade
of action and delivery for sustainable development. Some Security Council members
noted the importance of close cooperation with all stakeholders and the application
of internationally recognized best practices to ensure the sustainability of measures
for the return of internally displaced persons and refugees.
43. The country team further noted the importance of promoting cross-border and
regional cooperation for stability and development, investing more in conflict
prevention and the promotion of justice and human rights, redoubling efforts towards
inclusive and equitable growth, addressing humanitarian needs and building
resilience to climate change, and promoting development programmes that met the
needs of the population and restored public services in the affected are as.

B.

Observations
44. The Security Council travelled to Niamey to gain a deeper understanding of the
security, development and humanitarian situation in the Niger and the Sahel region in
order to better identify current needs and define the ways in which the Council could
provide the requisite support. The Council members also wanted to express their
deepest condolences to the people and Government of the Niger for the victims of
terrorist attacks, extend sympathy to the bereaved families and reiterate that those
heinous acts would not undermine the determination of the Council to continue to
support peace and stability in the region.
45. In the course of the visit, the Security Council took note of the significant
progress that the Niger had achieved despite the enormous challenges that it continued
to face. Council members commended the Niger for its democratic accomplishments,
making the country a role model for the entire region and beyond. They also
congratulated the Niger on its remarkable contribution to the work of the Council as
a non-permanent member, as well as on its role in ECOWAS and the G5 Sahel.
46. Security Council members also welcomed the strong commitment of the
Government of the Niger to security and education, particularly of women and girls,
and reiterated their support for the efforts of all bilateral and multilateral partners
supporting the Niger in its quest for peace, security, development and stability.

10/10

22-00053
