A/58/444–S/2003/1022

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
17 October 2003
Original: English

General Assembly
Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 10
Report of the Secretary-General on the work of
the Organization

Security Council
Fifty-eighth year

Identical letters dated 10 October 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and the
President of the Security Council
The fifth high-level meeting between the United Nations and regional
organizations was convened at United Nations Headquarters in New York from 29 to
30 July 2003. The theme of the meeting was “New challenges to international peace
and security, including international terrorism”. Twenty-one delegations from
regional, subregional and other international organizations took part in that
important meeting.
The purpose of the meeting was to discuss the main challenges to international
peace and security facing the world today. The meeting examined potential threats to
international security, such as civil wars and complex emergencies, the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, international terrorism, gross violations of human
rights, genocide, organized crime and other threats such as environmental
degradation and the spread of diseases. The meeting also raised important questions
as to how cooperative efforts could be strengthened between the United Nations and
regional organizations to respond effectively to any new challenges, and it reviewed
the follow-up to the previous two meetings, on cooperation in the fields of conflict
prevention and peace-building.
I was very pleased with the results of the meeting, which showed renewed
commitment by all to increased cooperation between the participating organizations.
Among the many important points raised, I wish to note in particular the reaffirmed
support of the participants for multilateralism and international institutions in
general, the urgent need for the international community to provide effective
responses to current challenges to international peace and security and the concern
expressed by many that human rights should not be undermined in counter-terrorism
efforts.

03-56814 (E)

211003

*
0
3
5
6
8
1
4
*

A/58/444
S/2003/1022

I have the honour to transmit to you the conclusions of the meeting, which
reflect my understanding of the various proposals and comments as Chairman of the
meeting (annex I). I also attach my opening remarks (annex II) and a list of
participating organizations (annex III). I shall keep you informed of further progress
made by the United Nations and regional organizations in this field of increasing
importance.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2

A/58/444
S/2003/1022

Annex I
Fifth high-level meeting between the United Nations and
regional organizations
New challenges to international peace and security, including
international terrorism
United Nations Headquarters, New York, 29 and 30 July 2003

Conclusions of the Chairman
1.
The fifth high-level meeting of the United Nations and regional organizations
was held on 29 and 30 July 2003 at United Nations Headquarters in New York. The
participating organizations discussed the main challenges to international peace and
security facing the world today, including international terrorism, poverty, intra- and
inter-State conflicts, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, organized
crime and violations of human rights. Some participants noted that, while these
threats were often described as “new”, they were in fact of long standing, though
they were converging in novel ways and at an increasing speed. The participants felt
that, by working together, regional and international organizations could have a
major impact upon their broader constituencies.
2.
Participants reaffirmed support for multilateralism and international
institutions and for the international community to provide effective responses to
today’s challenges to international peace and security. There was a serious exchange
over the implications of the use of force, which participants reaffirmed should be
used in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, under the authority of the
Security Council. They noted the importance of more frequent high-level meetings
between the United Nations and regional organizations. Participants also encouraged
the exchange of information among regional and international organizations at the
operational, strategic and policy levels.
3.
Participants recognized that terrorism represents today a major challenge to
international peace and security. They underscored the central role that the United
Nations plays in coordinating international efforts against terrorism and in setting
the framework for international action. To be effective, efforts against terrorism
should be undertaken with a thorough understanding of the environment in which it
has emerged. Participants stressed the importance of sharing experiences and best
practices, as well as of providing assistance to fulfil international obligations in
compliance with Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). This process had been
initiated by the Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee, which had
reached out to regional organizations. Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations should build on, and not duplicate, ongoing cooperation
efforts.
4.
The participating organizations reiterated their commitment that human rights
should not be undermined in counter-terrorism efforts. They expressed the need to
uphold fundamental human rights and existing international obligations concerning
human rights as an integral part of the fight against terrorism, rather than make a
trade-off between human rights and security, because respect for human rights
constituted a basic element in ensuring security. While conventions stating the need

3

A/58/444
S/2003/1022

for the respect for human rights were essential instruments, there was a need to
ensure compliance with existing standards.
5.
At a time when remarkable progress had been achieved in the dialogue among
civilizations, participants voiced concern about discrimination against peoples or
cultures. While there was an unquestionable need to confront terrorist groups with
determination, it was equally imperative to strengthen cultural and religious
understanding and to promote the values of tolerance, respect and peaceful
coexistence. Multilateral organizations had a key role to play in seeking ways of
addressing this issue and in promoting cultural diversity and multilingualism.
6.
Participants expressed particular concern about ensuring the protection of
civilians, especially children, in situations of armed conflict, in particular by
developing cooperative mechanisms for monitoring and peer review of the
application and implementation of relevant international instruments.
7.
Participants considered that poverty and deprivation continued to constitute
equally important threats that could not be considered of lesser priority. Moreover,
success in countering these serious problems by means of a successful development
agenda could translate into progress in other areas. Peace-building activities should
be accorded the highest priority.
8.
Multilateral cooperation was key in the area of disarmament and nonproliferation. Participants recognized the importance of strengthening multilateral
treaty regimes in these areas and of achieving universality both in their membership
and in their full implementation. They agreed that regional organizations could
make a significant contribution towards achieving and promoting the
implementation and strengthening of key instruments in this field. Particular
concern was voiced regarding the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The
problem of the illicit trade in small arms was also noted.
9.
Cooperation in the prevention of armed conflict was also noted as a
fundamental element to counter challenges to international peace and security.
Current cooperation at the working level should be pursued with renewed vigour.
Further work
10. To address the issues of human rights in the fight against terrorism, as well as
the promotion of the dialogue among civilizations, the participants agreed on the
need for further consultations at the working level. The participants also agreed on a
framework for further cooperation in confronting challenges to international peace
and security, including international terrorism.

4

A/58/444
S/2003/1022

Annex II
Opening remarks of the Secretary-General to the fifth high-level
meeting between the United Nations and regional organizations
New York, 29 July 2003
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to New York for this fifth high-level
meeting between the United Nations and so many of the world’s leading regional
organizations.
At the opening of our last high-level meeting, in February 2001, I said that
most of the challenges we face are bigger than any single one of us. If that was true
then, it is even truer now.
Our age is abundant with promise. But we have been reminded, in stark and
terrible terms, that our increasing interdependence also brings great vulnerability. In
rich and poor States alike, many things happen over which people feel they have
little control.
Borders are no barrier to the flow of new ideas, goods and services, tourists,
economic migrants and communication. But neither do they easily stop the
movement of terrorists, warlords, small arms, smuggled people, refugees, narcotics,
infectious diseases and environmental hazards.
The vicious sting of terrorism has been felt by the world’s most powerful
country, by its biggest democracy, by its largest State, by its most populous Muslim
nation, and by the home of Islam’s holiest sites — indeed, by all of us. And we now
see that weapons of mass destruction threaten us not only by their very existence,
but also by the potential that they might fall into the hands of terrorists who are
difficult to deter and extreme in their methods and objectives.
Civil wars and the disintegration of States create conditions in which civilians
are brutalized and warlords, terrorists and traffickers are empowered.
Meanwhile, the question of when and on whose authority military force should
be used, be it to protect the innocent or to achieve other aims, arouses great
passions — not only in those States where force is deployed, but everywhere.
While many of these problems have long been with us in one form or another,
the range and diversity of the challenges presented by the current environment are
unprecedented. In discussing how we can work together to address these challenges,
I hope we can build on the progress made during our previous high-level meetings
in cooperating on conflict prevention and peace-building.
I also hope we can build on the discussions earlier this year, in which regional
organizations took active part, in the special meeting of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and in the high-level Security Council meeting on new threats to peace
and security.
As we discuss these new challenges, I have invited the International Criminal
Police Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Collective
Security Treaty Organization to join us, and I welcome them to this forum. They
have much to contribute to the consideration of the items on our agenda.

5

A/58/444
S/2003/1022

I do not want to prejudge what course our discussions might take or the
conclusions we might reach. But I believe we would do well to bear in mind a few
basic points.
First, we must remember that we are all in this together. Let us not add to our
burdens by descending into unproductive polarizing over our differences. The
interests and values we share are vastly more important than the disputes we have,
even on fundamental issues.
Second, as our world changes, our institutions must keep pace with those
changes. We need a candid evaluation of our existing mechanisms and ways of
working. And we must redouble our efforts aimed at innovation and reform.
Third, we must be proactive not only against common enemies and threats, but
also against the factors that allow them to thrive. Much of the work of the United
Nations seeks to remove the sense of political grievance and economic despair that
can yield recruits to the violent designs of terrorists. This work must have a central
place in any overall strategy to defeat terrorism and other causes of insecurity.
Fourth, we must be proactive in promoting the principles in which we believe
and which are enshrined in the Charter, including the protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Every time we advance the protection of human rights, we
deal a blow to the evil designs of terrorists, and we remove a sense of injustice that
can cause the oppressed to channel their frustration into illegitimate violence. If we
compromise on human rights in seeking to fight terrorism, we hand terrorists a
victory they cannot achieve on their own.
If we build on these fundamentals, I believe we can develop a new vision of
global security. A vision that respects human rights while confronting the threats of
our age — including the threat of terrorism. A vision that draws upon the resources
and legitimacy of a network of effective and mutually reinforcing multilateral
mechanisms — regional and global — that are flexible and responsive to our rapidly
changing and integrating world.
I look forward to a productive meeting and to hearing your views. And I hope
that when we conclude we have a common set of specific next steps.

6

A/58/444
S/2003/1022

Annex III
List of organizations participating in the fifth high-level meeting
between the United Nations and regional organizations
Regional organizations
African Union
Association of South-East Asian Nations
Caribbean Community
Collective Security Treaty Organization
Commonwealth Secretariat
Commonwealth of Independent States
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries
Council of Europe
Council of the European Union
European Commission
Economic Community of West African States
International Criminal Police Organization
International Organization of la Francophonie
League of Arab States
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Organization of American States
Organization of the Islamic Conference
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat
Presidency of the Council of the European Union
Shanghai Cooperation Organization
United Nations agencies, funds, offices, programmes and other international
organizations
International Atomic Energy Agency
International Monetary Fund
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations Development Programme

7

A/58/444
S/2003/1022

United Nations Environment Programme
United Nations Office at Geneva
United Nations Office at Vienna/Office on Drugs and Crime
The World Bank Group
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
United Nations organs and departments
President of the General Assembly
President of the Security Council and Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee
President of the Economic and Social Council
Department for Disarmament Affairs
Department of Economic and Social Affairs
Department of General Assembly and Conference Management
Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Department of Political Affairs
Office for the Coordination for Humanitarian Affairs
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict

8
