S/PV.7703

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7703rd meeting

Tuesday, 31 May 2016, 10.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-15248 (E)
*1615248*

S/PV.7703

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would first like to express our sincere
gratitude to you personally, Mr. President, and to your
team, for the capable leadership and full programme of
work you brought to the Security Council this month.
A considerable amount of time has been allotted
in May to African issues and to discussing ways of
arriving at collaborative solutions to the crises on that
continent. As we have said in the Security Council
more than once, for us one of the key principles in
that context is finding African solutions to African
problems. In that regard, we truly appreciate the efforts
of the Egyptian and Angolan delegations in convening,
on 23 May, the scheduled consultative meeting between
the Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, and we commend the importance and
timeliness of the holding of an informal segment of the
meeting for the first time. It enabled us to conduct a
frank and constructive analysis of the current condition
of and prospects for cooperation between the two
Councils, as well as between the United Nations and the
African Union in general, in the maintenance of peace
and security. We also discussed country-specific topics
of interest.
It was not an easy discussion, but we value the fact
that there was no attempt to conceal the existence of
various problems in the relationship between the two
Councils and that suggestions were made for concrete
ways to overcome them. In particular, we acknowledged
the importance of ensuring that our consultative
meetings are more effective, including improving the
effectiveness of our mechanisms for implementing
decisions. One especially interesting discussion was on
the possibility of organizing joint missions of the two
Councils in the field.
2/19

31/05/2016

The consultative meeting was organically
complemented by the holding the next day of an open
debate on the issue of cooperation on security between
the United Nations and the African Union (S/PV.7694),
in which about 50 delegations took part, and at which
we adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2016/8 on
the subject. In our view, such activities have become
a major milestone in our efforts to strengthen the
strategic partnership between the two organizations, as
well as between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council, on the basis of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and
a foundation of genuine mutual respect. This assumes
the Security Council’s primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
the complementarity between the work of the United
Nations and regional organizations, in which each can
capitalize on its relative advantages.
Your commitment to the quest for solutions for
Africa, Mr. President, was also apparent in full measure
in your organization of the Security Council’s mission
to Kenya and Somalia. We are grateful to Cairo for the
hospitality shown to the members of the Council in the
Egyptian capital and at the headquarters of the League
of Arab States. During that visit, the members of the
Council met with the high political representation
of Somalia, Kenya and Egypt, received first-hand
information on the situation in those countries and in the
region as a whole and exchanged views and assessments
of many issues on the international agenda. All of the
meetings took place in a businesslike and constructive
manner and were very well organized.
I would like to say a few words about the situation
in Somalia and the challenges that country is facing.
We welcome the adoption of the election model, which
is aimed at ensuring national reconciliation and uniting
the country. The Council members’ visit to Mogadishu
and the negotiations that took place there served to
encourage the Head of State to approve the election
model.
However, with regard to establishing a political
process in Somalia, we need to be cautious. We must
not be hasty in advancing dubious models that could
lead to a division of the country. In that context, we
should continue to strengthen the unity of Somalia and
help to establish an effective Government, army and
security force as well as economic reconstruction, in
addition to effective ways of combating terrorism.
16-15248

31/05/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

S/PV.7703

The visit also demonstrated that Somalia has some
promising prospects, but the terrorist problem remains
very serious. Thanks to a coordinated, successful
operation by African peacekeepers, Al-Shabaab has
been contained. However, the terrorists continue to
control a significant part of the territory and key
roads. Clearly, terrorist groups are receiving external
assistance from many sources — material, technical,
military and man-power. Foreign terrorist fighters are
flocking to the country. That support is being provided
at a faster rate than support is being provided to the
central authorities and the Somali army and police.

Mr. President, let me begin by saying that you started
off your presidency with a major event, imperative for
all of us: the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), on
the protection of medical personnel in armed conflict.
Attacks against hospitals have increased in recent
years in Syria, Yemen, South Sudan, Afghanistan and
elsewhere. We deem it very important that the Council
has sent a strong message, and we will have to provide
strict follow-up of the resolution in order to ensure that
such violations of international humanitarian law do
not go unpunished. France will remain mobilized in
that regard.

Today the only effective mechanism in addressing
the terrorism challenge to the country is the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), whose mandate
was unanimously extended by resolution 2289 (2016)
until 8 July. We should take account also of the fact that
African peacekeepers must deal with broader problems
than provided for in their mandates, and with a risk to
their own lives. In that connection, we need vigorously
to address the issues of AMISOM’s capacity. We call for
further enhancement by the international community
of its support to the Mission in military, financial and
logistical terms.

Turning now to the Middle East, I would like to
come back to the issue of Syria and to the peace process.
The adoption of resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016)
made it possible to see some progress in resolving the
Syrian crisis. After very positive dynamics in March,
early May saw a loss of ground. The Geneva talks
were suspended and violence resumed, hitting Aleppo
even harder than before the coming into force of the
cessation of hostilities.

The efforts by the international community to
resolve the problems in Somalia are a clear example of
practical cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union in ensuring peace and security. For
that reason, we consider the the Egyptian leadership
of the Security Council mission to the country and the
conceptual dialogue between the two organizations
to have been were very well organized and resultsoriented. We are confident that the Council’s work
should be built on such approaches.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank and warmly congratulate
Ambassador Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta and the entire
Egyptian team for all of their work this month. With
great professionalism, they led us through a month that
was very busy in every way, particularly with meetings
with regional organizations — with the African Union
(AU) all of last week and with the Arab League in Cairo,
which was a first, as well as with the European Union.
Mr. President, as you have invited us to do, I will
address only three of the topics on the agenda of the
Council this month. I would like also to say a few words
about the main deadlines that we can expect during the
month of June.

Humanitarian access was very minimal in its
progress owing to the siege imposed by the regime,
of which Daraya has become a symbol. Given this
series of negative developments, the Special Envoy,
supported by France and other delegations, called for
the holding of another ministerial-level meeting of the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG). The Vienna
communiqué adopted on 17 May made it possible to
reaffirm the commitment of ISSG members to creating
the conditions for a credible resumption of negotiations.
Most importantly, the communiqué unambiguously
reaffirmed the need for the next round of negotiations
to focus just on the transition and its modalities for
implementation, and this by 1 August.
To date, progress is still minimal, as confirmed
by the Special Envoy during the consultations held on
26 May. While the goal of a resumption of political
negotiations has been set, we should not be too
hasty regarding a fresh inter-Syrian round of talks if
conditions to ensure their credibility have not been
met. The next few days should focus on the effective
implementation of the 17 May communiqué, using, if
necessary, those tools that have been agreed to, that is,
a ministerial-level meeting of the ISSG and the Security
Council.
In the immediate term, the main issue is
humanitarian access. If impediments to humanitarian

16-152483/19

S/PV.7703

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

convoys to all areas under siege are not lifted before
June 1, we will have to begin humanitarian air drops.
After five meetings of the ISSG and two Security
Council resolutions, we should be seeing some real
progress in this regard.
Turning now to the peace process, to which we
drew the Council’s attention on 15 May, we hope that
the ministerial-level meeting that we will be holding
in Paris on 3 June will make it possible to give a new
political horizon for the two-State solution. France has
for several months seen the threat of generalized unrest
on the ground. That threat is increasing on a daily basis
owing to the daily injustices suffered by the Palestinians
and the increasing insecurity of the Israelis.
That French initiative was the subject of extensive
consultations, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs in
April and the Prime Minister last week both visited
Israel and the Palestinian territories. The Minister
also consulted with our partners in the region and the
Quartet in order to build a broad-based consensus. The
ministerial-level meeting to be held on З June in Paris
must be the starting point for political mobilization.
The President of the Republic, François Hollande, will
open the meeting, in which the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and the United States Secretary of
State have already confirmed their participation.
Our approach is collective and complementary to
the action undertaken by the Quartet, whose upcoming
report should provide important information for moving
forward. We thank the very large majority of Council
delegations as well as others that have supported and
continue to support our efforts.
I cannot mention the month of May in the Security
Council without revisiting some of the significant
events that made it possible for the Security Council
to interact with regional organizations, particularly
the African Union, throughout the past week. The
Council’s meetings with the AU Peace and Security
Council and the League of Arab States during its trip
to Cairo and with the European Union’s Political and
Security Committee have reaffirmed the importance of
cooperation with regional organizations and to promote
mutual understanding of the crises of the day.
On the occasion of the tenth anniversary of
consultations with the African Union, we must
remain resolutely engaged in bolstering this strategic
partnership. The effectiveness of United Nations
action, like that of the African Union, cannot but be
4/19

31/05/2016

improved through that. In that regard, we welcome the
Egyptian presidency’s initiative in organizing a Council
trip to Somalia, a case in which good cooperation
with the African Union is essential to promoting
peace and security in the region. That field mission
and consultations with the African Union will enable
us to better adjust the mandate of the African Union
Mission in Somalia, which we will renew in a few
weeks, in terms of both offensive actions and respect
for human rights.
In conclusion, let me say a few words about the main
priorities of our presidency, which begins tomorrow. It
will be an extremely busy month of activities for the
Council, which we can organize into three main pillars.
First, peacekeeping will serve as the veritable
backbone of the month of June. With the ministerial
debate on 10 June, led by Minister for Foreign Affairs
Jean-Marc Ayrault, we will together take the opportunity
to deepen, in the presence of the Secretary-General and
the President-elect of the Central African Republic, our
understanding of effective and modern peacekeeping
in protecting civilians. The exchange will enable us to
set the tone of a month will that will be particularly
active in the area of renewing peacekeeping mandates,
including those of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force in the Golan
Heights, and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, without mentioning the anticipated
results of the strategic review of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. That is to say, Africa will
be at the heart of our presidency.
Secondly, the month of June will also be marked
by many important deadlines with regard to the
Middle East, including Syria, of course, in all its
dimensions — political, chemical and humanitarian.
Libya will also be on the agenda, along with Yemen
and the peace process, which I have already mentioned.
In late June, the Security Council will also receive
the Secretary-General’s report on the implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006) on Lebanon. June will also
be very active with regard to elections in the United
Nations. Specifically, we will elect new members of the
Council on 28 June.
Lastly, a word on the process of the election
of the Secretary-General. The General Assembly
16-15248

31/05/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

will organize new informal dialogues between the
candidates and Member States on 7 June. As in April,
I am certain that they will elicit very strong interest on
the part of Member States. We commend and encourage
this welcome opening. It will be up to the Council to
move ahead with its own work within the framework of
its responsibilities. In that regard, I thank Ambassador
Aboulatta of Egypt for the constructive discussions
undertaken under his presidency. It is in that spirit that
we will work during our June presidency to ensure the
organization and all necessary arrangements for the
Council to proceed to the initial voting ballots at the
appropriate time.
Again, I thank and congratulate the Egyptian
presidency for the high quality of the work in May. You
have set the bar very high, Sir.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would very much
like to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, for
your remarkable presidency of the Council during the
month of May. I also wish to congratulate your team
on the very excellent performance of the Council and
for the results achieved in our common endeavour to
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
A tangible result of the Egyptian presidency
was the progress achieved in the Security Council
mission to Somalia and East Africa, which was able
to ensure — with the assurance of and delivery by
the Somali leadership — that elections will take place
according to the agreed model under the set deadline. It
is now expected that the international community will
assist the Somali authorities in ensuring that elections
take place in the best possible conditions, which will
represent a substantial contribution to the complex
political and security process the country has been
going through.
The Security Council’s mission to East Africa also
included important meetings in Kenya and Egypt. In
a meeting held in Nairobi with the President of Kenya
and Kenyan high officials, concerns were raised
on the future of African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and on the Somali refugees in Kenya.
The Kenyan authorities stressed the correlations
between the participation of Kenya in AMISOM and
Kenyan national security, and the crucial need for
greater United Nations support to AMISOM, a matter
concerning which the serious attention of the Council

S/PV.7703

is required. We thank you very much, Mr. President, for
putting emphasis on that during the mission to Somalia.
The presence of a considerable number of Somali
refugees in Kenya poses a huge security, economic
and environmental burden on Kenyan authorities. In
that connection, an appeal for the assumption of the
principle of shared responsibility was addressed to the
international community through the Council’s call
for support for countries enduring the massive influx
of Somali refugees, of course including in Kenya.
Those two issues, AMISOM and refugees, justify
the Council’s renewed attention in order to preserve
the gains so far achieved in Somalia and to avoid
undesirable developments in case a suitable solution is
not found to the refugee issue.
The tenth joint consultative meeting between the
United Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council (see S/PV.7694) was another
important achievement of the Egyptian presidency.
The meeting was an opportunity for both Councils to
reaffirm and to find ways to strengthen cooperation,
complementarities and commitments in addressing
threats to international peace and security in Africa.
At the formal meeting held at the Permanent Mission
of Egypt to the United Nations, the two Councils
assessed the existing partnership at the strategic and
operational levels and the need to improve the exchange
of information and analysis in all phases of conflict,
and discussed the financial, logistical and operational
challenges of peacekeeping missions in Africa.
The two Councils also discussed the impact
of the three reviews under way of United Nations
peace operations, the peacebuilding architecture,
and resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. In the formal meeting, the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
discussed the situation in Somalia and Burundi. A
candid exchange of views took place, with the two
Councils reiterating their support and contribution to
those countries on the path to lasting peace.
Since it was established in 2004, African Union
Peace and Security Council has deployed or authorized
almost 70,000 uniformed peacekeepers to missions
in Africa, including the Regional Task Force for the
Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army and the
Multinational Joint Task Force set up to fight Boko
Haram. Moreover, the African Union established

16-152485/19

S/PV.7703

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

AMISOM, the hybrid Mission with which we had
contact in Somalia.
Despite financial and logistical constraints,
the deployment of peacekeeping missions by the
African Union Peace and Security Council has been
instrumental in supporting the Security Council.
Cooperation between the two Councils is based on
practical analysis of the African Union’s comparative
advantages in terms of proximity to the political, social,
economic, religious, ethnic and other dimensions of
African conflicts. That framework could guide the
Security Council in establishing the basis for effective
cooperation with the League of the Arab States — a
wish strongly expressed by both parties in the meeting
held in Cairo on 21 May, when the Security Council
mission and the League of Arab States held their first
consultative meeting. It is our view that the League of
Arab States can make a meaningful and significant
contribution to the peacebuilding process in Somalia,
which is a member of the Arab League. Both secretariats
at the United Nations and the League of Arab States
could start discussions on how to operationalize such a
partnership, which, in our view, could yield important
results in the security, political, social and economic
processes under way in Somalia.
In conclusion, I once again reiterate our sincere
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for the very skilful
way you have conducted the Council during the month
of May. We look forward to the French presidency, of
which the Ambassador of France has just presented the
first outlines to the Council, and we look forward to
continue working together with him.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would like to
recognize the work done by you and your team in
advancing the agenda this month. We also welcome the
holding of this public wrap-up meeting, in line with
the provisions of presidential concept note S/2010/507.
Similarly, we appreciate the concept paper prepared by
your delegation for this meeting. We have extracted two
points on which we wish to dwell. The first refers to
terrorism and the second to regional cooperation.
Vulnerability to terrorism and violent extremism
is now global in nature. It is manifested, inter alia,
in the existence of more than 30,000 foreign terrorist
fighters, including young people and women, from at
least 100 countries around the globe. Today, no single
6/19

31/05/2016

region of the world can consider itself free of that
phenomenon, much less of the terrorist scourge. In that
regard, Venezuela has insisted that the joint role of the
Security Council and the international community will
be decisive in combating those threats, particularly
through the design, implementation and enhancement
of strategies that stop the growth of non-State actors.
My delegation underlines once again the importance
of prevention in that important and overarching combat;
the need to adopt initiatives to combat those groups
and extremist ideologies that have set themselves the
task of promoting violence and intolerance; to address
the root causes that fuel this scourge; and to develop
effective and innovative strategies to counter extremist
and terrorist narratives and generate critical thinking
in society.
For that reason, we welcome Egypt’s support in
addressing that issue through the holding of an open
ministerial debate on countering the narratives and
ideologies of terrorism (S/PV.7690) on 11 May. That
meeting allowed us to address the threat of terrorism
from a comprehensive and non-selective perspective,
including responses to the scourge based on international
cooperation and bearing in mind the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, we welcome the adoption of the
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6, which calls
on the Counter-Terrorism Committee to submit a
comprehensive international framework to include a
campaign to counter the narratives of terrorist groups,
and also to provide guidelines and good practices to
effectively counter, in compliance with international
law, the ways that ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities use their narratives to encourage, motivate, and
recruit others to commit terrorist acts. In that regard,
we call on States Members to actively participate in the
drafting of that report, particularly by presenting their
national contributions, taking into account the fact
that such a campaign should be adapted to the national
context of each country.
With regard to regional cooperation, Venezuela
considers it important to highlight the meetings held
with the League of Arab States, the African Union and
the European Union to address issues and challenges
of common concern. It is therefore of vital importance
to promote the role that regional and subregional
organizations can play in finding peaceful and political
16-15248

31/05/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

solutions to conflicts, preventing such conflicts and
designing coordinated strategies for maintaining and
building peace, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
In that respect, and taking into account the fact
that the agenda of the Security Council continues to
be heavily concentrated on issues that threaten peace
and security on the African continent, the strategic
and complementary partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union is even more relevant.
The debate on cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union that was held on 24 May
(S/PV.7694), highlighted once again the importance of
cooperation between those two institutions in finding
peaceful solutions to the conflicts affecting the African
continent. We need to ensure that the African Union has
the predictable and sustainable logistical and financial
resources necessary to allow it to deal successfully
with its designated tasks assigned in deploying the
peacekeeping operations under its mandate. In that
regard, we stress the contribution of the African Union
Mission in Somalia to peacebuilding in that country.
The Mission requires adequate financial resources in
order to operate effectively in the context of its mandate.
Furthermore, in reiterating the premise that African
problems require African solutions, Venezuela believes
that a more active participation of the African Union
in Security Council briefings would be appropriate to
address issues related to that region, given its recognized
legitimacy and political authority in Africa, particularly
when considering the renewal, review or restructuring
of the mandates of peacekeeping operations that are
deployed on the continent.
We insist on the need for further progress in
consolidating and enhancing the relationship between
both multilateral forums on the basis of mutual respect
and in terms of developing common and integrated
strategies to tackle the emerging challenges in Africa,
on the basis of the comparative advantages of the
two organizations, with a view to ensuring improved
coordination and synergy between them.
To conclude, we reiterate our thanks for the work
undertaken by Egypt and wish every success to the dele
of France for the coming month.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would
like to take the opportunity of this wrap-up session to
highlight several current pressing security concerns,
including the situation in Syria, the issue of health care

S/PV.7703

in armed conflict, and our ongoing efforts to increase
cooperation between the Council and the African Union
(AU) on security issues.
As we have for many months, the Council in May
has focused on the political, humanitarian and security
situations in Syria. As Special Envoy De Mistura has
stressed, there are three interlinked elements needed
for peace in Syria: stopping the fighting, improving
humanitarian access and engaging in political
negotiations to bring about a political transition. Yet
as we discussed earlier this month, the cessation of
hostilities has given way to violence, and the regime
has disregarded international agreements on reducing
the violence and providing humanitarian access, as
outlined in resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016),
effectively undermining the conditions needed for
political negotiations.
While all sides have contributed to the return to
violence, the military escalation and indiscriminate
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure, such as
hospitals, schools and markets, are largely attributable
to the actions of the Al-Assad regime, and, as attacks
continue, the regime has restricted humanitarian
access and blocked aid, including medical supplies to
people in desperate need. It has deliberately targeted
first responders, health-care workers and medical
facilities. Resolution 2254 (2015) calls for rapid,
safe and unhindered access throughout the country.
Resolution 2139 (2014) specifically forbids the removal
of medicines and medical supplies from aid convoys,
but, as the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs reports, that is routine throughout the country.
For our part, we will continue to urge all parties to
comply fully across the country and specifically call
for an end to the Al-Assad regime’s continued offensive
attacks in Aleppo, Latakia and elsewhere, as well as
its besieging of towns and obstruction of humanitarian
access. The United States has worked with Special
Envoy De Mistura and, in particular, with the Russian
Federation to reaffirm the cessation of hostilities across
the country, and specifically that the parties agree to
recommit to the truce in Aleppo and the Damascus
suburbs. Yet the violence has continued, as we can see.
Secretary Kerry has raised these concerns with Foreign
Minister Lavrov and urged him to press the regime
to cease at once air strikes against opposition forces
and innocent civilians. Still, as we saw yesterday,
there are reports that numerous civilians were killed
as buildings around the national hospital in Idlib

16-152487/19

S/PV.7703

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

were struck. Again, at the last meeting in Vienna, all
members of the International Syria Support Group
urged full compliance of the parties with the terms of
the cessation.
That leads me to several points that I would like
to make with regard to our recent meeting on health
care in armed conflict (S/PV.7685), which provided
an opportunity to further examine the human
consequences of attacks in Syria and elsewhere. The
increasing trend of violence against medical personnel,
facilities and transportation is clear in Syria. The
attacks are so frequent that, as Under-SecretaryGeneral Stephen O’Brien has told us, proximity to a
hospital is now perceived by neighbours to be a threat
to their own safety. As we noted in that meeting, over
725 doctors have been killed and over 350 attacks on
medical facilities have taken place, the vast majority
of which have been committed by the regime, although
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has also
directed multiple bombings of medical centres. We
strongly condemn ISIL’s current offensive in Aleppo,
which threatens thousands of civilians and has also
targeted medical facilities and staff.
Those issues are now covered in resolution 2286
(2016), in which the Council demands protection for
medical and humanitarian personnel, hospitals and other
medical facilities. The resolution also emphasizes the
responsibilities of States to comply with international
law, end impunity and ensure accountability for those
responsible, and urges States to conduct investigations
into such violations. We feel strongly about those
principles, wherever such violence occurs, be it in
Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan or elsewhere.
Turning to our meeting last week with the African
Union (S/PV.7694), we welcome such opportunities
to examine how best the two organizations can work
together to achieve our common goals. Given the large
percentage of United Nations troops deployed in Africa,
coupled with the fact that over half of those serving in
the continent are themselves African, we have much to
gain from enhanced communication between the two
bodies. We know that the AU can be a particularly
effective partner in responding to the security crises in
its own backyard, including those unfortunate cases in
which offensive military operations are required. The
Security Council and AU Peace and Security Council
have common priorities and agree on many issues,
but we also need to deal with the differences that can
emerge inside each of our respective Councils. We need
8/19

31/05/2016

to be better at responding quickly and cohesively to the
political drivers and roots of conflict.
Before I conclude, I would like to quickly mention
our work and the Secretary-General selection process,
as I know that many Member States are eager for news
of the Council’s plans. Under your leadership, Sir, we
held an any-other-business session last week in which
we began to discuss the next steps in fulfilling our
important responsibilities to select the next head of the
Organization. We look forward to further discussions
under France’s presidency in June to finalize the
procedures for our upcoming deliberations.
In conclusion, I thank you, Sir, for your steady and
professional leadership of the Council this month.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, permit me, Sir, to congratulate you on having
convened this wrap-up session in line with the note by
the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507) and
for having distributed a concept note with proposals
addressed to the members of the Security Council to
guide their statements. As I have said before, Uruguay
values these formal wrap-up sessions because they offer
the possibility of placing on the record the positions
of the 15 members on the month’s work, thereby
contributing to giving the Security Council’s action
greater transparency and accountability.
Notwithstanding, Uruguay also attaches particular
importance to interaction with the membership because
we believe that it is always relevant to hold such
wrap-up sessions in the Toledo format or any other
informal format. Having said that, I also believe that
the formal format is very appropriate this month, when
the Security Council has the duty to share with all
Members of the United Nations various topics of the
greatest importance.
I will attempt to not be repetitive in saying what
our Mission has already stated publicly in the Chamber.
I therefore want to begin by highlighting the positive
aspects of what we have this month.
First, for the second consecutive month, we have
seen the lifting of a sanctions regime — the past month
in the Côte d’Ivoire and this month in Liberia. That
aspect of the Council’s work must not be undermined,
because the imposition of sanctions is one of the tools
available to the Security Council, but its use must be
limited to the time until the situation that called for
its use has reverted to normal. In that regard, I was
16-15248

31/05/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

pleased to witness this process from the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572
(2004) concerning Côte d’Ivoire, which was dissolved
on 28 April. I also take this opportunity to congratulate
my colleague from Ukraine, who chaired the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003)
concerning Liberia, and who said in his statement in
the meeting (S/PV.7695) at which we adopted resolution
2288 (2016), which dissolved the Committee, that it has
now been inscribed in the annals of history.
Another positive aspect was the adoption of
resolution 2286 (2016) on 3 May. That was a positive
response to an extremely negative reality, which
concerns us greatly, especially when we observe that
there is a systematic pattern of attacks and destruction
of medical facilities, their staff and means of transport;
attacks on health-care workers and patients; and a
systematic disruption of the supply of medications
and the convoys that are sent to provide those
medical supplies. Those violations of international
humanitarian law are nothing but war crimes, and
the Security Council should therefore address the
issue in a resolution. I understand that not just the
outcome — resolution 2286 (2016) — was a positive,
but the process was also positive because it involved
five non-permanent members as penholderswho worked
to address a particularly relevant and urgent issue.
Allow me to briefly address a couple of issues that,
from the point of view of working methods, could be
improved. On 23 May, Security Council members met
with African Union members informally in the morning
and formally in the afternoon in order to address the
programme of work agreed on between the parties.
The issues to be addressed were African issues. In that
regard, my delegation understands that the Security
Council is acting appropriately by attaching priority
to the issues that the African Union wants to include
on the agenda. That should be the approach to working
with a partner who wishes to transfer to the Security
Council issues that are priorities for its organization
and region. My delegation supported the request of the
African Union to include the topic of Western Sahara
on the agenda, but unfortunately that was not possible
owing to the obstruction by some members of the
Security Council who refuse to consider the issue.
With regard to the selection process of the SecretaryGeneral, my delegation recognizes the leadership Egypt
has provided during its presidency on this matter, in
particular by holding the coordinators’ meeting on

S/PV.7703

18 May and on other issues that were considered by
members of the Security Council on 26 May. While
there are some differences among members of the
Security Council about different aspects of the process,
I understand that it is very important to begin as
quickly as possible holding Security Council meetings
with candidates who are interested in the position to see
if the consensus achieved during our consultations last
week holds up.
Finally, I want to underscore Uruguay’s concern
about the two terrorist attacks perpetrated in May
against the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), which
led to the death of Blue Helmets. MINUSMA is the
peacekeeping operation that has had the most casualties
from direct attacks. We have repeatedly called it the most
dangerous of all the deployed missions. Unfortunately,
the Security Council is accustomed to expressing itself
about terrorist attacks through press communiqués, but
in this case it was a terrorist attack against a United
Nations peacekeeping mission.
During its mission to Mali in March, the Security
Council was able to see the precarious conditions under
which this peacekeeping Mission carries out its work.
For the reasons already mentioned and for having been
the direct target of terrorist attacks in May, I propose
that we not run out the deadlines that we proposed
for June, but rather that we speed up the timetable to
adopt a new resolution on MINUSMA’s mandate, in
particular everything that enables it to increase its
defence capability in order to prevent more loss of lives
among our peacekeepers.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to congratulate Ambassador
Aboulatta and his entire team for their remarkable and
effective work in managing the issues of the Security
Council during this month, which has had a very heavy
workload. I also thank him for issuing the concept
note, which allows us to focus on the issues of this
wrap-up meeting.
These formal wrap-up sessions are very useful. We
support them and believe that it is a good idea to hold
them as part of our ongoing support for transparency in
this Council. We also support the holding of informal
and interactive meetings of the Security Council with
non-member States because that also allows us to enrich
ourselves with their comments on our own work.

16-152489/19

S/PV.7703

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

I will concentrate on one of the areas of the
Council’s work in the month of May that the presidency
has specifically highlighted, that of resolution 2286
(2016) on medical assistance in armed conflicts. I
will also make a brief reference to the briefing on the
challenges to security in the Sahel (see S/PV.7699),
which my delegation organized together with the
Egyptian presidency just a few days ago.
With regard to 2286 (2016) resolution, which was
adopted by consensus and sponsored by 86 States
Members of the Organization, indeed deserves to be
highlighted. It is the first Security Council resolution
to deal exclusively with medical assistance in armed
conflicts, and its adoption shows that the Security
Council is responding to a very painful reality. In the
year and a half since Spain joined the Council, there has
not been a single month during which there has not been
one attack against doctors or hospitals and a country
in conflict. Resolution 2286 (2016) not only condemns
attacks against doctors and hospitals in armed conflict
and calls for compliance with international law in the
area, it also urges States to investigate such violations of
international humanitarian law and to bring the guilty
to justice. It also deals with issues such as preventing
attacks, the importance of training and the need to
gather objective and reliable information on the attacks
against doctors and hospitals in countries in conflict.
The resolution also calls upon the Secretary-General
to request and make recommendations to prevent these
events and to inform the Security Council at least once
a year on the implementation of this resolution. The
adoption of the resolution sends a message of support
from the Security Council to doctors and health-care
workers who work in situations of armed conflict
and day after day are fulfilling their missions under
extremely difficult conditions.
With regard to the new methods of work of the
Security Council, this resolution has established a new
precedent in the way that initiatives are proposed and
texts are negotiated. For the first time, the initiative of
the leadership and the coordination of the process was
assumed by five members. They are all elected members
belonging to the five regional groups. Therefore, it was
not only an innovative process, but also a model process
in terms of consensus, transparency and the inclusive
nature of it. It was an example of the success of the
Security Council’s initiatives and efforts when it works
in a constructive way and as a team.
10/19

31/05/2016

Climate change is not an abstract problem or one for
the future; it is scourge that is determining the living
conditions of millions of people throughout the world
today. It is pushing specific countries and people, for
example, Somalia, into a situation of environmental,
economic and social stress, and it has a direct impact
on international peace and security. It is a horizontal
and structural challenge that we must confront with all
of our resources.
In light of the aforementioned, I turn to the briefing
on the security challenges in the Sahel that took place
last Thursday (S/PV.7699). That meeting was a clear
example of the way in which the Council should address
threats to peace and security concerning situations on
its agenda through an integrated, holistic approach,
including, for example, in cases such as the Sahel,
desertification as a key element in understanding
the reality of the situation in the Sahel. The Security
Council must therefore be appropriately informed of all
challenges to peace and security in all corners of the
world. That is the only way in which, together, we can
improve our most fundamental function — prevention.
I conclude by reiterating, Mr. President, my
appreciation for your focused and effective presidency
of the Council and to wish every success to the French
presidency in the upcoming month.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on a very successful
presidency during the month of May.
First, let me touch upon the Security Council mission
to the Horn of Africa. At such an important juncture in
Somalia’s Statebuilding, the mission was both timely
and beneficial. I thank the Egyptian presidency for
taking the initiative to organize that visit. With regard
to the political process, the most pressing issue is the
electoral process. During the meeting in Mogadishu,
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud promised to hold
elections in August in order to build a united Somalia.
In keeping with his word, he issued a presidential
decree regarding the elections on 22 May. It was a
very encouraging development and demonstrated the
difference the Council can make on the ground when it
visits the countries on its agenda.
The Council should continue to do all that it can
in supporting the Somali-led transition process. In
Somalia, after more than 20 years of the absence of a
central Government, it may be difficult for the people
to really recognize the legitimacy of the Government.
16-15248

31/05/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Choosing their leaders through elections does not
necessarily mean accepting the State’s authority. The
Government should provide security and administrative
and social services to the people as peace dividends in
order to gain their trust. In following the formula of
Abraham Lincoln, the Somalis have built a Government
of the people and by the people, but it remains a big
challenge to turn it into a Government for the people.
Above all, we need to urgently establish a strong
security sector. If State authority is not extended
sufficiently to the areas liberated from Al-Shabaab,
power vacuums will be created and terrorists will take
advantage of them. Strong administrative institutions
also need to be firmly in place. The Federal Government
in Mogadishu will then have authority with substance.
Only a Government with strong institutions will allow
the Council to consider a possible exit strategy for the
African Union Mission in Somalia in the long run.
Japan will highlight the importance of institution­
building in the open debate on peacebuilding in Africa
during its Council presidency in July.
On 3 May, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2286 (2016) on health care in armed conflict,
with 85 sponsors. It was our great honour to co-author
the resolution, together with Spain, New Zealand,
Egypt and Uruguay. A few days after the adoption, the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) sent
an open letter to all United Nations Member States. In the
letter, the ICRC welcomed the adoption of the resolution
and urged Member States to reaffirm the importance of
compliance with international humanitarian law and to
take action in accordance with resolution 2286 (2016).
We are glad to hear of the positive reaction on the part
of the ICRC. The situations on the ground in Syria and
other countries, including Yemen, Afghanistan, Libya
and Mali, are still grim. We must remain vigilant and
urge all parties to conflict to abide by the resolution.
In closing, I would like to commend you,
Mr. President, and the entire Egyptian team for your
splendid, very well organized and skilful work.
(spoke in French)
I take this opportunity to wish every success to
Ambassador François Delattre during his presidency
next month. He can rely on my team and particularly on
me in ensuring the best outcome of the Council’s work.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me begin,
Mr. President, with warm congratulations and thanks

S/PV.7703

to you and to your whole team for a very successful
presidency. Once again, it has been a busy month. I am
therefore glad that you have made time for this wrap-up
session so that we may capture the lessons learned from
the past few weeks and share them transparently in this
open meeting. I very much agree with our colleagues
from Uruguay and Spain who said that it would be
even more effective if the session were to be interactive
and informal.
In keeping with the useful concept note that the
President circulated, I will focus on three points today:
the Council’s visit to Somalia; the situation in Syria;
and our work on appointing the next Secretary-General.
I believe that all three are examples of the need for us
to take an action-oriented approach so that we can exert
pressure and make a real difference in the world and
foster progress in a way that goes beyond our usual
business of adopting resolutions and products. Let me
take each briefly in turn.
Our visit to Somalia formed part of a good month
for cooperation with regional bodies, joining the visits
from both the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the European Union Peace and Security
Committee to New York. Those are important loadbearing relationships that we must continue to invest in
and to strengthen for the future. But the visit to Somalia
also demonstrated something else. It reaffirmed that
Security Council trips to countries on our agenda can
have a positive, tangible influence. It reaffirmed that
we speak with a powerful voice when we are united
and when we urge progress in the name of peace and
security. As our Japanese colleague just said, we saw
that when the Somali President approved the electoral
model to be used in this year’s crucial elections
shortly after our departure. In doing so, he overcame
an important hurdle to the democratic, representative
future that he people of Somalia so urgently deserve.
I therefore encourage future presidencies to mirror the
example set by the Egyptian presidency and arrange
more visits to countries on our agenda.
If Somalia shows how we have got it right this
month, sadly, Syria typifies the opposite. Following
the powerful debate on health care workers in armed
conflict (S/PV.7685), it was right that the Council met
to discuss the deteriorating situation in Aleppo. In
doing so, we helped contribute to the public pressure
that eventually brought about a recommitment to the
cessation of hostilities. But even that simple act was

16-1524811/19

S/PV.7703

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

far too difficult to achieve. Even as Aleppo burned, the
Council took too long to agree to hold a simple meeting.
Actions outside the Chamber — such as removing
medicine from convoys, stopping urgent medical
evacuations from besieged areas, or denying basic aid
to those most in need — speak louder than the words
within it. Those are the actions of the Syrian regime,
and they are deafening in comparison to the words
of the Security Council. So our response must not be
limited to calling another meeting. It cannot be even
more words. That is why we fully support the call from
the International Syria Support Group for air drops to
besieged areas, should access not be granted by land
by tomorrow. That deadline is looming fast. Should the
regime continue to prevent aid from reaching those who
need it, we will all have to work to turn the Support
Group’s pledge into action.
My final point is about our work on the appointment
of the next Secretary-General. I would like to pay
tribute to you, Mr. President, for beginning informal
discussions on how the Council will conduct that vital
selection process. The General Assembly hearings
have set a high bar for us to follow. There are huge
expectations, both inside and outside this building. I
therefore look forward to a Council process that builds
on the Assembly’s excellent work on the hearings last
month and next month, too, no doubt. In doing so, I
believe we will build on the steps taken this month
towards fostering a more open and responsive Security
Council. This has not been about votes, negotiations
or discussions, but about showing that we are in the
business of getting things done. I look forward to our
efforts continuing, both under the French presidency
and others to come.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the entire Egyptian delegation
for providing an environment conducive to effective and
efficient work by the Council in the month of May. Your
team’s highly professional efforts have been a hallmark
of the Egyptian presidency and deserve high praise.
At the outset, the Ukrainian delegation would
like to welcome the return of the formal wrap-up
meeting at the end of the month. In our opinion, it is
an important instrument in the Council’s toolkit for
ensuring transparency in its work, something that is
appreciated both by the United Nations membership
and civil society. May was not an easy month, full
of difficult discussions, important negotiations and
12/19

31/05/2016

events requiring the Council’s urgent attention. It was a
month of some historic decisions, one of them being the
lifting of sanctions on Liberia and the termination of
the related Security Council Committee, a case where
I felt very pleased to be losing my job as its Chair. It
was a month when from the very first day Council
members demonstrated the ability to reach agreements
and find solutions to issues on which very different and
sometimes opposing views exist. That is not to say that
we found a magic formula for resolving differences, but
to point out that if and when the political will is present,
the Council is very likely to deliver a result.
Exactly four weeks ago, the Council adopted
resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection of medical and
humanitarian personnel in armed conflicts. The fact
that 85 States Members of the United Nations sponsored
the resolution emphasized very vividly that the subject
requires urgent attention on the part of the international
community. That is nowhere more apparent than in
Syria, where medical facilities and health-care workers
have been repeatedly and systematically targeted. Over
the past month, the Syrian issue has consistently been
on the Council’s agenda. In our view, that consistency
is a sure sign that things in that country are not moving
in the right direction. The international community is
anxious to hear and welcome news that humanitarian
assistance has been delivered to one or another Syrian
town or village, and it appears that for the moment
that is the best we can hope for. What a sorry state of
affairs — especially when we are reminded that we
are talking about a conflict that according to various
counts may have already taken the lives of as many
500,000 people.
At February’s wrap-up session (S/PV.7633), my
delegation spoke of a glimmer of hope that seemed to
have appeared for the Syrian people. Three months
later, we can say that the glimmer has been all but
extinguished; last night’s bombings of Idlib are
gruesome proof of that. This is not the occasion to point
fingers about it, but what I would like to single out is
the issue of accountability. Accountability is the point
of reference in resolution 2286 (2016), and it would be a
challenge to find anyone generally opposed to bringing
those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law to account. While we are fully aware
of the political sensitivities surrounding the whole
Syrian political negotiation process, we are nonetheless
convinced that if for the time being accountability is
not about to be achieved through proper legal processes,
16-15248

31/05/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

transparency is the very least we can provide. In that
regard, a very controversial picture emerged last Friday
from the briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria
(S/PV.7701). The Council would do well to modify its
approach to its consideration of the ongoing conflict
in Syria.
I would be remiss if I failed to commend the
Egyptian presidency for spearheading open debates on
the topics of countering the narratives and ideologies
of terrorism (S/PV.7690) and cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union (see S/PV.7694),
and for leading the Council’s visit to Somalia. All in
all, Ukraine welcomes the strong regional, Chapter
VIII-focused edge of the Egyptian presidency. Besides
the meeting with the African Union Peace and
Security Council, that also relates to the first ever joint
consultative meeting with the League of Arab States.
As a country with European integration at the heart
of its foreign and internal policy, Ukraine also greatly
appreciated the useful informal exchange between
the Council and the Political and Security Committee
of the European Union (EU). In that regard, we also
look forward to next month’s EU briefing. Since all of
those important topics have already been eloquently
addressed by other speakers, I will not dwell on them,
or on my visit last week to the Central African Republic
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic, about which I am planning to report to the
Council later.
In keeping with your suggestion to focus statements
on key subjects, Mr. President, I would like touch on the
issue of the appointment of the next Secretary-General.
There have been several discussions on the issue this
month among Council members at various levels. We
believe that those deliberations have been very useful
but perhaps somewhat slow when it comes to deciding
on the Council’s next steps. Given the importance of
the matter, the large number of candidates and the
ever-present time pressure, the Ukrainian delegation
would like to underline that we are strongly in favour
of holding the Council’s meetings with candidates in a
timely fashion — provided that the candidates express
an interest in that — and of organizing initial strawpoll rounds without any delays. We are of the opinion
that for the Council to postpone taking action can only
result in its unnecessary imposition on itself of time
constraints that it would be better to avoid.

S/PV.7703

In closing, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your team on the successful
completion of your presidency, and to assure the
incoming French presidency of our full support.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to express its appreciation to the Egyptian
presidency for guiding the Council smoothly and
effectively through the month of May. We congratulate
you, Ambassador Aboulatta, and your team. And we
wish the incoming French presidency all the best for
the month of June.
African issues have been a focus of this month’s
work. A Security Council mission visited Somalia,
Kenya and Egypt, in a reflection of the Council’s
strong commitment to finding a political solution to
the question of Somalia and promoting peace and
stability on the African continent. China appreciates
the holding, on Egypt’s initiative, of an open debate
(see S/PV.7694) on the question of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
the area of peace and security, and the adoption of an
accompanying presidential statement (S/PRST/2016/8).
The meeting evaluated the successful experiences of
the past decade of cooperation between the two parties,
consolidated international consensus on the issue and
further enhanced support to the cause of peace and
security in Africa. China welcomes the road map for
the African Peace and Security Architecture from 2016
to 2020, and hopes that the United Nations and the
African Union will strengthen their cooperation in the
area of peace and security.
We support the African approach of African
solutions to African problems, as well as the African
Union’s efforts to resolve differences through peaceful
means such as dialogue, negotiation, good offices and
mediation.
The international community should provide
greater support for capacity-building of the African
Union and its collective security mechanism and
help Africa to achieve durable peace, prosperity and
development as early as possible.
Terrorism is a common security threat faced by
humankind. Counter-terrorism has consistently been a
focus of the Council’s work. China welcomes the fact that
this month, at the initiative of Egypt, the Council held
an open debate on counter-terrorism (see S/PV.7690)
that highlighted the importance of the international
community’s coordination and cooperation in fighting

16-1524813/19

S/PV.7703

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

terrorism, creating international synergies. The
international community should form a united front on
counter-terrorism, and full play must be given to the
central coordinating role of the United Nations and
the Security Council. In the fight against terrorism,
we should abide by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and adhere to standard
criteria. This fight must not be linked to a specific
ethnicity or religion.
The focus should be on halting the trans-border
movement of terrorists and cutting off their financial
resources and their supplies of weapons. Attention must
also be given to effectively fighting terrorist activities
conducted via the Internet and social media.
On the question of the Middle East, at present the
conflict between Palestine and Israel continues, as the
peace negotiations remain deadlocked. China is deeply
concerned about the situation. As a fundamental issue
having direct bearing on peace in the Middle East,
the question of Palestine must not be overlooked and
certainly not forgotten. To preserve the legitimate
national rights of the Palestinian people is the joint
responsibility of the international community. More
robust efforts are required to push forward the
peace process, on the political front, and to promote
reconstruction, on the economic front. The key to
breaking the current impasse is to jumpstart the
peace process.
China welcomes the international community’s
efforts in terms of good offices and welcomes the new
approaches proposed in that regard. The international
support group will hold a meeting of foreign ministers
on 3 June in Paris. China hopes that this will inject
fresh vitality into our efforts to find a solution. China’s
Foreign Minister, Wang Yi, will head the Chinese
delegation to the meeting and work with the rest of the
international community to facilitate the peace process
in the Middle East and help find a solution to the
question of Palestine and Israel at an early date.

31/05/2016

the President, regional leaders and other stakeholders
in this critical period as arrangements for the elections
were being finalized. We welcome the decree issued
three days after the visit by the President setting
out the electoral process, and we urge all Somalis to
work within those parameters in re-establishing a
representative Government in Somalia.
We see Council missions such as these as a very
valuable tool to advance peace and security objectives.
They can also assist the Council in meeting its conflictprevention responsibilities.
That is why New Zealand has been a strong
supporter of such visits during our term, including to
Guinea-Bissau, where Council engagement alongside
regional and international stakeholders remains
critical, and to Burundi, which we would have liked
to have seen the Council visit earlier, when, we feel,
quiet diplomacy could have had more of a chance of
shaping developments.
Visiting missions take time and money, including
from United Nations mission budgets, so we should use
them judiciously. We should be flexible about timing
and configuration. In some cases, we do not see the
need for all 15 Council members to travel, necessarily,
in order to convey the views of this body, especially
in conflict-prevention situations. We think that the
Council’s visit to Timor-Leste in 2012 was a good
example of a mini-mission. It was led by South Africa;
six members, all elected, took part in that visit.
We face major conflict-prevention challenges in
the year ahead, including in the Great Lakes, and we
should be flexible about how we use the Council’s tools
to address those issues.

Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your Mission for your efficient and
professional leadership of the Council in May. We
thank you also for the concept note that you provided
for this session.

We were very pleased that the Council hosted the
African Union for the annual joint consultative meeting
last week. The meetings were symbolic, coming at the
10-year anniversary, and continuing to deepen the
exchanges between the two Councils is an even more
critical issue for us. We thought that the discussion in
Addis earlier this year on the way back from Bujumbura
was a very helpful informal exchange that enhanced the
Councils’ mutual understanding. It was highly topical,
and delegations were ready to engage on the core issues.

We were very pleased to participate in the mission to
Kenya, Somalia and Egypt. In Somalia in particular, as
other speakers have noted, we saw immediate, positive
impact from the Council’s face-to-face engagement with

As discussed last week, we think that more regular
discussions, including teleconferences between the
presidencies of the two Councils, would be one useful
and low-cost way to maintain those linkages and, more

14/19

16-15248

31/05/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

importantly, to support a shared analysis of conflicts
and how we can both best address them. There are other
ways in which we can work better together, including
through joint visits, and we would be happy to discuss
those ideas further.
The month began on a very encouraging note, with
the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), as others have
noted. The resolution condemned attacks on healthcare workers and health-care facilities. It recalled key
international humanitarian law and the principles of
distinction and precaution, and the prohibition against
indiscriminate attacks. And, importantly, it requested
the Secretary-General to brief the Council annually on
the implementation of the resolution.
We would like to reflect briefly on some of the
working methods behind the adoption of the resolution,
to which Spain referred to as well. New Zealand was
very pleased to play a significant role, working together
with our partners in the Council, in developing the
resolution, which was supported by all 15 members and
sponsored by 85 Member States.
Key stakeholders, including the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Médecins Sans
Frontières, were closely engaged, as were stakeholders
not on the Council. We see the development of
this resolution, over many months, as a strong
model for inclusive and considered discussion and
decision-making. New Zealand would like to see this
approach taken more often by the Council to improve
its outcomes.
Finally, in the area of working methods, I would
like to comment on the discussions under way on the
appointment process for the chairs of subsidiary organs.
These issues are of great interest to us, because they
are important for the way the Council works and have
implications for the wider United Nations membership
and for all States that will serve as elected members
on the Council. It is elected members that serve as
chairs of the Council’s subsidiary organs, including
the sanctions committees. The appointment process
of these chairing roles is notoriously opaque, and we
believe that this should change.
The Security Council elections will be held next
month, and the earlier timing provides us with more
time to reflect on which members are best suited to
chair which subsidiary bodies. And, most importantly,
this allows more time to consult with the new members.

S/PV.7703

Accordingly, New Zealand is a strong advocate of
all Council members being involved in this process,
not just the permanent members, and we propose that
successive Presidents of the Security Council are best
placed to facilitate the chair allocation process after the
incoming members have been elected.
Overall, New Zealand wants to see more inclusive
decision-making, less micromanagement and less
control in the hands of few, and better efforts to prepare
new chairs for their roles. Given the importance of
these issues, and working methods discussions more
generally, we would see value in holding regular
briefings for interested Member States on the work of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, as I think was mentioned
in the presidential statement adopted after the open
debate late last year.
In closing, let me say that we all benefit from
greater transparency and greater engagement with the
United Nations membership as a whole.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to begin by
commending you and your team, Mr. President, for
the excellent organization and conduct of the Council’s
work this month. Based on that alone, I must say
that the Egyptian presidency has been a resounding
success. I wish also to thank you for having organized
this formal note 507 briefing. This particular format
affords the Council an important opportunity for its
members, particularly the elected members, to place
on record their views on and assessment of the work
and workings of the Council, which other formats do
not. We continue to believe that Council members
should reach an understanding on striking a balance
between interactivity, which the informal briefing,
or Toledo format, allows, and the need for a formal
record, which the present format affords. In line with
the concept paper, I intend to focus on a few of the five
issues suggested.
I wish first to reflect on the Council’s recent work
on Syria, specifically on the humanitarian front. We
wish to underscore that the Syrian Government has a
full obligation to secure the safety, security and welfare
of its citizens. The Government must also provide and
facilitate humanitarian access to besieged and hard-toreach areas, particularly to the areas under its control.
As such, we, alongside other Council members, remain
appalled that, despite our collective best efforts,
humanitarian access, especially to besieged and hard-

16-1524815/19

S/PV.7703

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

to-reach areas, remains pitifully limited. Bureaucratic
delays, facilitation failures or the wilful obstruction
of eight convoys by the Syrian Government and other
parties of the conflict are all deplorable and completely
unacceptable. It is frustrating, as every passing day can
mean life or death to the people in besieged areas. They
cannot be forsaken. While the 17 May communiqué
of the International Syria Support Group (ISSG)
provides for the activation of air bridges and drops by
tomorrow should the situation with regard to access
does not improve, we must underscore that it should
not substitute for land access. In that regard, we call on
all ISSG members, particularly those with influence on
the Syrian parties, to continue pushing for land access.
It is fitting that the tenth anniversary of informal
consultations between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council (PSC) was
commemorated with an open debate (see S/PV.7694)
on 24 May that focused on the way forward for United
Nations-African Union (AU) relations and the future
of the African Peace and Security Architecture. The
recent reviews of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, peace operations and resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, have provided
impetus for a renewed and reinvigorated relationship
between the Security Council and the PSC. Malaysia
reaffirms its support for S/PRST/2016/8, which we
believe frames and paves the way for future engagement
between the Security Council and the AU PSC.
In line with our common interests to have more
substantive discussions that could lead to more concrete
outcomes, Malaysia believes that both the Council
and the AU PSC can further improve their working
methods when convening informal consultations.
Specifically, we believe that certain proposals floated
during the May consultations, including on the
agenda of the joint consultations, with emphasis on
an assessment of the implementation of the Security
Council-AU PSC communiqué would be useful for
continuity and coordination purposes. In addition,
following the example of the way in which informal
consultations between the Council and the European
Union Commission are undertaken, we are of the view
that the practice by which each side proposes a certain
number of topics it wishes to discuss would avoid
unproductive procedural wrangling and afford more
time for substantive exchanges.
Turning to more working methods-related issues,
my delegation wishes to reiterate its appreciation to
16/19

31/05/2016

Ambassador Motohide Yoshikawa, who will be leaving
very soon, and to the delegation of Japan for their sterling
work in leading the Council’s Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
We fully support the Informal Working Group’s
proposed work plan for 2016 and are pleased with the
progress of consultations on the first item of the work
plan — on transitional arrangements for newly elected
or incoming Council members. Given that, in a few
weeks’ time, the General Assembly is scheduled to
elect five non-permanent members of the Council for
the term 2017-2018, the proposal to involve the new
members in the Council’s work as early as possible is
welcome. At the same time, we believe that the process
of identifying new Chairs of subsidiary bodies should
also begin early. In that regard, we support the proposal
for incoming members to be fully consulted and for the
Security Council presidency to take a much larger role
in that process. Ideally, the presidency should lead in
a way that could introduce greater transparency and
inclusiveness in the Council’s work.
In conclusion, I again congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your excellent team on a job well
done. The Egyptian presidency was conducted very
efficiently and professionally, which we greatly
appreciate. To Ambassador Delattre and the delegation
of France, I wish to reaffirm the full cooperation and
support of my delegation during his presidency and
to wish them all the very best. We are confident that
France will successfully guide the Council through
what looks to be a very hectic June.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the entire delegation of Senegal, I would
like to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, and
your team for the professionalism and efficiency with
which you steered the work of the Security Council in
the month of May.
The Egyptian presidency was certainly busy and
productive, and at times highly paced, both in terms of
the strategic discussions and the practical actions taken
by the Security Council. There were times for reflection,
with thematic debates on how to deconstruct terrorist
ideology and rhetoric (see S/PV.7690), on cooperation
in the areas of peace and security with the African
Union (see S/PV.7694) and on the security challenges
in the Sahel region (see S/PV.7699). There was also
moments of action in the Council. At the initiative
of Egypt, the Council travelled to East Africa — to
Nairobi, Mogadishu and Cairo. It also reviewed several
16-15248

31/05/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

S/PV.7703

mandates and adopted five resolutions, four or which
concerned African issues.

consultations format, either to hold it over two days or
to convene two sessions per year.

I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your concept note on issues to orient our exchange
today, namely, on Syria, Somalia, the counter-terrorism
fight, cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union and protecting medical staff in armed
conflict. The elements to the press that you issued
on Friday, on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, and our
adoption this morning of resolution 2290 (2016) attest
to the crucial importance that your presidency has
attached to African issues.

Another issue that we should consider is that of
medical personnel in situations of armed conflict,
concerning which the Security Council adopted
resolution 2286 (2016). I recall, inter alia, General
Assembly resolution 69/132, concerning global health
and foreign policy, which my country had the honour
to submit to the Assembly in December 2015. The
resolution urges all parties to conflict to take the
measures necessary to prevent and suppress attacks
on medical personnel and health infrastructure. It
also requests States to be ensure accountability for the
perpetrators of such acts, because no one should shoot
at an ambulance.

The tenth annual session of consultations between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council stood out among this organ’s
highpoints in the month of May. They were the first
such consultations held since the issuance of the report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peacekeeping Operations, the Secretary-General’s own
report (S/2015/682) on the implementation of the Panel’s
recommendations and the report on peacebuilding
(see S/2015/490). This year’s session made it possible
to renew the commitment of the two organizations to
pursuse their engagement — a development that gives
rise to much hope.
In addition, in considering the situations in
Somalia and Burundi, the Council and the PSC
held discussions about the need to adapt strategies
and methods to the changing situation. Its informal
consultations and dialogue made it possible to reflect
on redefining priorities and preventing conflicts
through cooperation between the two bodies. A key
outcome of those consultations was the importance of
orienting their cooperation — and thus their annual
consultations — towards a more pragmatic approach
based on the actions to be undertaken by them in
relation to specific challenges.
It is important to identify priorities, with concrete
deadlines and achievable objectives, that both
organizations can meet, including with regard to
strategic cooperation. As appropriate, that should make
it possible for us to align regional cooperation and the
triangular dialogue among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries so as
to provide more coherence and effectiveness to the
Council’s work. Given the high number and complexity
of the issues on the the agendas of both organizations,
the question arises as to whether we should review the

At the same time, my delegation understands the
problem of providing medical care in armed conflict
beyond ensuring the protection and delivery of medical
humanitarian assistance. Regarding the harmful impact
of the recent Ebola epidemic on peacebuilding processes
in the affected countries, it is urgent that we be able
to keep the peace in the wake of emerging challenges
undermining the Council’s actions in seeking lasting
peace. We dare hope that the report of the SecretaryGeneral that has been requested in the resolution will
offer an opportunity to launch an in-depth reflection on
the issue of health care in armed conflict.
We commend the role of the Security Council in the
process of electing the new Secretary-General, which
the Egyptian delegation has sought to clarify. We are
certain that the presidencies to come will effectively
and efficiently organize straw polls and interactive
dialogues with all candidates who desire to so engage.
To conclude, I reiterate the congratulations of the
Senegalese delegation to you, Sir, on your leadership
this month, and assure Ambassador François Delattre
of France and his team of our support. We wish them
every success as they prepare to assume the presidency
of the Security Council for June, which will be
extremely busy.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as the representative of Egypt.
At the outset, I should like to thank everyone for
the kind words addressed to the Egyptian presidency
during the month of May, and I express our deep
gratitude to all members of the Security Council for the
support provided to Egypt throughout this month.

16-1524817/19

S/PV.7703

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

May was a busy month, during which the Council
addressed extremely important issues that have a
direct impact on international peace and security.
The main purpose of this wrap-up session is to draw
lessons from dealing with issues that have an impact
on international peace and security. We must build
on the lessons learned from our working methods
during this month and evaluate the effectiveness of
the Council’s activities in terms of transparency, scope
and objectivity. In that regard, the Egyptian presidency
distributed an informal concept paper in which we
proposed focusing on a limited number of issues
during this meeting and addressing them in both their
procedural and substantive aspects. The aim of this
exercise was to affirm the important relation between
those two aspects in increasing the effectiveness of the
Council’s work. Accordingly, I will now focus on the
following topics.
First, the unanimous adoption of resolution 2286
(2015), with its focus on health care in armed conflict,
is an indicator of the important and constructive role
that the elected members of the Council can play.
That initiative, which was launched by five elected
members of the Council — Japan, Spain, New Zealand,
Uruguay and Egypt — addressed the increased attacks
against health-care facilities and health-care workers
in conflict. The broad support for the resolution, with
the sponsorship of 85 Member States, reflects the
ability of the Council to reach new heights in facing
emerging challenges that threaten international peace
and security. It also indicates the Council’s ability
to mobilize support for relevant resolutions that
enjoy legitimacy and acceptance in the international
community. Accordingly, that improves the credibility
of the Council and points to its seriousness in addressing
and dealing with the perpetrators of such attacks.
I would also like to draw attention to the unique
way in which we shaped that initiative. It was the first
time that five members of the Council collectively
developed a draft resolution in a measured way, with
openness, transparency and inclusivity in dealing with
all members of the Council, all interested parties and
actors that are not Council members, all with the aim of
enriching the content and in reaching unanimity. That
is different from the usual practice, whereby a single
member presents a draft resolution without enough
time to hold consultations on it.
Secondly, the open ministerial debate (see
S/PV.7690) on the theme of countering the narratives
18/19

31/05/2016

and ideologies of terrorism reiterated the importance of
expanding our approach to combating terrorism. It is no
longer enough or effective for international efforts to
focus on security aspects alone, for this is a phenomenon
that has gained ground in all societies, regardless
of their level of development. The participation of
representatives from the Al Azhar Islamic Research
Academy and the Microsoft Corporation reflected
the importance of the Council’s openness to the
perspectives of the real actors and players in the area
of countering the narratives of terrorists. In addition,
the participation of more than 70 speakers in the open
debate reflected the extreme importance and concern
that the international community attaches to the topic.
The
summary
in
presidential
statement
S/PRST/2016/6, which was the outcome of the open
debate, requests the Counter-Terrorism Committee to
submit a proposal to the Security Council by 30 April
2017 for a comprehensive international framework
to counter the narratives by extremists. That fact
constitutes an affirmation of the Council’s seriousness
and of its political will to build on the broad interest
in the topic in a practical manner. That is a challenge
to Member States to work in a unified manner and to
show their commitment in fulfilling that task. In that
regard, we call upon the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which Egypt is honoured to chair, to begin immediately
implementing the task mandated to it and to consult
closely with States, organizations and the relevant
parties to allow the Security Council to consider the
framework in all its aspects after the Committee has
finalized it. That will enhance the credibility of the
Security Council and its resolutions and illustrate the
international consensus on the issue.
Thirdly, many briefings and consultations were
held this month on the situation in Syri. The most
important one was the briefing held on 4 May (see
S/PV.7687), which was unique because it did not include
the adoption of a draft resolution on the situation in
Syria, as had been previously agreed. Interventions by
Member States, which included the participation of the
Syrian delegation, revealed points of both convergence
and divergence with regard to violations of the ceasefire
by Syrian and regional parties. While that does not
represent the ideal manner for the Council to act, it
nevertheless serves to highlight the clarity and realism
with which the crisis and its magnitude are described.
Despite that — or perhaps as a result of it — the
Council was able to issue two press statements in which
16-15248

31/05/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

it reaffirmed its rejection and condemnation of the
targeting civilians and civilian structures and its call
for a cessation of all hostilities against humanitarian
and medical personnel. We also reaffirmed our
condemnation of terrorism.
The main principles that bring us together — in line
with international law, international humanitarian law
and our resolutions, without selectivity — are sufficient
to enable us to agree upon the main principles for
resolving the situation in Syria and ending the suffering
of the Syrian people. In that regard, I would like once
again to reiterate Egypt’s support for the International
Syria Support Group and to encourage the Group to
lead the crucial, necessary coordination between the
United States and the Russian Federation under their
joint leadership.
Fourthly, the time chosen for the Council’s visit
to Somalia, Kenya and Egypt in May reflected the
importance of timing of the Council’s field visits. The
visit coincided with the tension related to the stalemate
in the Somali Parliament in adopting the electoral
model for 2016, thereby allowing the Council to send
a powerful message to all Somali parties about the
importance of building on the achievements made
since 2012 and the fact that the Council will not tolerate
anything that hinders the political process. Days
following our visit to Mogadishu, the Somali President
exercised his executive powers to adopt the electoral
model, paving the way for taking the necessary
measures to complete the election process in time.
In that context, and coinciding with the political and
security developments in Somalia and the humanitarian
crisis in the Horn of Africa, the Council’s visit and its
meeting with the President of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta,
provided a good opportunity to hear the perspectives of
an important actor in the Horn of Africa and to listen
to his views on the challenges facing regional efforts
to securing peace and security in Somalia and the
possible means for strengthening cooperation between
the Security Council and the important regional players
in confronting the crises in those areas.
Based on the Council’s interest in soliciting the
views of regional actors, the Council concluded its visit
with a meeting with the Permanent Representatives to
the League of Arab States in Cairo. That was the first
such meeting with the Arab League, in which we held

S/PV.7703

a frank dialogue about the challenges in the region,
including terrorism. We also discussed the means to
support the process in Somalia and the peace process
in the Middle East, which encompassed the Arab
League’s perspective on the French initiative and the
existing consensus on a number of principles that allow
for the return to direct negotiations between the Israeli
and Palestinian sides.
Fifthly, the joint meetings between the members
of the Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union were an opportunity for
a strategic review of the state of our partnership on the
tenth anniversary of the first such consultations. The
in-depth discussions during the meetings reflected the
common desire to develop joint cooperation towards a
deeper and more effective partnership, the advantages
of informal meetings between the two sides and the
possibility of holding them regularly, when the situation
allows, to permit regular dialogue between the two sides
and form a common understanding of the challenges in
the continent. The meetings also raised important issues
about how to best use the annual consultations as a way
to coordinate efforts and positions between the two
sides and draw lessons to be applied within the broader
sphere of promoting the role of regional organizations.
Finally, as this is the last meeting under the Egyptian
presidency in the month of May, I would like to express
my appreciation for the outstanding efforts on the part
of my colleagues in the Egyptian delegation to making
our presidency a success. I would also like to express
my thanks to all delegations for the support provided to
the Egyptian delegation during its presidency. I cannot
forget to thank in particular the Council’s secretariat
and the entire team of interpreters for their excellent,
professional work, which was a direct reason for our
smooth operations during the month of May. I wish
every success to His Excellency Ambassador François
Delattre and his delegation during France’s presidency
in June. We assure them of our support in successfully
carrying out their tasks.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

16-1524819/19
