s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/25426
17 March 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council, at its 3184th meeting, held on 17 March 1993, in connection with the
Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina":
"The Security Council has been informed by the Secretary-General in
a letter of 12 March 1993 of the violation on 11 March 1993 by military
jets, proceeding from the airport of Banja Luka, of Security Council
resolution 781 (1992), relating to the prohibition of military flights in
the airspace of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, notwithstanding
the fact that the Bosnian Serbs at the airport had received appropriate
notification by United Nations observers that such flights would
constitute a violation of the said resolution.
"The Security Council equally takes note of the report by the
Secretary-General in his letter of 16 March 1993 indicating that on
13 March 1993 new violations of the no-fly zone took place by planes that
proceeded to bomb the villages of Gladovici and Osatica in the Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina before leaving in the direction of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). The above flights are
the first violations of Security Council resolution 781 (1992) observed
by UNPROFOR which involved combat activity.
"The Security Council strongly condemns all violations of its
relevant resolutions and underlines the fact that since the beginning of
the monitoring operations in early November 1992, the United Nations has
reported 465 violations of the no-fly zone over the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
"The Security Council demands that these violations cease forthwith
and reiterates its strong determination to ensure full respect of its
resolutions.
It particularly underlines its condemnation of all
violations, especially those reported by the Secretary-General in his
letters referred to above, at a time when the peace process has reached a

93-15522

3763c (E)

170393

170393

I. • .

S/25426
English
Page 2

critical juncture and when humanitarian relief efforts require full
cooperation by all parties.
"The Security Council demands from the Bosnian Serbs an immediate
explanation of the aforementioned violations and particularly of the
aerial bombardment of the villages of Gladovici and Osatica.
"It requests the Secretary-General to ensure that an investigation
is made of the reported possible use of the territory of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to launch air attacks
against the territory of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"The Security Council has mandated its President to convey to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) and to the leader of the Bosnian Serbs its
deepest concern about the above-mentioned developments, and its demand
that they take immediate action to prevent any repetitions of these
attacks.
"The Security Council will continue to consider what additional
steps may be required to secure implementation of the provisions of
relevant Security Council resolutions."
