s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/24742
30 October 1992
. ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL.
Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council, at its 3131st meeting, held on 30 October 1992, in connection with
the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation in Tajikistan'':
"The Security Council has considered the communications·received
from the Government of Tajikistan.
"The Security Council exp~esses its very grave concern about the
continuing deterioration in the situation in Tajikistan, which is causing
considerable loss of human life and serio.us material damage. It notes
with concern the consequences for peace and security in the region that
this crisis might entail.
"The Security Council calls on all parties to the conflict to end
the fighting. It ·urges the Government of Tajikistan,. local authorities,
party leaders and other groups concerned to enter.into a political
dialogue with a view to reaching an overall settlement of the conflict by
peaceful means. It calls on parties in neighbouring countries to refrain
from any action which might contribute to increasing tension and to
impeding a settlement.
"The Security Council welcomes the efforts made by the member
countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States, on the initiative of
the Republic of Kyrgyzstan, and those undertaken by other States to help
Tajikistan to resolve the crisis.· It invites the Government of
Tajikistan and all other parties to the confli·ct to cooperate actively
with all these efforts.
"The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General's decision to
send a goodwill mission, including a humanitarian assistance mission, to
Tajikistan and Central Asia, in response to the requests of the
Governments of the region, within the next few days as a contribution by
the United Nations to resolving the conflict.
92-66542

3501c (E)

301092

301092

I•• •

S/24742

English
Page 2
"The Security Council calls on all parties to the conflict and the
neighbouring countries to facilitate the work of the Secretary-General's
mission and to ensure the safety of its perci,innel."
