UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/972
14 September 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 6 SEPTEMBER 1999 FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE
SECURITY COUNCIL ADDRESSED TO THE SECRETARY-GENERAL

Further to my letter of 5 September 1999 (S/1999/946), I have the honour to
inform you that the members of the Security Council have agreed on the terms of
reference of the Security Council mission (see annex).
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission is as follows:
Namibia (Ambassador Martin Andjaba - Head of mission)
Malaysia (Ambassador Hasmy Agam)
Netherlands (Minister Alphons Hamer - Presidency of the Security Council)
Slovenia (Ambassador Danilo Türk)
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
(Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock)
In view of the urgency of the situation, it is the intention of the mission
to depart for Indonesia in the evening of 6 September 1999. To that end, I
would be most grateful if the Secretariat could make the necessary arrangements.

(Signed) Peter van WALSUM
President of the Security Council

99-26355 (E)

140999

/...

S/1999/972
English
Page 2

Annex
Terms of reference for the Security Council mission’s
presentation to the Government of Indonesia

1.
The Security Council commends the sustained efforts of the Government of
Indonesia through the good offices of the Secretary-General to find a just,
comprehensive and internationally acceptable solution to the question of East
Timor. It expresses its appreciation to the Government of Indonesia for its
cooperation with the United Nations in this process.
2.
The Security Council is nevertheless seriously concerned about the
deteriorating security situation in East Timor, particularly since the popular
consultation. The Council welcomes the undertakings given by the Government of
Indonesia that it will fulfil its obligations under the Agreements of
5 May 1999. But the Government’s efforts so far have not been able to prevent
an intensification of violence in the territory.
3.
The Security Council is particularly concerned at the campaign of violence
against the United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) in recent days. This
has meant the closure of all but four of UNAMET’s regional offices; the
Mission’s headquarters is now under a virtual state of siege. The Council
deplores the murders of UNAMET local staff members and the attack on
4 September 1999 which left an international staff member seriously wounded.
4.
Reflecting the will of the international community, the Security Council is
determined to see the Agreements of 5 May 1999 implemented fully. The people of
East Timor have made a clear choice in favour of independence; their will must
be respected.
5.
For its part, the United Nations is bring forward planning for phase III of
the transition process. This will be done in consultation with the Government
of Indonesia.
6.
The International community is looking forward to working with the
Government of Indonesia in bringing East Timor to independence. The Security
Council urges the Government of Indonesia to ensure security and allow UNAMET to
implement its mandate without hindrance.
*

*

*

The mission will explore with the Government of Indonesia whether the
Government would find it helpful if the mission were to make the same
presentation to representatives of other political parties. The mission will
take any opportunity to show its full support for UNAMET and its staff.

-----
