United Nations

S/PV.5753

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5753rd meeting
Friday, 5 October 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Christian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. Gayama
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Spatafora
Mr. Arias
Mr. Voto-Bernales
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Burian
Mr. Sangqu
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Khalilzad

Agenda
The situation in Myanmar
Letter dated 3 October 2007 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2007/590)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-52995 (E)

*0752995*

S/PV.5753

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

attention. My Special Adviser, Mr. Ibrahim Gambari,
just returned from a short mission yesterday and will
brief the Council shortly. I asked Mr. Gambari to
convey to the senior leadership in Myanmar very clear
messages from me, on which Mr. Gambari will
elaborate in his briefing.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Myanmar
Letter dated 3 October 2007 from the
Permanent Representative of the United States
of America to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council
(S/2007/590)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Myanmar and Singapore, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At
the
invitation
of
the
President,
Mr. Swe (Myanmar) and Mr. Menon (Singapore)
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ibrahim Gambari,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in response to a request contained in a letter
dated 3 October 2007 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, under the symbol S/2007/590.
I welcome the Secretary-General,
Ki-moon, and invite him to take the floor.

Mr.

Ban

The Secretary-General: We meet at a time when
events in Myanmar are attracting unprecedented world

2

I am deeply concerned about the recent events in
Myanmar and the reports of continued human rights
violations. I must reiterate that the use of force against
peaceful demonstrators is abhorrent and unacceptable.
While I am relieved to hear of reports that some
military forces have been withdrawn and some
restrictions eased, the overall situation remains of
serious concern, especially with regard to the unknown
predicament of the large number of individuals who
were arrested without due process. I hope that those
detained will be released without further delay.
Now more than ever before, the Government of
Myanmar should take bold actions towards
democratization and respect for human rights. The
national reconciliation process must be accelerated and
made as broad-based, inclusive and transparent as
possible. A serious and comprehensive political
dialogue between the Government and the political
opposition is indispensable. One important outcome of
my Special Adviser’s mission is the announcement by
the Government of a possible meeting between Senior
General Than Shwe and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. I
welcome that announcement and urge both parties to
meet as soon as possible. It is too early to measure the
impact of Mr. Gambari’s visit or to label it a success or
a failure. It appears, however, that a window of
opportunity has opened, and it is vital that the
Government of Myanmar respond positively.
Advancing the cause of democratization and the
development of a peaceful and prosperous Myanmar
will require the sustained engagement of the United
Nations, with the active support of the international
community, including especially the countries in the
region. A united Security Council could play an
important role in support of the ongoing efforts of the
United Nations.
In that regard, I want to thank the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations and its members for their
support for my initiative, as well as for their own
interest and engagement in this issue. I trust that they
will remain seized of the situation in Myanmar and
actively engaged in finding a solution.

07-52995

S/PV.5753

The President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral.
Mr. Gambari: Thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
outcome of my recent mission to Myanmar from
29 September to 2 October. Members of the Council
are fully aware of the circumstances in which the
Secretary-General decided to dispatch me to Myanmar,
and I am grateful for the clear and strong support
expressed by the Council for my mission.
On behalf of the Secretary-General, I would like
to thank the Myanmar Government for having received
me and for the cooperation extended to my delegation
during our visit. Within the context of the good offices
mandate entrusted to the Secretary-General by the
General Assembly, my mission had three main
objectives: first, to assess the situation on the ground in
the wake of recent demonstrations; secondly, to deliver
clear messages from the Secretary-General to the
Myanmar authorities at the highest level; and thirdly,
to try to promote dialogue between the Government
and the opposition as the best path to ending the
present crisis and achieving national reconciliation.
Before addressing each of those objectives,
however, I would like to express my gratitude to the
Myanmar authorities for their flexibility in developing
the programme of my visit as it evolved. As was the
case during each of my previous visits to Myanmar, I
was able to meet with both the Chairman of the State
Peace and Development Council, Senior General Than
Shwe, and with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. I also met
with Acting Prime Minister Lieutenant General Thein
Sein and other members of Government. Although,
despite repeated requests, I was not able to meet with
other relevant interlocutors — including the National
League for Democracy (NLD) and representatives of
the monks and 88 Generation Students — I did receive
messages from many groups and individuals that have
also informed my findings, including, of course, the
close help I got from the United Nations country team.
The conditions in which my mission was
undertaken and its duration were such that any
assessment of the situation on the ground is necessarily
limited. In my last two briefings, I updated members of
the Council on the backdrop to the growing
demonstrations since 19 August. The authorities
initially exercised restraint in dealing with the

07-52995

protests — which was very much appreciated — but in
the week preceding the mission tensions escalated
through violent repression by the authorities against
peaceful demonstrators. By the Government’s own
account, up to a dozen people — including a Japanese
journalist — were killed, several dozens wounded, and
over 2,000 arrested. Unconfirmed reports, however, put
the number of casualties higher.
By the time my mission started, the protests on
the streets of Yangon had been largely put down, and
by the time the mission ended, the streets were busier
and activity seemed to be returning to normal, although
the situation remains tense. Of great concern to the
United Nations and the international community are
the continuing and disturbing reports of abuses being
committed by security and non-uniformed elements,
particularly at night during curfew, including raids on
private homes, beatings, arbitrary arrests and
disappearances. There are also continuing reports of
mass relocation outside Yangon of monks arrested in
the course of the demonstrations and monasteries that
remain blockaded. The High Commissioner for Human
Rights, who is with us at this meeting, and the Human
Rights Council have issued strong appeals for
independent verification of those reports and
accountability for any human rights violations.
During the mission, the United Nations Resident
Coordinator in Yangon reported that at least two
national United Nations staff members were arrested
and detained. I brought that fact immediately to the
attention of the authorities at the highest level, and the
two staff members were subsequently released. A third
national United Nations staff member and a dependent
were also reported missing later, and both have also
since been released. The United Nations Office in
Yangon has received requests from people asking for a
safe place to hide.
In my discussions with senior Governments
officials, I was told that the demonstrations were
instigated by a small minority of elements opposed to
the Government and supported from outside; that the
demonstrations were limited to Yangon and Mandalay,
while the rest of the country had remained calm; that
the authorities had indeed shown the utmost restraint in
handling the situation; and that most of those arrested
could be expected to be released shortly, after
investigation and interrogation. My delegation was also
taken to a mass rally in Lashio, in north-eastern Shan
State, which was organized in support of the

3

S/PV.5753

Government’s National Convention and seven-step
political road map.
It is clear, however, that the demonstrations over
the past few weeks have been, for the most part, an
expression of deep and widespread discontent about
socio-economic conditions in the country. General
vulnerability in Myanmar is defined by accelerating
impoverishment and the growing inability of the social
service structures to address the basic needs of the
general population. As an illustration, a United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) assessment of
household living conditions for the period 2004-2005
noted that one third of Myanmar’s people lived below
the poverty line and that 90 per cent of the people were
spending less than $300 per year. At the time of the
study, UNDP predicted that a 10 per cent rise in prices
could push another one third of the country below the
poverty line. Since then, the price of fuel has been
increased twice, and significant levels of inflation have
driven prices up considerably for basic food items and
commodities. The overall poverty level is also
indicated by the share of the household budget taken
by food consumption, which on average is as high as
69 per cent.
Although the protests coincided with the
Government’s sudden decision on 19 August to sharply
increase the price of fuel, the marches by monks across
the country appear to have provided a catalyst for the
demonstrations to become explicitly political in nature.
That must be understood within the context of
Myanmar’s complex history since independence. What
is clear is that since 1988 the democratic aspirations of
the people of Myanmar have been denied by the
Government in the name of stability and security.
Although the Government succeeded after 14 years in
completing the National Convention on 3 September,
and although it assured me that the seven-step road
map is broadly supported by the population, the
exclusion of key stakeholders, such as the NLD, and
the failure to meet the expectations of key participants,
such as ethnic ceasefire groups, tends to undermine the
credibility and legitimacy of the process. In that
context, the Government must open up and broaden the
process that is to define Myanmar’s future, and
therefore meet the demands for greater inclusiveness,
participation and transparency, in order to accelerate
the transition to democracy and to civilian rule.
With regard to the second objective of my
mission, I am pleased that, amidst the ongoing crisis, I

4

was able to deliver clear and strong messages on behalf
of the Secretary-General directly to the authorities at
the highest level. My first message was to emphasize
the changing domestic, regional and international
context within which my mission was taking place,
with the clear and strong support of Myanmar’s
neighbours, including China and Japan, countries of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
Security Council. As I have said before, the world is
not what it was 20 years ago, and no country can afford
to act in isolation from the standards by which all
members of the international community are held
accountable. It is therefore essential for Myanmar’s
leadership to recognize that what happens inside
Myanmar can have serious international repercussions.
My second message was to express the deep
concern of the Secretary-General and the international
community about the most recent events and to make
specific recommendations for immediate steps to
de-escalate tensions. Those recommendations include:
putting an end to night raids and arrests during curfew;
lifting the curfew as soon as possible; releasing all
those arrested during the demonstrations; allowing
access to clinics for those wounded during
demonstrations; withdrawing military forces from the
streets; ensuring respect for human rights and the rule
of law in the exercise of law enforcement, in
accordance with international standards; allowing the
International Committee of the Red Cross to have
access to persons detained and to assist in tracing
missing people; and putting an immediate end to raids
on monasteries.
Thirdly, I emphasized the need to address without
delay the political and socio-economic factors
underlying the demonstrations through specific midand long-term measures, predicated on dialogue among
all stakeholders. Any decrease in tensions can be
sustained only if it is accompanied by positive steps to
address the root causes of unrest. Specific
recommendations have been put to the Government in
that regard. The Council is already aware of the
following key areas in which I have been encouraging
the Government to make tangible progress: first, the
release of all political prisoners, including those
arrested in the course of recent demonstrations;
secondly, the promotion of an all-inclusive national
reconciliation process; thirdly, full cooperation with,
and better access for, humanitarian organizations;
fourthly, the cessation of hostilities in conflict areas,

07-52995

S/PV.5753

including in Kayin State; and fifthly, continued
cooperation
with
the
International
Labour
Organization.
While it remains unclear how responsive the
authorities will be to those messages, I believe that the
mission helped develop understanding of the regional
and international perceptions of the situation in
Myanmar and of the urgent need for them to implement
some of the specific ideas put to the authorities in
order to meet domestic and international expectations.
In terms of immediate steps, I would like to note that
the authorities have already announced a relaxation of
the curfew in Yangon and Mandalay. Reports indicate
that the visible military presence in the streets has been
reduced. I have also been informed by the Government
that, as of today, a total of 2,095 persons arrested in the
course of demonstrations have been released, including
728 monks, and that more releases will follow as a
direct result of my request to the authorities on behalf
of the Secretary-General. While those steps are
welcome, further steps will need to be taken over the
next few days and weeks, not only to overcome the
current crisis but also to address the underlying factors
of the recent unrest.
With regard to the third objective of my mission,
namely, the promotion of dialogue, the visit allowed
me to resume the role I started playing during my last
visit, by conveying messages between the senior
leadership and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. The fact that I
was allowed to meet with her a second time after
meeting with the Senior General in itself suggests the
usefulness of the United Nations good offices as a way
for the parties to explore the possibility of engaging in
early dialogue. I am therefore cautiously encouraged
by the Government’s announcement yesterday that
Senior General Than Shwe is prepared to meet Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi, although with certain conditions.
This is a potentially welcome development that calls
for maximum flexibility on all sides. The sooner such a
meeting takes place, the better, as it is a first and
necessary step to overcome the high level of mistrust
between them. I sincerely hope that the potential for
dialogue will be recognized to the same extent by both
sides, and that it can translate into concrete steps in the
immediate wake of the crisis.
Another necessary step for genuine national
dialogue to take place is the release of all political
detainees, particularly the sick and the elderly. After
all, only free men and women can engage in dialogue.

07-52995

The future of Myanmar belongs to all the people of
Myanmar. It is therefore in the interest of the nation
that all those who have a contribution to make should
have the opportunity to do so. The issues for dialogue
are known — from serious political and human rights
concerns to pressing humanitarian and socio-economic
issues — but only by working together as one people
will Myanmar be able to address them and move
forward as one nation.
In that connection, the specific recommendations
that were put to the Government, including the
possibility of establishing a broad-based constitutional
review commission, are aimed at encouraging the
Government to engage in a post-National Convention
process of consultations that is all-inclusive,
participatory and transparent. That would enable the
credibility and legitimacy of the draft constitution to be
submitted to a referendum. The United Nations has
experience in facilitating such a constitutional review
process.
In addition to the imperatives of the political
dispensation, the Government needs to be more
sensitive to the extremely fragile humanitarian and
socio-economic context within which the recent
demonstrations and crisis broke out. In that regard, the
recommendation put to the Government to consider
establishing a broad-based poverty alleviation
commission to identify and address socio-economic
needs will be a useful vehicle for promoting national
dialogue on ways to improve the overall “health” of the
country. The work of United Nations agencies in the
country has been recognized as useful by the
authorities. Every effort needs to be made to continue
to find areas of mutual interest where progress can be
made, including in the areas of health, education and
drug reduction.
While the humanitarian and political action needs
to continue to be coordinated, it is essential not to let
humanitarian actions become hostage to political
conditions, and vice versa. Any serious steps on the
political front should be acknowledged by the
international community through the provision of
incentives in the humanitarian and socio-economic
areas.
In conclusion, I would like to say the following.
Amidst the tragic events of the past few weeks, this is
an hour of historic opportunity for Myanmar. As I have
said before, responsibility for the future of the country

5

S/PV.5753

ultimately rests with the Government and people of
Myanmar. However, the world is watching closely how
that responsibility will be exercised in the interest of
all the people of Myanmar.

Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I begin
by thanking the Secretary-General and, in particular,
his Special Envoy, Mr. Gambari, for their very full and
informative reports that we have just heard.

To delay the prospect of a peaceful, prosperous
and democratic Myanmar is to deny it to those who
deserve it the most: the people of Myanmar. They have
suffered too much for too long. At this point, what they
need above all is hope, and I would be encouraged if
this mission helped Myanmar’s leaders to listen to their
own people.

The world has been both inspired and appalled by
images from Burma in recent weeks. We have been
inspired by the sight of people risking their very lives
to make their voices heard for peaceful change and for
democracy. And we have been appalled by the callous
brutality of a regime willing to beat and kill peaceful
demonstrators, including Buddhist monks, who are so
revered in Burmese society — a regime that has carried
out, and is continuing to carry out, mass arbitrary
detentions across the country.

The Government also needs to know that the
world needs a peaceful, prosperous and democratic
Myanmar that can contribute to the development of the
region and play a useful role in the international
community. I want to reiterate here that, over the past
two years, Myanmar has demonstrated greater
openness and cooperation with the United Nations and
the international community. Now is the time for
Myanmar’s leadership to make the bold choices that
will demonstrate that these efforts have not been in
vain and that Myanmar is ready to partner with the
international community by making serious, tangible
progress in the areas of concern to the international
community. If it does so, it will find that there is much
goodwill out there to help it along the way. Myanmar is
part of a dynamic and prosperous region. As the
ASEAN countries have already demonstrated, they
recognize that they also have a responsibility to
support Myanmar’s efforts towards a peaceful and
stable future.
Finally, as I have emphasized from the beginning,
the Secretary-General’s good offices are a process, not
an event. It is important to recognize that one mission
by itself cannot resolve the fundamental challenges
facing Myanmar today. Advancing the causes of allinclusive national reconciliation, democratization and
full respect for human rights will require sustained
engagement by the United Nations, including through
the intensification of the Secretary-General’s good
offices, with the active support of Myanmar’s
neighbours, ASEAN countries and the international
community, including a united Security Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Gambari for his
briefing.
The floor is open for those Council members who
wish to make statements.

6

I was very concerned by the Special Envoy’s
comments about the continued human rights abuses
being committed by the regime. It is essential that
these come to an end.
Despite the censorship imposed by the regime,
the entire world has witnessed these events on the
ground in Burma. A sense of outrage and disgust at
what has happened has spread around the world. The
United Kingdom condemns once again today in the
strongest terms the violence that continues to be
perpetrated against the people of Burma.
The regime cannot turn the clock back. The world
has seen the real desire of the Burmese people for
change, and they have the support of my Government,
and of many other Governments. The situation in
Burma is not just an affront to the world; it is a threat
to stability beyond Burma’s borders. It is right that the
United Nations and the Security Council should be
involved. Despite the violence of recent weeks, the
international community stands ready to help Burma
achieve national reconciliation.
What needs to be done to bring about the change
that is so clearly needed? First of all, we should set out
common demands of the regime. These include the
immediate end to the use of force against peaceful
demonstrations, the immediate release of Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi and all other detainees and political
prisoners, and the start of a new and genuinely
inclusive process of national reconciliation to allow
Burma to transition to democracy.
We have heard recent statements from the regime,
including one last night from General Than Shwe. The
test for them is whether they are now prepared to work

07-52995

S/PV.5753

with opposition leaders and with ethnic groups. They
will be judged by results.
We believe that the Security Council should
remain actively engaged. A presidential statement
capturing the common concerns of the Council would
be appropriate. Among other things, the Council should
unanimously support the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy in continuing their efforts to set in train
this inclusive dialogue leading to real democratic
change in Burma. We thank them for their efforts so
far. We believe that Mr. Gambari should return to
Burma very soon to maintain the momentum. And we
welcome the personal engagement and commitment of
the Secretary-General.
Now is the time for all those with influence on
the regime in Burma to play their part as well. We
welcome the unequivocal message sent by members of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
who see themselves directly affected by the crisis in
their region. We recognize and appreciate the helpful
role played by China in supporting Mr. Gambari’s visit.
The authorities in Burma need to know that they have
no support whatsoever in pursuing their present
policies.
Burma is a country of vast natural resources and
immense human talent. But for some 45 years, those
resources have been squandered and those talents have
been suppressed by a callous and misguided regime.
The world stands ready to help rebuild Burma and see
it integrated into the global community, where it
belongs. The sooner that an inclusive reconciliation
process takes place, the sooner this can be achieved.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): My delegation
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and for promptly dispatching his Special
Envoy to Myanmar in response to the unfolding crisis.
We particularly commend the efforts of Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari to engage the leadership of Myanmar in
addressing the complex challenges faced by the
country. Naturally, we deeply appreciate his
comprehensive briefing and look forward to further
detailed deliberations on the points he has raised.
In anticipation of such discussion, allow me at
this juncture to share some thoughts, as felt by my
delegation. The decision by the Government of
Myanmar to permit Mr. Gambari’s visit is encouraging.
Such a spirit must be constantly promoted. We urge the
Government to recognize the visit of Special Envoy

07-52995

Gambari for what it was: a window of opportunity to
engage the international community in the resolution of
the various problems that have been left to fester for
too long.
The situation in Myanmar was the focus of
Foreign Ministers of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) at an informal meeting in
New York last week. On that occasion, Indonesia
joined the rest of ASEAN in expressing concern,
indeed revulsion, over the developments in Myanmar.
We called upon Myanmar to desist from the use of
force and to seek a political resolution. We urged the
authorities to resume national reconciliation with all
parties, working towards a peaceful transition to
democracy, and to release all political detainees,
including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi.
The situation in Myanmar is at stark variance
with the common path on which countries within
ASEAN are currently embarking, namely, the vision of
an ASEAN community, bound together by shared
values that include democracy and respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms. We are currently
working on an ASEAN charter as the legal instrument
of the organization, on the basis of those shared values.
In the exercise of constructing this democratic
vision, Myanmar has not been an outside partner. On
the contrary, it has been working together with the rest
of the ASEAN members. That is what makes the recent
developments in the country all the more difficult for
the other ASEAN members. That is why we encourage
the authorities in Myanmar not to see these values, or
the clamour of their people for them, as an affront, or
as a challenge to be combated.
The tragic events in the country have serious
implications for the credibility and reputation of
ASEAN. We cannot look the other way, because it is
impossible to advance together if a member fails to
honour the values espoused by the group. Since 2003,
our engagement has involved encouraging Myanmar to
make tangible progress in restoring democratic
institutions and pursuing national reconciliation, in
accordance with its own road map to democracy. We
have committed ourselves to supporting Myanmar in
moving forward on this path in a frank, candid and
firm way. Unless seriously addressed, the recent crisis
can only undermine any positive steps that may have
been taken by Myanmar over recent years.

7

S/PV.5753

Moving forward, it is essential that the Security
Council consistently support the Secretary-General’s
good offices, including through the promotion of a
climate conducive to peacefully resolving the current
situation.

ancient times. Therefore, we are no less concerned
about the situation in Myanmar than any other country.
We sincerely hope to see a Myanmar with political
stability, economic prosperity, social harmony and
democratic progress.

Equally, it is important to acknowledge the
importance of Human Rights Council resolution S-5/1,
adopted by consensus on 2 October 2007, at the
Council’s fifth special session, on the human rights
situation in Myanmar. We believe that the
implementation of that resolution should complement
and strengthen the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral vis-à-vis Myanmar.

Since late September, the situation in Myanmar
has witnessed some disturbances which seriously
disrupted the normal life of the people of Myanmar.
The Chinese Government and leadership have followed
the situation very closely and, on many occasions,
called on all parties concerned to exercise restraint,
restore stability through peaceful means as soon as
possible, promote national reconciliation and achieve
democratic progress.

As to Myanmar itself, we again urge the
Government to exercise restraint and urgently work to
replace the climate of fear with the power of
democratic persuasion and inclusive dialogue. Genuine
inclusive dialogue should take advantage of the
perspectives of all parties, united as one people and
one nation. In this regard, we draw some modest hope
from the latest reports of the offer by the leadership of
Myanmar to meet with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. We
hope that this is a first step towards national
reconciliation.
My delegation believes that the recent events in
the country should serve as strong impetus for real
progress in the democratization process. As the
Government and the people of Myanmar tackle the
challenges of attaining those noble goals, Indonesia
remains ready to continue to support that country
bilaterally and within ASEAN.
I would like to conclude by reiterating our full
support for the good offices of the Secretary-General in
comprehensively engaging Myanmar, in a manner
complementary to the efforts by ASEAN and other
countries of the region.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement. I would also like to thank
Mr. Gambari, the Secretary-General’s Special Adviser
on Myanmar, for his briefing and to congratulate him
on attaining the expected objectives through his visit to
Myanmar.
China is an immediate neighbour of Myanmar.
The two countries share a border of over 2,000
kilometres, and the two peoples have lived as
neighbours and have shared weal and woe since

8

China has also called on the Government of
Myanmar to commit itself to improving the lives of its
people, maintaining ethnic harmony and properly
addressing related social issues. China encourages the
Government to implement the seven-step road map
promptly and to continue to make greater efforts on the
democratization process. We believe that Myanmar’s
stability serves the fundamental and long-term interests
of its people as well as the common interest of the
Asia-Pacific region and the world at large. On this very
point, China shares the same position, perspective and
expectations espoused by the rest of the international
community.
China firmly supports the Secretary-General’s
good offices and has always believed that the United
Nations could and should be able to play a constructive
role in helping Myanmar. During his visit to Myanmar,
Mr. Gambari had an in-depth exchange of views with
Myanmar with the leaders of Myanmar on the current
situation and also met people from various
communities and circles. That is one good step. We are
quite encouraged to see the results of this visit and
view positively the efforts by Mr. Gambari and the
Government of Myanmar.
Since the inception of the turbulence, China has
made its due efforts to promote stability in Myanmar
and has encouraged the Myanmar Government to
continue its engagement with the international
community. So far, Mr. Gambari’s visit has achieved
some initial results. He has listened to the views of
different parties within the country and has also
conveyed the concerns of the outside world. It should
be noted that the purpose of the Secretary-General’s
good offices cannot be served through only one or two

07-52995

S/PV.5753

missions. This will be a gradual process with
incremental results. We encourage Mr. Gambari to
continue his engagements with all parties in Myanmar,
further build on mutual trust and facilitate candid
dialogue.
We have learned that Myanmar has invited
Mr. Gambari to visit the country again in midNovember this year. We sincerely hope that the
Secretary-General’s good offices will truly help
Myanmar to achieve internal stability and national
reconciliation and will provide constructive assistance
to the country in addressing economic, social,
humanitarian and human rights problems. Any actions
by the Security Council should facilitate the good offices
of the Secretary-General rather than interfering with them
or even undermining the mutual trust already established.
We have noted that the situation in Myanmar is
calming down thanks to the joint efforts of all parties
in Myanmar and the international community. China
hopes that the situation in Myanmar will continue to
move in a positive direction. The current situation does
not pose any threat to international or regional peace
and security. The future of Myanmar lies in the hands
of its people and its Government, and their problems
will be addressed properly through consultations.
In our view, it is quite understandable for the
outside world to express concern or expectations
regarding the situation on the ground. However,
pressure would not serve any purpose and would only
lead to confrontation or even the loss of dialogue and
cooperation between Myanmar and the international
community, including the United Nations. Therefore,
the Security Council should adopt a prudent and
responsible approach in handling the issue of
Myanmar. The international community can help the
country achieve national reconciliation and democratic
progress by offering constructive engagement and
mediation. The key is to take the right approach.
Yet, if the situation in Myanmar takes a turn for
the worse because of external intervention, it will be
the people of the country who bear the brunt. That is
the last thing that China, as well as other neighbours of
Myanmar and other regional countries, wish to see.
We look forward to continued constructive
engagement and cooperation between the international
community and the Myanmar Government, which, we
hope, will help the country move in a positive
direction. China supports the positive role of the

07-52995

Association of Southeast Asian Nations on this
question and will continue to work with the
international community for a proper settlement of the
Myanmar issue.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Envoy, Mr. Gambari, for their very
thorough briefings.
Unfortunately, what we have just heard about the
situation in Burma and the attitude of the authorities of
that country only confirms our fears. On 26 September,
the Security Council met and urged the Burmese
Government to show restraint. The Burmese authorities
did not heed that urgent call. To the contrary, 10 days
ago a leaden weight descended on Burma.
It is impossible to know the toll of these tragic
days, because the junta is trying to conceal its bloody
repression from the world. But one thing is for certain:
the brutal repression led by the army and the police has
already cost too many lives. France forcefully
condemns this violence against peaceful demonstrators.
This is why, along with its partners in the European
Union, France has decided to strengthen the targeted
sanctions against the Burmese leadership. The
repression is less visible now, but it continues day after
day. Thousands of people are being arrested outside
any legal framework. The population is living in fear
of raids that are being conducted mostly at night by the
police. Among those who have literally disappeared are
many monks. Corroborating evidence attests to temples
devoid of any human presence within and around the
capital.
France expresses its extreme concern about the
fate of these many prisoners and disappeared persons.
The Burmese leaders must know that they will be held
responsible for the fate of these persons.
In that tragic context, France reiterates its urgent
appeal to the authorities to immediately release persons
who have been incarcerated for having peacefully
exercised their right to freedom of expression and of
assembly. We urgently request that the International
Committee of the Red Cross be immediately authorized
to gain access to Burmese prisons. Furthermore, we
demand once again the unconditional release of
Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi and of all prisoners of
conscience imprisoned before the recent events.
Finally, we reaffirm the importance that we attach to

9

S/PV.5753

the swift arrival of Mr. Pinheiro, Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in Burma.
At this tragic time, the Burmese people can be
assured of the support of the international community.
France wishes to welcome the very firm position taken
by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) in that regard. Over and above that, the unity
and resolve of the international community were
powerfully demonstrated by the Human Rights
Council’s unanimous adoption of a resolution in
keeping with the gravity of the situation in Burma.
In that context, the Security Council, which acts
on behalf of the international community, cannot just
remain silent. Its duty is to express — to use the terms
employed by the ASEAN presidency — universal
revulsion at the attitude of the Burmese generals and to
make them understand that they will not be able to stay
in power through a reign of terror and arbitrary action.
But we will be shirking our responsibilities if we
do no more than condemn. We must go further and
send a message of hope to the Burmese people by
helping the Secretary-General to set out prospects for
the future: true national reconciliation and a transition
towards democracy. It is in that spirit that we reaffirm
our full support for the good-offices mission led by
Mr. Gambari, to whom we once again express our
gratitude for his resolute actions, which augur well for
the future. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
has been able to establish relations of trust with all the
Burmese parties. We hope that, on the basis of this
initial outcome and the ideas that he has just described,
he will soon be able to make concrete proposals with a
view to launching, with United Nations support, a
genuine process of dialogue that brings together the
authorities and the representatives of the opposition
and of minority groups. To that end, we believe that he
must be able to return to Burma as soon as possible.
We have noted that the head of the junta is
prepared to begin a direct dialogue with Ms. Aung San
Suu Kyi. However, that very belated statement once
again sets out conditions for a resumption of dialogue.
We hope that it is not just another delaying tactic. Of
course, we leave the decision up to Ms. Aung San Suu
Kyi and her party as to whether or not to respond to
this proposal.
On the other hand, if the Burmese authorities
continue to refuse to consider any serious and sincere
dialogue with the opposition or set unacceptable

10

conditions for its resumption, and persist in their
tactics of repression, terror and human rights
violations, the Special Envoy must make that known
and the Security Council must draw all the necessary
conclusions.
Finally, my delegation wishes to emphasize the
great importance that it attaches to the collective nature
of our effort. We all share the same concern; we all
hope for real progress towards dialogue and
democracy; we all support Mr. Gambari’s activities.
The countries of the region, the countries of ASEAN
and China play an essential role, and France pays
tribute to them. It is important that the Council support
and strengthen this collective approach and that we
send clear messages to the Burmese authorities.
Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General. That presence illustrates the gravity
of the situation that we are discussing today and of
which the Security Council is quite rightly seized. I
should also like to thank Professor Gambari for his
briefing on his mission to Burma at a most critical
time. Today’s meeting is an opportunity to stress the
Council’s full support for his good-offices efforts.
The size of the demonstrations in Burma has
shown the degree to which the absence of dialogue has
proved untenable over the long term. Indeed, the
movement of monks and of the population, which we
have witnessed since 19 August, has been unique in
terms of its scale and its extent throughout the country.
My delegation condemns the brutal repression of those
non-violent demonstrations. Moreover, Belgium is
particularly concerned at the many arrests that have
occurred in recent weeks and strongly urges the
Government of Myanmar to release persons who have
done nothing more than exercise their fundamental
right to freedom of expression and of assembly.
The Council is no doubt aware of the European
Union’s decision to extend the targeted sanctions
regime, following the grave events witnessed by the
international community. Belgium supports those
sanctions and wishes to make it clear that repression of
fundamental rights can in no way be tolerated.
Moreover, we hope that progress in democratization
and in respect for human rights will enable us to
reverse the course of events.
In that context, the role of the countries in the
region, particularly the neighbouring countries, is

07-52995

S/PV.5753

essential. Belgium welcomes the 27 September
statement made by the presidency of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), whose presence in
the Council today we welcome.
My delegation will listen closely to the statement
to be made by the representative of Burma. In view of
recent developments, Belgium’s expectations can be
summarized as follows: first, immediately launch an
inclusive political dialogue; secondly, open the way for
real democratization, with total respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms; and, finally,
immediately and unconditionally release those arrested
during the recent repression as well as all political
prisoners, primarily Daw Aung San Suu Kyi.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We thank the
Secretary-General for his statement. We also thank
Professor Gambari, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, for his comprehensive briefing on his recent
visit to Myanmar.
South Africa supported the decision by the
Secretary-General to send Professor Gambari, his
Special Envoy, to Myanmar, acting in the context of his
good offices. We also welcomed the decision by the
Government of Myanmar to receive the Special Envoy,
and particularly to permit his visit to Ms. Aung San
Suu Kyi. We applaud Professor Gambari for his tireless
efforts since assuming his role as Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General and particularly his efforts aimed at
addressing the current developments in Myanmar.
The South African Government has expressed its
deep concern at the recent violence and excessive use
of force in Myanmar that led to the loss of life. South
Africa is of the view that the long-term solution to the
current challenges facing Myanmar lies in a negotiated,
inclusive and peaceful political solution through
dialogue between the Government and all political
actors. We call on the authorities in Myanmar to
exercise restraint and to refrain from further acts that
may exacerbate the current situation.
We welcome the expeditious and concerted
manner in which the Human Rights Council acted in
response to the situation. We urge the entire
international community, in particular the Security
Council, to rally behind the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy as they continue with their endeavours.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I would like to thank
Mr. Gambari for his briefing and observations on his

07-52995

recent visit to Burma. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and to express our strong support for
his continued good offices and efforts towards
promoting democracy and reconciliation in Burma. We
encourage him to remain vigorously engaged in that
process and the Government of Burma to use that
assistance and window of opportunity, as the SecretaryGeneral put it, to take bold action towards democratic
change in the country.
Slovakia is concerned about the deterioration of
the situation in Burma. We condemn the violent and
repressive action of the military leaders in Myanmar
against the peaceful civil demonstrations which began
last month in response to the escalating tensions,
human rights violations and the deteriorating
humanitarian and social situation in that country. We
are shocked and dismayed by the reports of death and
serious injuries among the protesters and are deeply
concerned about the fate of hundreds of activists and
ordinary people who have been detained or are
missing.
Slovakia calls on the authorities of Burma to
immediately cease all hostilities and human rights
abuses against its own citizens, to free the arrested
demonstrators and all prisoners of conscience,
including the democracy leader and Nobel Prize
Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi, and to commence a broadbased and all-inclusive process of political
transformation and national reconciliation while
respecting the multi-ethnic and multireligious nature of
its society.
Burma has an appalling human rights record that
includes the use of child soldiers and forced labour,
torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment. For decades the military regime has waged a
war against ethnic groups in which its security forces
have razed villages, raped women and killed civilians,
causing hundreds of thousands of people from Burma
to seek refuge in neighbouring countries. We fear that
if the violence and gross human rights violations
continue, the situation in Burma might turn into a
major and dangerous intra-State conflict with dire and
unpredictable consequences for the whole region.
In that regard we reaffirm our call to the
Government of Burma to cooperate fully with the
United Nations, to address the political and
humanitarian situation in the country and to
implement the recommendations of the Secretary-

11

S/PV.5753

General, as presented by Mr. Gambari, and the
provisions of the road map of transition to democracy.
We strongly support the role and efforts of the
regional partners in helping to find ways for Burma to
respond to the situation and achieve a sustainable,
peaceful, democratic and political solution to the crisis.
While reiterating our full support for the role and good
offices of the Secretary-General and his envoy
Mr. Gambari, we believe that the Security Council
must also take appropriate steps to tackle the situation
by considering a strategy that might help to facilitate
national reconciliation and a genuine transition to
democracy in Burma.
Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the Secretary-General’s
participation in today’s meeting. We want to thank him
for dispatching his Special Adviser to Burma and for
working very hard — as I know he did — to make sure
that he was admitted to Burma. Those steps
demonstrate, Sir, your commitment to helping the
Burmese people during this critical time.
We appreciate Special Adviser Gambari’s report
on his most recent visit to Burma and commend his
efforts. We support his mission and have confidence in
his diplomacy.
Terrible things have happened in Burma over the
past few weeks. The United States is appalled by the
brutal repression that has been carried out by the
Burmese regime against its own people. The beatings,
mass detentions, torture and even murder of citizens —
children, women, students, monks and nuns — and
even murder simply for participation in peaceful
demonstrations are unacceptable. And they should be
unacceptable to Powers with influence over Burma, to
regional States and, indeed, to all of us in this
Chamber.
Despite the Burmese regime’s attempt to block
news of the recent disturbing events from reaching the
rest of the world by shutting off access to the Internet,
courageous Burmese citizens made sure we saw the
truth of what was happening on the ground. The
images were gripping — photographs of the death of a
Japanese journalist shot down by Burmese security
forces and images of the lifeless body, floating in a
river, of a monk who had been executed.
In considering those events, I wish to quote the
words of Nay Tin Myint, a Burmese exile who

12

underwent dreadful forms of torture during 15 years in
a Burmese prison, which he called “the closest thing to
hell”. In a recent opinion piece he reminded us that the
world was not watching in 1988 when thousands were
killed by the guns of the regime. It is watching now.
The people of Burma must not be let down.
Because the brutal repression by the regime is
now occurring far from cameras and public view, it is
difficult to verify the facts on the ground. Only
yesterday, the regime admitted that it had arrested over
2,000 demonstrators and claimed that it had released
692 persons. The regime even arrested several United
Nations staff members during the sweep of houses and
apartments in the area where major protests have
occurred. Fortunately, they were released. But there are
many who are still in jail, rounded up by the Burmese
regime in raids in the middle of the night. Given past
practice, we fear that they are being kept in
unimaginably inhumane conditions and denied access
to international humanitarian organizations.
The impact of the violent repression is clearly felt
throughout the region, and the region itself is faced
with an exodus of refugees from Burma, the spread of
controllable infectious diseases and the trafficking of
narcotics and people — all closely tied to the political
crisis in that country.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) Foreign Ministers made the point, and we
agree, that the events in Burma undermine the
reputation and credibility of that important regional
organization. We welcomed the statement on
27 September by the Chair of ASEAN, Singapore’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs, in which he expressed the
revulsion of the ASEAN Foreign Ministers over the
actions of the Burmese security forces and urged a
peaceful transition to a democratic Government. Others
are also speaking out, including the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of India, the Prime Minister of
Singapore, the European Union ambassadors — all
those voices are indicative of an emerging regional,
indeed international, consensus that the repression
carried out by the Burmese regime against its own
people is both indefensible and intolerable.
I also wish to recognize the role of China in using
its special influence to persuade the regime to receive
Special Adviser Gambari. We look forward to the
continued support of China for the Secretary-General’s

07-52995

S/PV.5753

Special Adviser in order to gain tangible results from
its good offices mission.
What next? We have heard today Special Adviser
Gambari’s assessment of his recent visit and an
accounting of the “to do” list he provided to the
regime. I must convey to you, however, our deep regret
that the Burmese authorities did not fully cooperate
with him during his visit. It is of particular concern that
they limited his access to key people and places,
including the leaders of the 88 Generation student
group and monks and monasteries that participated in
peaceful demonstrations. Moreover, the United States
was greatly disturbed to see the regime resume the
unlawful detention of citizens, just hours after his
departure.
Nevertheless, Mr. Gambari’s mission may have
succeeded in cracking open the door. It is still too early
to evaluate it, but we take note of the offer of General
Than Shwe to meet with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. At
the same time, we deeply regret that that offer included
unrealistic conditions. In our view, the regime must
move beyond gestures and take concrete steps that
respond to the concerns of the Burmese people and the
international community.
What does the Burmese regime need to do? The
United States calls on the Burmese regime to
implement the following measures: First, it must
immediately end the violent crackdown, including an
end to the raids, lifting of the curfew and the removal
of the military presence around monasteries and on the
streets of Burmese cities. Secondly, it must
immediately release citizens detained for the
participation in the recent demonstrations. This will be
a critical step in de-escalating the current situation.
Thirdly, it must release all political prisoners, including
Aung San Suu Kyi. This overdue step is essential in
order to begin a genuine and inclusive dialogue with all
actors of Burmese society, so as to begin the transition
to a civilian representative government. And fourthly,
it must restore public communication links, such as
telephone lines and Internet connections, within Burma
and between Burma and the rest of the world.
What can the world do to incentivize the Burmese
regime to take these necessary measures? This is an
issue for the entire international community. The
United States has done its part to back up its words
with actions that will serve to ratchet up pressure on
the regime. Last week, the Department of the Treasury

07-52995

blocked the assets of 14 senior regime officials, and the
Department of State identified senior regime officials
and their immediate family members — over 200
individuals — as subject to a ban on entry into the
United States. We are now exploring follow-up
measures targeting the regime and those who provide
financial support to it.
The Security Council must not remain silent just
because the people of Burma have been silenced by the
violent repression carried out by the regime. We have
an opportunity to be their voice, and we must.
At the moment, Special Adviser Gambari is the
link between the international community and the
regime. It is therefore vital to maintain the momentum
begun by his recent visit in order to obtain concrete
results from his good offices mission. We urge
Mr. Gambari to return to the region as soon as possible
to continue his intensive diplomatic efforts, and we call
on all Governments with influence with the regime to
support his return and his mission. We expect that upon
his return he will receive full cooperation.
Burma’s neighbours have a special role and
responsibility. We also urge ASEAN and its member
States to build on their efforts to increase pressure on
the Burmese regime.
What if the Burmese Government does not take
appropriate steps? If the Burmese regime does not
respond constructively to the demands of the
international community in a timely manner, the
United States is prepared to introduce a draft resolution
in the Security Council imposing sanctions. We must
all be prepared to consider measures, such as arms
embargos, to incentivize the regime to cooperate with
Mr. Gambari.
In conclusion, it is time for the Council to do
more than simply listen to a briefing. Like the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, the
United States also believes that the Council must speak
out in a presidential statement to support the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to establish a genuine political
dialogue between the regime and all parties, to
condemn the deplorable repression of peaceful
demonstrators and to call on the Burmese regime to
release detainees and political prisoners, so that they
can participate in a dialogue leading to national
reconciliation.

13

S/PV.5753

The eyes of the world are focused on Burma. The
people of that nation are going through a difficult time.
Like people everywhere, they deserve to live in peace,
prosperity and freedom. The United Nations should
stand with them and assist in bringing about a political
transition from dictatorship and repression to
reconciliation and democracy.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express our thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for his statement. Allow me also to thank
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, for his important briefing to the Security
Council on his recent visit to Myanmar. My delegation
strongly supports the efforts of the Secretary-General,
and particularly through his Special Envoy,
Mr. Gambari, and we hope that those efforts will meet
with success.
My delegation condemns acts of repression that
prevent the spread of freedom in all parts of the world.
These have many manifestations and forms. We regret
the most recent events in Myanmar and hope that the
situation will return to normal. We call for stability,
achieved through peaceful means, as soon as possible
in the service of the national interests of Myanmar.
In our view, the issue of Myanmar must be
addressed in a highly professional manner, without
selectivity or discrimination. We must understand that
what is needed here is to find solutions, without
resorting to confrontation with Myanmar.
It must be recalled that some principal and
subsidiary bodies of the United Nations continue to
consider the situation in Myanmar. On 2 October 2007
the Human Rights Council adopted its resolution S-5/1,
on the situation of human rights in Myanmar. We
would therefore prefer that the Security Council’s
approach to this issue be based on close coordination
with those bodies. My delegation would also like to
stress that the ideal way for the Security Council to
deal with this issue would be to support the good
offices of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy,
as well as those of regional organizations and
neighbouring countries, in finding a solution to the
situation in Myanmar, and to avoid attempting to
interfere in the situation in any way.
Finally, we call on the Government of Myanmar
to investigate the recent violations and to bring the
perpetrators to justice. We call on that Government to
resolve internal issues before it is too late. We strongly

14

call on the authorities in Myanmar to cooperate with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, to fully
assist him and to show greater flexibility, with a view
to achieving prosperity for the people of Myanmar.
Mr. Spatafora (Italy): First of all, I express my
strongest appreciation to the Secretary-General and to
his Special Envoy, Mr. Gambari, for their strenuous
efforts on behalf of all of us. I cannot appreciate
enough the special efforts of the Special Adviser,
Mr. Gambari, because the messages that he has
delivered to the Myanmar authorities and the
objectives of his mission as he has described them are
messages and objectives that I think all of us around
this table share. Most important of all, I would say that
they are shared by the membership at large.
His briefing today confirms that, through his
mission, he has been able to achieve the maximum
possible under the current circumstances, in 48 hours
and notwithstanding all the limitations imposed on
him. It is a fact that, as the Secretary-General has said,
a window of opportunity is now open and I make an
appeal to the authorities of Myanmar not to close it.
I am looking forward to what my colleague from
Myanmar will say to show that we are on the right
track. We are convinced that the unanimous support
lent by this Council and by the entire international
community was instrumental in the access to political
actors granted to Mr. Gambari during his mission.
Once again, cohesion, unity of vision and common
purpose have proven to be powerful driving forces. The
United Nations has reaffirmed its unique role as the
trusted and legitimate highest body of international
governance. Today I am glad to see the SecretaryGeneral here with us, further reinforcing this message,
and I thank him.
I will carefully report, of course, to my
Government on the content of Mr. Gambari’s briefing,
which has shadows and light. It was eagerly awaited by
the entire international community and will certainly
be studied in Rome with the greatest attention, in line
with the central priorities that our Government,
Parliament, civil society and public opinion attach to
the call of the people of Myanmar for peace,
democracy and freedom.
Unfortunately, since Mr. Gambari’s departure
from the country, we have continued to receive very
disturbing reports of repression. The suspension of
demonstrations has not been achieved through dialogue

07-52995

S/PV.5753

and reconciliation, but rather through a ruthless
crackdown and intimidation that we strongly deplore
and condemn.
Three days ago, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights expressed, before the
Human Rights Council, her concern for the safety and
well-being of the monks and for the thousands of
people arrested in the course and aftermath of the
peaceful demonstrations. We fully share her concerns
and join her call on the Myanmar authorities to give a
full account of their actions, including precise and
verifiable information on the number of people killed
and injured and on the whereabouts and condition of
those who were arrested. Humanitarian organizations
should be given full access to detainees. A democratic
transition, to be achieved through an inclusive political
dialogue, remains the only viable recipe for peace and
development in Myanmar.
That is gradually being recognized by the entire
international community, along with the need for an
immediate release of all political prisoners and the
recognition of the vital role to be played by the United
Nations in this regard. The consensual resolution
adopted three days ago by the Human Rights Council
testifies that the peaceful voice of the demonstrators in
Myanmar has been heard and is mobilizing the
attention of the community of nations as a whole. As
has already been said by others, this Council cannot
remain silent.
We are convinced that the latest events make it
increasingly difficult to argue against the competence
of this body to address the situation in Myanmar. Our
firm belief is nurtured by the strong statements we
have heard in the past several days from the countries
of the region and in particular from the ministers of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the
main subregional organization. We must continue to
engage at the highest level with key players, notably in
the region. Our special thanks goes to China for the
constructive role that it has played and, I am sure, will
play, and its influence. We are convinced that they hold
a special responsibility to promote a peaceful and
democratic solution to the current situation.
At the same time, the Security Council should
continue to be informed on a regular basis about the
developments on the ground and the progress in the
implementation of the Secretary-General’s good offices
mandate. The message that must come from this

07-52995

body — not necessarily, of course, from this meeting,
but certainly in the coming days — must be a strong
message of strong support to the Secretary-General, so
that we will strengthen the hand of Mr. Gambari, his
Special Envoy, in future initiatives. That is to say, we
must strengthen his hand in the implementation of the
messages that he has delivered on behalf of all of us
and in reaching the objectives of his mission. We must
strengthen his hand. I think that is what is at stake, and
I heard all those who took the floor before me
highlighting that point.
We are convinced that the Council’s role will be
essential in achieving our common goals in the country
and beyond, namely reconciliation, stability, freedom
and democracy. I hereby reiterate the position
expressed by the ministers of the European Union on
the need for the Security Council to consider further
steps. On its part, the European Union has already
decided to toughen its sanctions against the regime in
Myanmar, while providing increased humanitarian
assistance to the country.
Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to join Panama’s voice to those of the
other Member States that have thanked the SecretaryGeneral for his participation, and Mr. Gambari for his
effort in handling the sensitive situation in which
Myanmar finds itself.
I would also like to recognize the manner in
which today’s debate is being held. I think the fact that
we are having an open meeting, with the participation
of Myanmar and of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), promotes transparency in the
actions of the Security Council. I am sorry that we
have not been able to find a suitable mechanism
through which to hear the voice of the Human Rights
Council or the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, whose participation on this topic is
indispensable.
I must also express my regret at the fact that we
have not yet heard the representatives of either
Myanmar or ASEAN, before the members of the
Council expressed their views. I think it would have
been preferable to listen to them first, before speaking
ourselves.
Everything indicates that there is clarity and
understanding as to the facts in Myanmar and the goals
to be attained: protecting human rights, the release of
the prisoners, the need for a national understanding

15

S/PV.5753

free from external interference. All of those goals seem
very clear. What is being discussed is how to achieve
those goals. In Panama’s view, those are objectives that
we should try to attain through a unified effort by this
Organization, and not through separate initiatives of its
various entities and organs.
In this context, the delegation of Panama
welcomes the statements that have been made by
ASEAN and welcomes in particular the support for the
resolution adopted by the Human Rights Council. We
feel that any gesture by this Council should be
undertaken in a manner consonant with those previous
declarations.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the Secretary-General. We are grateful to
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, for his comprehensive briefing
on the outcome of his important and useful visit to
Myanmar. Russia has consistently supported the good
offices mission of the Secretary-General, and we hope
that the efforts of Mr. Gambari will lead to positive
results and that they will help Myanmar’s advancement
along the path of democratic development and
constructive cooperation with the United Nations and
the international community.
We repeatedly voiced serious concern at the
situation in Myanmar during the days of its recent
dramatic flare-up, when, unfortunately, there were
human casualties involved. We call upon the
authorities of the country and on the opposition forces
and those involved in protest actions to show restraint
to prevent the destabilization of the situation and
further manifestations of violence. We drew attention
to the information that the Myanmar leadership has
shown willingness to cooperate with the international
community, including, once again, to receive
Mr. Gambari again, and also to engage in contacts with
Aung San Suu Kyi and other leaders of the opposition.
It is important that that approach be acted upon in
practice.
The Russian delegation took an active part in the
adoption of the resolution of the Human Rights
Council on the situation of human rights in Myanmar.
The main point, we think, is to encourage that country
to consistently implement the proclaimed programme
of democratic reforms. We pin great hopes on members
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations

16

(ASEAN) and other States of the region to continue
further efforts to promote a normalization of the
situation in Myanmar.
With regard to the Security Council, its job is to
continue lending political support to the efforts of
Mr. Gambari, who received an appropriate mandate
from the General Assembly.
Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Mr. Ibrahim Gambari for his
extensive and clear information about his recent visit to
Myanmar. He has brought us credible testimony about
the painful situation suffered by the people of
Myanmar. Peru is concerned by the violation of human
rights and the worrisome information about the
humanitarian crisis that Myanmar is going through.
This situation has worsened over the past year, as
the military authorities have intensified repression
against the political opposition and ethnic minorities,
which has led to the displacement of hundreds of
people within and outside the country. We join in the
general rejection by the international community of the
repression witnessed over the past few days against
peaceful demonstrators. Also, the restrictions on
fundamental freedoms, unjustified detention, cases of
torture and other forms of maltreatment — all of these
are unacceptable. We reject the arbitrary detention of
Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi and of other political leaders,
despite repeated appeals from the international
community.
This week, the Human Rights Council in Geneva
has acted in accordance with its main responsibility,
namely to respond when there are victims. As a
member of the Human Rights Council, Peru actively
promoted the adoption of the resolution.
Further, the increase in the number of internally
displaced persons and refugees is creating a serious
situation of instability, which threatens security in the
region. In that context, Peru would like to highlight the
urgent need to promote cooperation and dialogue as a
way of seeking political solutions designed to bring
about a democratic transition and genuine national
reconciliation. In this task, the participation and
cooperation of the neighbouring countries surround
Myanmar is very important, as well as that of the
countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) and of the international community as a
whole.

07-52995

S/PV.5753

In conclusion, Peru would like to express support
for the continued good offices mission undertaken by
the Secretary-General through his Special Envoy,
Mr. Gambari, leading to a dialogue between the
Government and leaders of Myanmar.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Ghana.
My delegation is also grateful to the SecretaryGeneral for his statement. I also wish to reiterate
Ghana’s confidence in his good offices in Myanmar.
We strongly support his positive interventions in the
situation in that country, both directly and through the
Special Envoy, Mr. Gambari. Let me also express our
thanks for the briefing provided by Mr. Gambari on his
latest mission to Myanmar, which elicited intense
interest around the globe — and rightly so — because
the situation in Myanmar is a matter of concern to us
all.
Given the circumstances in which the visit was
undertaken, we think that Mr. Gambari deserves
commendation for engaging with both the authorities
of Myanmar and their opponents, as well as with
regional leaders, particularly of countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
That underscores the continuing importance of the role
of the Special Envoy as a vital link, not only between
the Government and the people of Myanmar, but also
with the international community at large.
We believe that recent events in the country have
introduced a new dynamic in the political situation and
we are convinced that the long-term peace and stability
of the country depends on the fulfilment of the
legitimate aspirations of the people of Myanmar for
democracy and for a better quality of life. The
contribution of the Special Envoy in that regard is of
utmost importance.
I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Council. I shall now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Swe (Myanmar): Mr. President, I thank you
for the opportunity to speak to the Security Council in
connection with Under-Secretary-General Ibrahim
Gambari’s visit to Myanmar under the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices role mandated by the General
Assembly. I wish also to thank the Secretary-General
for his statement. I am also gratified to learn that
Mr. Gambari, after reporting to the Secretary-General,

07-52995

has briefed the President of the General Assembly
earlier today.
Mention was made of a statement to be made
today on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN). I also understand that my colleague,
the Permanent Representative of Singapore, will also
be making a statement. Yesterday, when I contacted
him, he was kind enough to clarify to me that his
statement will not be on behalf of ASEAN.
At the meeting of the 10 permanent
representatives from ASEAN countries just before the
present meeting, the Permanent Representative of
Singapore was kind enough to share his statement with
us. Six permanent representatives, including Myanmar,
made known their views to Singapore, the recurring
chair of ASEAN, that they regard the statement in
question as a national statement by Singapore. The
statement is indeed forward-looking, but there are
some elements with which we have some difficulty,
particularly with regard to the reference to sanctions.
In the life of every nation, there are times when it
has to face challenging situations and overcome them.
Myanmar went through that experience very recently.
In fact, what Myanmar went through was indeed a
daunting challenge. However, we have been able to
restore stability. The situation has now returned to
normalcy. Currently, people all over the country are
holding peaceful rallies within the bounds of the law to
welcome the successful conclusion of the national
convention, which has laid down the fundamental
principles for a new constitution, and to demonstrate
their aversion to recent provocative demonstrations.
Let me now turn to Special Envoy Gambari’s
visit to Myanmar. In that connection, I wish to deeply
thank Mr. Gambari for his briefing.
We had already agreed for Mr. Gambari to visit
Myanmar in November. However, after SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon met with my Foreign Minister
on 26 September and expressed his desire to dispatch
Ambassador Gambari to Myanmar at an early date, the
Government of the Union of Myanmar invited
Ambassador Gambari to visit Myanmar commencing
29 September.
Ambassador Gambari was accorded access and
full cooperation by the Myanmar Government during
his visit. He was received by Senior General Than
Shwe, the Chairman of the State Peace and

17

S/PV.5753

Development Council. He also had the opportunity to
hold separate meetings with the Acting Prime Minister
and Government spokespersons, led by the Minister for
Information. In addition, he met twice with Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi. Ambassador Gambari travelled to
northern Shan State and was able to witness the
prevalence of peace and stability even in those farflung areas. He witnessed a rally in support of the
successful conclusion of the National Convention by
some 120,000 people in Lashio. He also had occasion
to meet with the leaders of an armed group that had
returned to the legal fold and that had participated in
the National Convention.
Prior to the visit of Ambassador Gambari,
maximalist positions were articulated by a number of
countries that Ambassador Gambari must meet our
Head of State and that Ambassador Gambari must also
meet with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. Ambassador
Gambari has accomplished even more than what was
expected from his visit. Following the visit,
Ambassador Gambari passed through Singapore and
called on Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong in his
capacity as Chair of the ASEAN Standing Committee.
Subsequent to the meeting, the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Singapore issued a press release which
mentioned that Prime Minister Lee “was encouraged
by the access and cooperation given by Myanmar
Government to Mr. Gambari”.
In view of the improved situation of peace and
stability in the entire country, and in particular in
Yangon and Mandalay, the curfew hours imposed in
those two cities have been shortened. The authorities
initially detained a number of people for questioning.
Those who had not infringed any serious laws were
later released. To date — as mentioned by Ambassador
Gambari — a total of 2,095 people, including 722
monks, have been released. Those who were released
also include the remaining locally recruited employee
of the United Nations Development Programme and
her family. More releases will follow.
On the political front, Myanmar will continue
with its policy of national reconciliation. We will
resolutely implement our seven-step road map to fulfil
the aspirations of the people. As part of the national
reconciliation process, our Head of State has relayed a
message through Ambassador Gambari to the effect
that, should Daw Aung San Suu Kyi renounce her
obstructive and confrontational stance, he would be
ready to meet her personally. I am also happy to inform

18

the Council that Ambassador Gambari has again been
invited to visit Myanmar some time in November.
We are encouraged by the position that was
expressed by the Secretary-General that no one can
address the complex challenges facing Myanmar better
than the Myanmar people themselves. I would like to
recall, as Ambassador Gambari just mentioned, what
Ambassador Gambari said to this body in an earlier
briefing: the good offices role is a process and not an
event. Patience, time and space are needed.
Cooperation with the United Nations is a basic
tenet of Myanmar’s foreign policy. It is in that context
that we cooperate fully with the Secretary-General and
Ambassador Gambari in connection with the good
offices role mandated to the Secretary-General by the
General Assembly. The process is proceeding well.
More importantly, despite the
recent tragic events,
the situation in Myanmar is not — I repeat, not — a
threat either to regional or to international peace and
security. I would like to express my deep appreciation
to the members of the Security Council that, both here
and at their capitals, have taken that position. No
Security Council action is warranted with regard to the
situation in Myanmar.
I would therefore like to call on the Security
Council to refrain from any action that would be
detrimental to the good offices role of the SecretaryGeneral mandated by the General Assembly. On our
part, we will continue to cooperate with the United
Nations. In that regard, I can do no better than to quote
my Foreign Minister, who, in his address to the
General Assembly, stated: “We will continue to work
closely and cooperate actively with the United
Nations” (A/62/PV.13).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore.
Mr. Menon (Singapore): As a neighbour of
Myanmar and a fellow member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), it is with a heavy
heart that we speak today. Recent events in Myanmar
cannot be overlooked or ignored, even by Myanmar’s
friends and neighbours.
That is why, on 27 September, we issued a
statement in our capacity as ASEAN Chair. All ASEAN
members were present, including nine of ten Foreign
Ministers. The statement expressed revulsion over
reports that the protests were being suppressed by

07-52995

S/PV.5753

violence. It called for restraint, national reconciliation,
the release of political detainees, including Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi, and for Myanmar to work towards a
peaceful transition to democracy. In addition, the
statement expressed support for the visit of United
Nations Special Envoy Ibrahim Gambari. It also
referred to the serious impact on ASEAN’s credibility.
It therefore cannot be just an internal matter of
Myanmar.

There are also reports that the authorities have
released some of those detained. Unfortunately, many
others are still being detained and arrests reportedly
continue. Yesterday, Senior General Than Shwe
announced that he was willing to meet with Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi, but he imposed preconditions on that
meeting and, most regrettably, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi
remains in detention. Mr. Gambari’s visit is the start of
a long and arduous process.

On 29 September, my Prime Minister, Mr. Lee
Hsien Loong, wrote to Senior General Than Shwe to
convey his deep concern and to urge Myanmar to work
with Mr. Gambari to find a way forward. On 2 October,
my delegation in Geneva delivered a statement at the
fifth special session of the Human Rights Council on
the draft resolution on Myanmar and stressed the
importance of supporting Mr. Gambari’s mission. On
3 October, Prime Minister Lee met with Mr. Gambari
to assure him of ASEAN’s full support and to
encourage him to press on with the United Nations
efforts.

Thirdly, we have to be pragmatic. It would be a
grievous mistake to think that if the State Peace and
Development Council (SPDC) left the scene tomorrow,
all would suddenly be well and all problems would
automatically be resolved. The military is a key
institution in Myanmar that cannot be wished away.
Any peaceful solution to the crisis will have to involve
all parties, including the military. If the military is not
part of the solution, there will be no solution. If the
process is mishandled, it could result in greater
instability and more suffering for the Myanmar people.
Thant Myint-U, a former United Nations Secretariat
official and grandson of U Thant, warned recently that
the world must be careful that the change it wants to
see in Myanmar does not lead to the anarchy seen in
Iraq.

But we are here today to look forward, not back.
To move forward, there are certain realities that we
have to acknowledge. First, we need to recognize that
the United Nations efforts, as embodied by
Mr. Gambari, are unique and irreplaceable. At this
stage, Mr. Gambari represents our best hope and is also
the only game in town. Mr. Gambari is an experienced
and gifted diplomat who seems to have gained the trust
of both sides. The international community should
buttress his position and invest him with the requisite
support, authority and prestige. Mr. Gambari should
return to Myanmar and resume his good offices role as
soon as possible to sustain the momentum. We urge the
Myanmar Government to continue to cooperate with
the United Nations and Mr. Gambari.
Secondly, we should avoid falling into the trap of
over-simplification. The situation in Myanmar is
complicated. As the Secretary-General himself has
noted, we should not prematurely try to pigeonhole Mr.
Gambari’s visit as a success or failure. He has
succeeded in beginning a process that can bring change
to Myanmar. The fact that Myanmar has allowed
Mr. Gambari to visit three times, most recently in the
midst of the present crisis, is encouraging. It shows
that the Myanmar authorities want to maintain a line to
the United Nations.

07-52995

Myanmar is not a homogeneous State. There are
many armed ethnic groups that are opposed to central
Government rule. Only a very tenuous ceasefire
prevents the renewal of hostilities. That should not be
an excuse for delaying necessary steps forward, but
neither do we want a Yugoslavia in South-East Asia.
There has also been talk about additional
sanctions. My delegation can understand the impulse to
punish unacceptable behaviour. Indeed, we should not
rule that out. But we have to pause to consider
dispassionately what the real impact of additional
sanctions will be. How will they affect a regime that is
only tangentially connected to the rest of the world?
Will they help or hinder the role of the United Nations?
How will they affect the willingness of the SPDC to
cooperate with Mr. Gambari? What is their impact on
the people of Myanmar? All such actions should have
only one objective, which is to strengthen
Mr. Gambari’s hand as an effective mediator.
Fourthly, ASEAN will take a responsible
position. Myanmar is part of the ASEAN family.
Whatever we may think about the behaviour of a
family member, it is still a family member. But

19

S/PV.5753

ASEAN’s influence is limited. That was underscored
last year when the Myanmar authorities refused to
seriously engage the ASEAN envoy. Yet, the same
authorities received Mr. Gambari and arranged a
substantial programme for him, which included
meetings with Senior General Than Shwe and Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi. That was a clear signal of
Myanmar’s preferences.
It is in everyone’s interest to keep Myanmar in
the ASEAN family, but we are not Myanmar’s only
neighbour. China and India are two large countries
with a long history of engagement with Myanmar. We
believe that they are uniquely placed to play a role. In
that regard, allow me to commend China for its quiet
efforts, which we believe were instrumental in securing
a substantive and useful visit for Mr. Gambari. We

20

hope that India will play a similar role. Likewise,
Japan has a role to play, because it is a major aid donor
to Myanmar. All of us — the international community
as a whole — must do our part. Because of the size and
complexity of the undertaking, the good offices of the
United Nations and Mr. Gambari offer the only new
way forward.
The President: There are no other speakers
inscribed on my list.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the course of the Council’s prior consultations, I should
now like to invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

07-52995
