S/PV.7839

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7839 th meeting

Friday, 16 December 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Martins
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. McCully
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Barro
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-44408 (E)
*1644408*

S/PV.7839

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General: Today, I report to the
Security Council for the last time on the situation in the
Middle East. It saddens me that my last such briefing
brings no sense of optimism for the future.
Some may ask why, given all the crises in the
region, I have chosen to address the Council on the
question of Palestine. To them, I say that while the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is not the cause of the wars
in the Middle East, its resolution can create momentum
for peace throughout the region. In 1947, on the basis
of General Assembly resolution 181 (II), the world
recognized the two-State solution and called for the
emergence of independent Arab and Jewish States.
On 14 May 1948, the State of Israel was born. Almost
seven decades later, the world still awaits the birth of
the Palestinian State.
As the Security Council has made clear, Gaza and
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, have been
under military occupation since 1967. These lands
comprise the future Palestinian State, ultimately to
be agreed by the parties through direct negotiations.
History has shown that peace and security can be built
only on the basis of respect and mutual acceptance.
The right of the Jewish people to have a State does not
negate the right of the Palestinian people to statehood.
Yet Palestinian frustration and grievances are
growing under the weight of nearly half a century of
humiliating occupation. Ten years ago, the majority
of both peoples believed in the two-State solution;
today, that majority is unravelling. Leaders on both
sides increasingly speak to their ever more radicalized
constituencies, rather than to each other. The
expanding Israeli settlement enterprise and an evermore entrenched status quo is preventing Palestinian
2/19

16/12/2016

development and locking in Gaza. Some Israeli
politicians increasingly call for the so-called full
annexation of the West Bank. Gaza and the West Bank
remain politically divided, and Palestinian factions fail
to make the compromises necessary for national unity.
Israelis feel that there is no end in sight to terrorism,
as incitement and calls for Israel’s obliteration continue
unchallenged by Palestinian leaders.
The framework for peace remains unchanged — the
establishment of two States, on the basis of the principle
of land for peace and a just and comprehensive regional
peace consistent with relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as with existing agreements signed
between the parties. As I took office 10 years ago, the
Middle East was still recovering from the years of
the second Palestinian uprising and the war between
Israel and Hizbullah in 2006. The reaffirmation by the
League of Arab States of the Arab Peace Initiative and
the convening of the Annapolis conference in 2007
brought some hope.
Despite early optimism, attempts to reach a final
resolution failed to make headway and were upended
with the eruption of conflict in Gaza in December
2008. Further attempts at peace in 2010 and 2013 were
equally eclipsed by renewed hostilities. The summer
of 2014 saw the most devastating conflict in Gaza to
date. During the height of the fighting, I traveled to the
region and met with regional and international partners,
as well as with the leadership in Israel and Palestine,
to push for a ceasefire. An agreement, sadly, came too
slowly for those who paid a heavy price during those 50
days of horror. I said then and I continue to insist that
without addressing the deeper causes of this conflict,
such cycles of escalation will persist.
Yet another troubling measure of the current state
of play is that, during my tenure, the Security Council
has adopted only two resolutions on the Middle East
peace process, the most recent almost eight years ago.
We are fast approaching a precipice as a direct result
of the actions of those seeking to destroy the prospects
for peace. But there is a way out of this deadlock — by
both sides implementing the recommendations in the
recent report of the Middle East Quartet. That would
demonstrate that Israelis and Palestinians are serious
about building trust and laying the foundations for
meaningful negotiations that would end the occupation
based on the 1967 lines, establish a viable, independent
Palestinian State, and resolve all final status issues.
16-44408

16/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

But there are also major obstacles. As I have
consistently stated, Israel’s settlement activity beyond
the 1967 line is in flagrant violation of international
law and the Fourth Geneva Convention. Settlements
eat away at the land meant for a future Palestinian
State. Over the past decade, the number of Israelis
living in settlements in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, has increased by some 30 per cent to about
600,000 people. A bill currently being debated in the
Israeli legislature risks the regularization of more than
50 outposts and thousands of housing units built on
private Palestinian land in the West Bank, which would
be a clear violation of international law. If adopted, this
legislation would for the first time apply Israeli law on
the status of Palestinian land in the occupied West Bank.
I strongly urge legislators to reconsider advancing the
bill, which would have negative legal consequences for
Israel and substantially diminish the chances for ArabIsraeli peace.
Bold steps by Israel to empower the Palestinian
Authority, based on the transition envisioned in previous
agreements, could bring benefits to the Palestinian
people and increase Israeli security. Progress in this
area, however, will be difficult unless the Palestinian
authorities take brave and concrete steps to address
incitement and violence. Acts and statements that glorify
terror are unacceptable. I have repeatedly and strongly
denounced incitement and all acts of terror. Stabbings,
vehicle rammings and other attacks by Palestinians do
nothing to advance their dream of statehood.
Israel must also understand that continued occupation
and heavy-handed security responses — including the
possible excessive use of force and the highly restrictive
closure policy in Gaza — play into the hands of
extremists. These actions risk undermining moderate
voices, and further deepening the gulf between the two
sides. I have also decried the practice of administrative
detention and ill-treatment in detention by Israeli and
Palestinian authorities alike. Similarly, executions of
prisoners by Hamas in Gaza are absolutely unacceptable,
and I continue to speak out against constraints on
freedom of expression by Israeli and the Palestinian
authorities, including against human rights defenders.
The absence of Palestinian unity throughout the
occupied territory presents an obstacle to the two-State
solution. The failure to organize Palestinian general
elections has remained one of the clearest signs of
this disunity and of the fragile Palestinian democratic
process. The divisions between the West Bank and Gaza

S/PV.7839

can be overcome only with the formation of a single,
legitimate and inclusive Palestinian Government,
on the basis of Palestine Liberation Organization
principles. We must urge a renewal of the democratic
legitimacy of Palestinian leadership and institutions
and ensure that they represent all Palestinians. It is
unacceptable that Hamas still boasts an anti-Semitic
Charter that aspires to the obliteration of Israel. Hamas
must once and for all renounce the use of violence
and recognize the right of Israel to exist alongside a
Palestinian State, in accordance with all relevant
Security Council resolutions and previous agreements
between the parties.
Over the past 10 years, the Palestinian Authority has
made strides in building its institutions. In 2011, these
achievements were recognized by the international
community as being well positioned for establishment of
a State. Palestine received non-member observer State
status in 2012, and I witnessed, alongside President
Abbas, the raising of the Palestinian flag for the first
time at the United Nations just last year. Still, Palestine’s
State-building and democratic governance aspirations
continue to be undermined by the occupation and the
lack of Palestinian national unity.
The centrality of the challenges facing Gaza cannot
be overstated. Indiscriminate rocket fire by Hamas
towards Israel for a decade has convinced many Israelis
that there is no hope for peace. After three brutal
conflicts, Israel’s crippling closures and a decade-long
political divide have left 2 million Palestinians trapped
in a humanitarian tragedy, without hope for a political
horizon. I have witnessed this devastation on my four
trips to Gaza. I must warn, as I have repeatedly stated,
that Gaza is a tinder box. It is almost certain to explode
unless movement and access restrictions are lifted and
humanitarian needs are addressed; unless rocket attacks,
tunnel construction and smuggling stop; and unless
progress is made towards establishing a Palestinian
State, with Gaza as an integral and peaceful part.
I also want to take this opportunity to commend the
efforts of United Nations colleagues working with such
diligence and dedication to promote peace and prevent
yet more violence. Let me begin by honouring the
24 United Nations staff members based in the occupied
Palestinian territory who have been killed in the line of
duty during my tenure. Their sacrifices shall never be
forgotten. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East provides a muchneeded element of stability for 5.3 million Palestine

16-444083/19

S/PV.7839

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

refugees across the region. It continues to face serious
financial challenges. I urge Member States to honour
their commitment and increase their contributions to
the Agency.
The Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process has
been instrumental in bridging differences between all
sides, facilitating negotiations and engaging with the
region and international partners. The United Nations
country team is working under difficult circumstances
to provide relief to vulnerable Palestinians and to
help build the institutions and policies of a future
independent Palestinian State.
During the past 10 years, I have argued that we
must never accept bias against Israel within United
Nations bodies. Decades of political manoeuverings
have created a disproportionate volume of resolutions,
reports and conferences criticizing Israel. In many
cases, rather than helping the Palestinian cause, that
reality has hampered the ability of the United Nations
to fulfil its role effectively. At the same time, Israel
must realize that the reality in which a democratic State
governed by the rule of law keeps the Palestinian people
under military occupation will continue to generate
criticism and calls for accountability.
As we look to the future, I call on the Security
Council to reaffirm without reservations that there is
no alternative to the two-State solution. The status quo
entrenches a one-State reality of perpetual occupation
and conflict. We must not give up on the right of
Palestine to exist, just as we must protect the right of
Israel to exist in peace and security with its neighbours.
I urge the Council to explore the vast potential
of incentives and begin immediately to develop, in
consultation with the parties, an agreed framework for
advancing a final resolution to the conflict on the basis
of direct negotiations. The upcoming conference in
France could be an opportunity to begin that discussion.
The Arab Peace Initiative presents a chance to
develop a comprehensive settlement of the conflict. But
there cannot be sustainable peace between Israelis and
Arabs without progress towards Palestinian statehood.
Ten years ago, my predecessor, Kofi Annan, called
for a revitalized Middle East Quartet, working closely
with international and regional partners, to facilitate
and sustain direct negotiations. I fully believe that
architecture remains critical.
4/19

16/12/2016

Since becoming Secretary-General, I have visited
the region 11 times, including during periods of war.
For 10 years, I pressed Israelis and Palestinians to
start believing in a common future, bound by their
undeniable historic, religious and national connections
to the land. Those aspirations have not been fulfilled.
I will continue to hope that the majority of Israelis and
Palestinians are tired of the tug-of-war over historical
narratives.
But hope alone will not end the occupation, or rid
the Palestinian and Israeli peoples of their legitimate
fears. There must be a major shift to courageous and
concrete action by the parties that enables meaningful
negotiations. The United Nations will continue to assist
that process.
Ultimately, it is up to Israelis and Palestinians to
make peace — we cannot do it for them. They must
rebuild trust in each other as the only way to address
the fears and suspicions that have led to the deep
polarization we see today. At the same time, we all
can — and must — contribute to building trust, so
sorely needed in the Middle East and the world today.
That work must begin now, before it is too late.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. McCully (New Zealand): The situation in
Syria is bleak. Aleppo has fallen. The fate of tens of
thousands of civilians is unclear. Despite the strong
calls from members of the Security Council and others,
civilians continue to suffer.
New Zealand has used strong words in this Chamber
to describe the actions of Russia, and we stand by them.
Indeed, Russia, Iran and the Syrian Government bear
much of the responsibility to ensure the protection of
civilians. They must allow the United Nations to do its
job to get aid to those who need it and to ensure the
safety of those who stay and those who wish to leave.
The Security Council will meet behind closed doors
shortly to talk about how the United Nations might get
more involved in eastern Aleppo. To date the Security
Council has been unable to meet its responsibilities.
Unless that is going to change, it is our view that an
emergency special session of the General Assembly is
an appropriate next step.
16-44408

16/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In thanking His Excellency the Secretary-General
for his final briefing on the Middle East it is difficult
not to be struck by the depressing familiarity of much
of what he has imparted: a continuation of incitement
and violence against ordinary Israelis and Palestinians
and a continuation of the settlements programme,
which undermines the prospect of a viable Palestine
and challenges the credibility of any commitment to the
two-State solution.
In listening to today’s briefing and to recent
briefings by the Secretary-General’s Special
Coordinator it is difficult to understand how the
Council can be silent when the space for a two-State
solution is being so clearly undermined. Since 1947,
the Council and the international community have
embraced the notion of two States living peacefully
side by side as the only acceptable basis for resolution
of this issue — as reinforced in Oslo and Madrid and in
a number of Security Council resolutions. But we have
been told in words of one syllable that developments
taking place on the ground now threaten the viability of
the two-State solution and that the people on the ground
are losing hope in the two-State solution, with all of the
consequences that follow.
Since the previous briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.7820) we have seen the situation compounded
by legislation before the Knesset that could lead to
the legalization of settlements and outposts, including
on privately owned Palestinian land. Since the last
briefing we have seen opportunities missed to advance
Palestinian reconciliation.
In the past we have participated in these debates
and expressed frustration with the challenges and
shortcomings from all sides, but also expressed
optimism that we would somehow see parties find
their way back to the negotiating table. That has been
difficult, but we are now moving beyond difficult. We
are now moving into a space in which the plain facts
are telling us that the forces currently in play will
irretrievably undermine the prospect of two States
living peacefully side by side.
It is difficult to see the legislation now before by
the Knesset as other than a direct challenge to the
notion of a two-State solution and a direct challenge to
the resolutions previously adopted by the Council.
Where does that leave the Council? It is eight
years since the Council last adopted a resolution
on this question. Over that time a good number of

S/PV.7839

reasons have been advanced as to why further Council
pronouncements might be counterproductive or
premature. But when the Secretary-General and his
representatives tell the Council that not only are people
on the ground losing hope in the two-State solution
but that the facts on the ground are being altered to
render a two-State solution unviable, it seems to me
that the Council must either reassert, on behalf of the
international community, a firm commitment to the
two-State solution or it should start to turn its attention
to its responsibilities in the event there is one State not
two. A one-State future clearly takes us into territory
that no friend of Israel wishes to contemplate.
My country has been engaging with fellow Council
members on the type of draft text that would reassert
the two-State solution and call clearly for a halt to
the violence and the settlements, which threaten to
undermine this process. We very much welcome the
advice that Arab colleagues are working on text for
this purpose.
It is time for us, the collective membership of
the Council, to stop being bystanders and act as the
custodians of the two-State solution that we should be.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I want to begin by
welcoming the Secretary-General’s briefing, as this will
probably be his last public meeting on the issue. I want
to thank him for his unflinching activism on the Middle
East peace process. It has been a difficult and, at most
times, frustrating portfolio, but he has not wavered in
his resolve to bring a conclusion to what is one of the
longest-running issues on the Council’s agenda. I agree
with every word that he said in his briefing just now.
But it is perhaps with his successor in mind that I want
to talk today. He faces a challenge on which we, in the
broadest possible sense, have failed for over 60 years.
So, what can we do, as members of the Security
Council, to make sure that the ninth Secretary-General
of the United Nations does not have to endure the
frustrations of his predecessors? What can we do
together to ensure that the people of Israel and Palestine
enjoy decades of peace ahead rather than relapse into
more decades of division and hatred? I want to focus on
three issues where our activism is needed most: illegal
settlements, Gaza, and incitement and violence.
The United Kingdom’s position on settlements is
clear. It is a position shared by all of us around the table,
I think. The settlements are illegal under international
law and take us further away from the two-State

16-444085/19

S/PV.7839

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

solution that we all want to see. Despite the findings of
the Middle East Quartet report this year, the situation
has only gotten worse. As the Foreign Minister of New
Zealand said, we are especially concerned by the land
regulation bill in the Knesset, which would retroactively
legalize settlement outposts in the West Bank. Should
that proposal go ahead, it would be a serious blow to
the prospects for a two-State solution. It would pave the
way for an exponential rise in settlements deep in the
West Bank and create more grievances, hopelessness
and anger among Palestinians. The United Kingdom
regularly raises the issue of settlements with Israel,
at all levels. The Foreign Secretary raised it when he
met Prime Minister Netanyahu on 30 September. But
we should also use the voice of the Council to make
that call, to urge Israel to cease its policy of settlement
expansion so that that grave barrier to peace can
be lifted.
Turning to Gaza, it is clear that there is a real risk
of a return to conflict. As we saw in October, rocket
attacks have continued, as have the Israeli responses.
We should speak loudly and clearly in the Chamber.
Terrorist groups in Gaza must permanently end rocket
fire and other attacks against Israel. But the woes of
Gaza go beyond the unacceptable acts of those groups.
It is estimated that 90 per cent of Gaza’s water is not fit
even for agricultural use, and that Gaza continues to
have the highest unemployment rates in the world. Some
progress is being made — education and health facilities
have now largely been rebuilt — but reconstruction
is far from complete. Efforts need to focus on house
rebuilding and reviving the economy, stimulating
exports and creating jobs. So we encourage the Israeli
authorities to improve Gazans’ access to clean water
and to improve the flow of the necessary construction
materials into Gaza, such as concrete. In tandem with
that, let us recognize that our support is needed too.
Donors must honour their commitments made at the
International Cairo Conference on Palestine for Gaza
Reconstruction. Too many are still outstanding. The
United Kingdom stands ready to play its part.
Turning to my third point, we are pleased to see
that the levels of violence have dropped in recent
months, but again there is much for both parties to
do to de-escalate tensions and prevent incitement.
We cannot underestimate just how corrosive racist,
anti-Semitic and hateful language is in Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territories. Together, we must
deplore incitement on all sides of the Israeli-Palestinian
6/19

16/12/2016

conflict, including any comments that stir up hatred
and prejudice. Sadly, such hatred is not limited to
words alone. We are appalled by terrorist attacks
against Israeli citizens. We are appalled at the violence
committed by extremist settlers against Palestinians.
We unequivocally condemn all such incidents.
Before I give up the floor, I recognize that it will
take more than the Council’s words to finally make
progress. We also need to work with partners in the
region and internationally to produce improvements on
the ground and build trust between the parties, if we are
to secure progress towards meaningful negotiations.
With that in mind, it is incumbent upon the Council to
take appropriate action in support of those efforts. We
believe that there is clear merit in a Council resolution
that commands the full support of the Chamber. We
will judge any proposal that emerges on its merits and
on whether it supports progress towards peace, but
there is a great deal that we can all agree on, and I hope
that we can make progress towards a lasting peace in
the days and weeks ahead.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We note with regret that the situation in the
Middle East and North Africa continues to be tense
and explosive. Over the past few years the situation in
the Israeli-Palestinian track has continually worsened.
Negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians have
been de facto frozen. After the completion in April
2014 — without any tangible results — of a nine-month
round of Israeli-Palestinian contacts under the auspices
of the United States, the situation in the Middle East
process has become significantly worse, as evidenced
by regular clashes in the West Bank, outbreaks of
violence from which peaceful Palestinian and Israeli
civilians suffer, and violations of the ceasefire in Gaza.
We strongly and unconditionally condemn any
terrorist activities, which stoke an already tense
atmosphere in the region. We must put an end to violence.
We are very worried about unilateral actions by Israel
creating irreversible facts on the ground. The Israeli
Government, in spite of the unequivocal condemnation
of the international community, continues to build
settlements and expand them in the occupied territories,
expropriating land in the West Bank and destroying
Palestinian homes. All of those actions undermine the
prospects for a two-State solution, to which there is no
alternative, as recognized by participants to the conflict
and the international community, as a whole.
16-44408

16/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Russia, as a member of the Middle East Quartet
of international mediators, is trying to reanimate the
negotiations and re-establish a political horizon in
the peace process. We note the report of the Quartet,
published on 1 July, on the status of the peace process,
and see it as a consolidated form of a message from
the international community. We are convinced that
a good-faith implementation by the parties of the
recommendations contained in that report would
contribute to improving the situation and overcoming
mutual distrust.
One of the main obstacles to resuming the peace
process is the division within the Palestinian ranks.
In the future, we intend to continue our efforts to
reestablish Palestinian unity, based on the political
platform of the Palestine Liberation Organization and
the Arab Peace Initiative.
We are particularly concerned about the situation in
Gaza. The humanitarian situation there is very severe.
That means that Palestinians living in Gaza cannot look
forward to any sort of future, which contributes to their
radicalization. It plays into the hands of the extremists.
We share the views of the international community on
the need to put an end to the embargo imposed on Gaza
as soon as possible.
Next year will mark 50 years since the adoption
of resolution 242 (1967), one of the foundational
documents of the legal basis for the Middle East peace
process. We note with regret that, half a century later,
the root causes of that protracted and chronic conflict
have not been dealt with and that prospects for a peace
settlement are very dim. In the context of the conflicts
all over the Middle East, the situation could lead to the
worst possible consequences.
The continuous turmoil and upheaval that began six
years ago, and was hastily and naïvely called the “Arab
Spring”, has created massive unresolved problems.
Yemen and Libya, which were often touted as models
of the democratization process, are still suffering from
bloodshed and power struggles. There is a grave situation
in Iraq, and the conflict in Syria has reached tragic
proportions. The senseless and shortsighted actions
of certain countries, characterized by interference in
internal affairs and attempts to change rogue regimes
in order to impose their recipes for democracy without
taking into account the historic, cultural and religious
specificities of Middle East States, as well as the direct

S/PV.7839

involvement of those States, have led to the emergence
of a large area of chaos and anarchy.
Of course, terrorists from Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, Jabhat al-Nusrah, Al-Qaida and affiliated
groups have taken advantage of that situation. Overall,
in a whole range of countries in the region, State
institutions have been destroyed and humanitarian
socioeconomic problems have become severe, which
has provoked an unprecedented wave of migration.
From the very beginning of the Syrian crisis, Russia has
consistently advocated its peaceful resolution, while
respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the country. We are convinced that there is no
alternative to a political solution, based on an inclusive
inter-Syrian dialogue, while at the same time ensuring
the cessation of hostilities, increasing humanitarian
access and continuing the fight against terrorism.
It is precisely that complex position that is enshrined
in the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522,
annex), in Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2254 (2015), and in the corresponding
decisions of the International Syria Support Group.
Thanks to the actions of the Russian Air Force, we
managed to prevent terrorists from seizing Damascus,
undermine the military and economic potential of the
terrorist groups, and liberate large swathes of territory.
In addition, we are providing assistance in establishing
dialogue between the Government of Syria and the
representatives of the internal and external Syrian
opposition with a view to finding a common Syrian
consensus on a political and diplomatic settlement of
the crisis.
The Russian Federation continues to make every
effort to de-escalate tensions and resolve the most acute
humanitarian problems in Syria, especially in Aleppo,
where military activities are ending and the withdrawal
of fighters and their families from the eastern part of
the city is continuing. At the same time, large-scale
humanitarian and medical assistance is being provided
to the Syrian population affected by the conflict. Over
the past few days, the main flow of Russian humanitarian
aid has been directed to Aleppo. We believe that the
most urgent task now is the comprehensive end of
military activity and the resumption of inter-Syrian
negotiations. Damascus has more than once confirmed
its readiness to take part in such negotiations.
In Iraq, the violent confrontation and struggle
against Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)

16-444087/19

S/PV.7839

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

is continuing. After terrible losses and defeats, the
Iraqi forces have managed to regain control over the
strategically important cities of Ramadi and Fallujah.
On 17 October, with the assistance of the so-called
anti-ISIL coalition, the military operation to liberate
the main stronghold of terrorism in the country, Mosul,
began. As we understand, it is still premature to speak of
significant victories. Meanwhile, during the two-month
campaign, the humanitarian situation has seriously
deteriorated; the number of internally displaced persons
exceeds 90,000 and more than 700,000 are in need of
urgent assistance.
The situation in Yemen and Libya is also very
serious. According to international humanitarian
organizations, 82 per cent of the 27 million population
of Yemen require urgent humanitarian assistance, and
according to the United Nations Children’s Fund, every
10 minutes one Yemeni child dies from hunger.
As a result of the disintegration of Government
structures and the de facto vacuum of power, Libya
has become a transit point for migrants seeking to
cross the sea into Europe and a breeding ground for
terrorism, cross-border crime, arms smuggling and
drug trafficking. Since the beginning of the year, more
than 328,000 illegal immigrants have reached Europe
by crossing the Mediterranean.
The situation in the Middle East and North Africa
and the spread of terrorist activities beyond that region
demonstrates, once again, that in today’s world no
single State is immune from the threat of terrorism,
and no single State will be able to sit on the sidelines in
an oasis of security. On that basis, we believe that the
task of paramount importance is to join forces, based
on the principle of the indivisibility of security, so as
to combat terrorism and extremism and to form a truly
universal anti-terrorist front.
Russia is not trying to reap geopolitical dividends
from the geopolitical instability in the region, or to
assert its influence by reformatting the Middle East
region. We are in favour of decisive action to destroy
ISIL and other terrorist groups, wherever they are, and
we are for a speedy resolution to all crises through
political and diplomatic means, in strict accordance
with the principles of international law. We support
concrete and effective measures for improving the
humanitarian situation and the socioeconomic recovery
and revival of the region. Those urgent tasks can only
8/19

16/12/2016

be tackled in the framework of active and effective
international cooperation.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. China
applauds the Secretary-General’s tireless efforts to
advance the Middle East peace process.
The issue of Palestine lies at the heart and at the
source of the larger Middle East question. Today, the
situation in Palestine is dire. The peace talks between
Palestine and Israel are mired in an entrenched
deadlock, with violent clashes occurring continuously,
together with serious humanitarian crises. In particular,
Israel’s continued construction of settlements has
undermined the prospects of the two-State solution. The
international community should feel a greater sense of
urgency, take tangible actions and help bring about a
comprehensive and just settlement of the Palestine issue
without delay. The international community should
stand behind Palestine’s independent statehood and
the peaceful coexistence of Palestine and Israel, which
is the right way forward. Having a State of Palestine,
based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital and enjoying full sovereignty, is an inalienable
right of the Palestinian people.
The parties concerned should steadfastly advance
the peace process on the basis of the principle of land for
peace, the two-State solution, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the applicable Security Council resolutions. The
international community should encourage Palestine
and Israel to hold fast to the correct course of peace
talks. Both sides should exercise maximum restraint
so as to avoid any further escalation of the tensions.
Israel should be the first to show good will by halting
the construction of settlements and the demolition of
Palestinian homes, so as to create enabling conditions
for the resumption of the peace talks. The parties
concerned should show vision and foresight, proceed
from the fundamental long-term interests of both
peoples to make a political decision, and strive to
resume fruitful talks as soon as possible.
The international community should maintain
its effort to lend effective support to the Middle East
peace process. China supports all peace efforts aimed
at de-escalating tensions between Palestine and Israel
and realizing the two-State solution. We support the
establishment of more effective mechanisms to help
bring peace to the Middle East. We also support the
idea that the Council should honour its responsibilities
16-44408

16/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and take action without delay to address positively the
legitimate concerns of Palestine and the Arab States. In
that process, the parties concerned should strengthen
coordination with Palestine and the Arab States so as
to form a synergy.
China is a staunch supporter of the just cause of
the Palestinian people and is an active mediator for
Palestinian-Israeli peace. As a permanent member of
the Council, China stands ready to work with the rest
of the international community towards a just solution
to the Palestine-Israel issue and towards peace and
stability in the Middle East as soon as possible.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General for
the particularly incisive stocktaking that he has just
shared with us after 10 years of managing the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, but also for his unremitting
commitment to dealing with that critical issue.

S/PV.7839

Finally, progress in the Palestinian reconciliation is
also indispensable.
For several years now, the so-called status quo
in the Middle East has really constituted a state of
regression — daily regression for the people and for
peace. With every day that passes, we see further
threats to the two-State solution, and yet, more than
ever, that should be our sole common compass. Given
that assessment and will, France, under the leadership
of the President of the Republic, Mr. François Hollande,
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Marc
Ayrault, presented an imitative last spring aimed at
finding a way out of the current impasse. Though the
peace process was partially eclipsed by the serious
crises elsewhere in the Middle East, our primary
objective was and continues to be to place this conflict
back at the heart of the political priorities of the
international community.

Unfortunately, we cannot contest his assessment
about the inexorable marginalization of the two-State
solution, which is still the only one that responds to
the legitimate aspirations of Palestinians and Israelis
to live in peace. While the climate that has paralysed
the peace process for the past two years is a shared
responsibility, it is undeniable that the ongoing Israeli
settlements are the main challenge to implementing
a two-State solution. The settlement enterprise is the
product of a deliberate policy, one that is more and more
obvious, and that is carving up the territory of a future
Palestinian State. We can see that in various ways:
the de facto annexation of Zone C and of its natural
resources, transfers of populations, the obstruction of
the movement of populations, the demolition of homes
and humanitarian infrastructure and a plan to legalize
illegal outposts. It is our responsibility to firmly
and collectively condemn that policy because we are
convinced that it is leading to disaster, for not just the
Palestinians, but also for Israel.

Since the beginning and at every stage, our approach
has been transparent vis-à-vis the parties, inclusive and
dovetailed with existing efforts, especially those of the
Quartet and our Arab partners. The ministerial meeting
that was held on 3 June in Paris marked the first
essential phase of international mobilization to save
and make the two-State solution concrete. Following
that meeting, in-depth work began with all partners
wishing to contribute to developing a comprehensive
incentive package, one that shows that both parties can
only benefit from peace, and that the current situation
has a cost — a cost to Israeli and Palestinian economic
development, a cost to building a viable Palestinian
State and a cost to the stability and prosperity of the
region as a whole. As a result of that work, which has
been going on for about a year, France will organize an
international conference in January, brining together
all partner States that advocate for peace. Our goal
is to present the contributions of the international
community to relaunching the negotiating process and
to concluding the implementation of a peace agreement.

Secondly, the radicalization of people, acts of
violence and terrorism and incitement to violence are
also ongoing threats that can cause a rapid degeneration
into an uncontrollable conflagration. We have seen
that on too many occasions, with three wars Gaza in
September and the violence that culminated between
October in 2015 and April 2016. That violence severely
undermines the prospect of two States, a Palestinian
State and an Israeli State, living side by side in peace
and security.

First, in collectively reaffirming our support for
a two-State solution in a context where the situation
continues to deteriorate, we are determined to recall
that it is the only possible solution to the conflict and
to recreate a political climate that can actually reverse
the negative spiral we are seeing on the ground and
to recreate positive momentum. Secondly, our goal is
achievable by promoting international engagement
based on a coherent mechanism for concrete support
and incentives towards relaunching dialogue between

16-444089/19

S/PV.7839

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the two parties. We all know that only the Israelis and
Palestinians can achieve peace directly. However, we
must also acknowledge that the conditions today are not
conducive to resuming such negotiations.
Therefore, our initiative seeks to promote a
convergence of efforts in the same direction with a view
to recreating an enabling environment for dialogue and
negotiations, showing the parties just how much they
stand to gain by bringing about peace. If we do not take
resolute action in that direction, the two-State solution
will continue to erode and disappear, like a mirage in
the desert. There is no other valid alternative that can
actually meet the legitimate aspirations of both parties.
We therefore must do everything within our power,
while we still have time, to prevent such a drift. I will
state once again that such a drift will never lead to a
just, enduring solution to the conflict and will continue
to threaten balance in the region.
That is the sense of efforts of France, along with all
our partners, working towards a favourable momentum
based on a two-State solution. We particularly call for
the support of the members of the Security Council,
to shoulder together the historic responsibility that is
incumbent on us to achieve peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegation is grateful
to His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his presence and briefing today. We thank him
for his frank assessment and strong message, and
we appreciate his untiring efforts to facilitate peace
in the Middle East, specifically on the Palestinian
question. I also acknowledge the presence of His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of New
Zealand, Mr. Murray McCully. Malaysia appreciates
New Zealand’s persistent commitment to pushing for
Council actions to create the necessary conditions for
peace in the region.
My delegation decided to take the floor today
to echo the views expressed around the table for the
need for the Council to take decisive and concrete
action on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in line with
the Council’s responsibility under the Charter of the
United Nations.
For far too long, the Council has been in a state of
inertia when it comes to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
which belies the worsening situation on the ground.
Malaysia reiterates the need to create the necessary
conditions for peace and to push the parties in the right
direction in order to salvage the two-State solution.
10/19

16/12/2016

Clearly, doing nothing is not an option for the Security
Council as an organ entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security. We must take urgent,
effective actions to hault and reverse illegal settlement
activities and end illegal occupations, which are
fuelling radicalization in the region and beyond.
Over the years, we have heard repeated warnings
from the Secretary-General and the Special
Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov, about the expansion of
settlement activities that threaten to bury the two-State
solution. And yet, Israeli settlement activities have
kept growing, despite their undeniably illegal nature
under international law, the clear recommendations of
the Quartet report and the widespread condemnation
of the international community. Recent developments
have led to a new sense of urgency, especially the
unprecedented attempt by the Israeli parliament to
pass a bill to legalize outposts, including on private
Palestinian lands. Furthermore, just last week, Israeli
authorities decided to proceed with a plan to build 770
housing units in the illegal Israeli settlement of Gilo, in
East Jerusalem.
As we have heard from the speakers at the Arria
Formula meeting on settlements last October, the
impact of settlements on the Palestinians are farreaching. Settlement expansion has led to an increase
in settlers’ violence, demolitions of Palestinian homes
and structures, confiscations of Palestinian lands,
discriminatory policies and denial of development
infrastructure and natural resources. Palestinians are
even prevented from burying their dead relatives in
the Muslim cemetery adjacent to the Al-Aqsa Mosque
because Israeli authorities have seized the cemetery land.
Since the beginning of this year, Israel has demolished
866 Palestinian structures in Area C of the occupied
West Bank, affecting over 5,000 Palestinians of whom
over 1,200 have been rendered homeless, including
586 children. The widespread anger, frustration and
despair inevitably fed into further radicalization of the
oppressed population that has nothing more to lose.
Settlement activities constitute the single biggest
threat to peace and the two-State solution. That
threat has multiplied and become entrenched over the
decades because of the Council’s inaction. It is long
overdue for the Council to assume its responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations to maintain
international peace and security and strive to reverse
the negative trends that are threatening peace and
the two-State solution. The Council is responsible for
16-44408

16/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the current predicament in the occupied Palestinian
territory, but we can also undo that damage if we stay
true to the values and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and uphold international law and
international human rights standards.
I reiterate that the Council has various tools at
its disposal, which it has not shied away from using
in various conflict areas in the world. The IsraeliPalestinian conflict should be no exception. We have
seen how providing incentives, whether in the form of
the comprehensive Arab Peace Initiative or the billions
of dollars in military aid sent to safeguard its security,
have done nothing to persuade Israel to move in the
direction of peace or led it to grant any concessions to
uphold the two-State solution. Instead, it has further
emboldened Israel to intensify its settlement activities
and entrench its repressive occupations.
We need to stop rewarding illegal behaviour
that threatens peace and security in the region and
beyond. We need to stop shielding those who have
continually violated Council resolutions, international
law and human rights standards. The Council has a
moral, legal and political responsibility to end Israel’s
repressive occupation and sanction its settlement
activities, apartheid policies and gross violations of
human rights, as well as to ensure accountability and
support the fundamental right to self-determination.
The Council should not be left high and dry, waiting for
another resolution.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing. Japan appreciates
the dedication shown by the Secretary-General in
promoting the Middle East peace process.
The briefing by the Secretary-General today was
a sad reminder that we have been unable to deal with
the persisting issues blocking peace and the two-State
solution in the region for the past 10 years. Japan’s
position is that it will not recognize any unilateral change
by either party that may prejudice the final resolution.
In that regard, Japan reiterates that settlement activities
are in violation of international law and urges Israel
to completely freeze such activities. We are deeply
concerned about the recent advancement of legislation
that would allow for the retroactive legalization of
illegal Israeli outposts located on private Palestinian
land.
We firmly believe that the issues surrounding the
peace process should, first and foremost, be resolved

S/PV.7839

through direct negotiations. We are deeply disturbed
by the continuing violence between the two sides.
Although the degree of violence has been relatively low
in the past few weeks, its root causes have not been
addressed. The persisting acts of violence from both
parties are fundamentally incompatible with a peaceful
solution. It is important that leaders on both sides take
steps to prevent violence and incitements to violence,
and show credible commitment to the peace process.
There is broad agreement within the Council
on the urgent need to save the prospects of a twoState solution. Japan supports initiatives that benefit
the Middle East peace process. Japan appreciates
the efforts made by the various parties and is ready
to constructively engage in those initiatives. The
Secretary-General noted that the Council has adopted
only two resolutions concerning the Middle East peace
process over the past 10 years. It is disappointing to be
reminded that we are still addressing the same issues
that those resolutions aimed to deal with. It is important
for the Council to send a united message to the parties to
reaffirm the commitment to peace. Japan believes that
the message to be sent should be effective, unequivocal
and meaningful, and contribute to promoting the peace
process together with other initiatives. Japan stands
ready to work with other Council members to that end.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We appreciate the
Secretary-General’s active stand on the issue, and we
share the understanding of many States represented in
the Chamber that the status quo in the Middle East leads
only to further instability and makes the prospects of
a two-State solution increasingly remote. Therefore,
only proactive diplomatic efforts, including on the part
of the Council, combined with a common desire of
both sides to the conflict, can lay the groundwork for
restarting the political process and moving away from
the ongoing deadlock in the Middle East peace process.
We cannot allow the hopes for peace on both sides to
vanish completely. So many decades without real peace
are inadmissible. Ukraine welcomes any international
effort aimed at bringing a new dynamic to the Middle
East settlement and seeking opportunities for the
resumption of negotiations between the Israeli and
Palestinian sides. We therefore appreciate the ongoing
efforts of France to unblock the Middle East peace
process. We still hope that the Palestinian and Israeli
authorities will respond positively to the invitation to
hold an international conference in January next year in

16-4440811/19

S/PV.7839

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Paris and will sit at the negotiating table in order to try
to revive prospects for a peace settlement.
Yet again, we have to signal our strong concern
over the continuous recurrence of violence in Gaza
and the West Bank. The incident that occurred this
week, on 14 December, left two Israeli police officers
wounded and a young Palestinian man dead. The attack
near the Austrian Hospice guest house in the Old City
is yet another reminder to all of us of the urgent need
for action.
We remain convinced that the establishment of
a stable, peaceful and democratic Palestinian State
is in Israel’s long-term security interests. However,
the ongoing process of settlement expansion and
the legalization of outposts do not contribute to the
already moribund peace process, and must be stopped.
Settlement construction in the West Bank and the twoState solution are two paths going in opposite directions.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive briefing today on a central issue in
the Middle East that is ever present in our minds but
ever absent from the Council, namely, the Palestinian
question.
We had hoped that, to guide our future work, the
Secretariat would issue a written report on what has
been done over the past 10 years, or rather what has
not been done, what has not been resolved, and what
the international community, the Organization, and the
Council in particular, have failed to achieve, namely, to
put an end to the longest standing occupation in modern
history.
Time and again, the international community has
agreed on and expressed its consensus on the so-called
two-State solution, comprised of an Israeli State and
a Palestinian State within the borders of 4 June 1967.
Palestine would be a valuable State with Jerusalem as
its capital. However, it seems that such agreement and
consensus are confined only to occasional words and
statements in an attempt to save face by boasting about
the assistance provided to the Palestinian people. It
seems that it is the fate of those people to be eternally
grateful and forever indebted to those who have sought
to improve their lot in exchange for surrendering their
fate and future to external Powers that take control
of their land, demolish their homes, displace their
population and besiege it behind walls.
12/19

16/12/2016

The reshuffling of cards and the denial of
truth have reached a new low. Some have rushed to
condemn Israel’s attempts to legalize new outposts
in the occupied Palestinian territory, hoping that we
will heap praise on them. Perhaps they hope that we
will overlook the fact that all settlements in occupied
Palestininan territory since 1967 are illegal according
to all international instruments and conventions,
including Council resolutions, which have apparently
become ineffectual.
The Israeli settlement activities are not just an
obstacle to peace and the two-State solution; they
are at the heart of the crisis. The cause of Palestine,
first and foremost, is the cause of a land occupied by
force; the cause of a people who have been denied their
right to live a life of dignity in their own homeland.
In that regard, I would like to remind the Council of
an internationally agreed principle that has been buried
alive, namely, the principle of land for peace principle.
The different levels of humanitarian attention
accorded to the Palestinian question must be examined
in comparison with other issues in the Middle East:
it is truly a source of surprise. The deafening voices
lamenting the absence of conscience and humanity on
certain issues suddenly fall silent when the issue at hand
is the issue of a people whose generations — including
women and the elderly — have only known injustice
over the past decades.
I call on everyone here today to self-reflect and to be
true to themselves. I call on the Council to pay serious
attention to the most urgent challenge of our time,
namely, the possible collapse of the two-State solution.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. We
also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his efforts, which
we support.
The Secretary-General summarized the past decade
for us, during which unfortunately little has improved
in the Middle East. It is with sadness and pain that we
received today’s assessment of the situation, which
hardly appears encouraging.The Middle East region
is suffering from a number of civil wars and sectarian
wars: together with the presence of various terrorist
and extremist groups the area has been transformed
into a permanent battlefield and is causing enormous
suffering to the civilian population, particularly in
Syria, Iraq and Yemen.
16-44408

16/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In the light of what we have heard, we cannot
ignore the fact that some members of the Organization,
including Security Council members, have had and
continue to have significant shared responsibility in
those conflicts. As for their place in history, only time
will tell.
With regard to resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
question, this is a topic that must continue to be high
on the agendas of the Organization and the Security
Council and we should not give up in spite of the
current impasse. Ever since the partition of Palestine
in 1948, Uruguay has been in favour of the creation of
two States, one Jewish and one Arab. We have always
followed the situation in the region very attentively and
we are extremely concerned about the lack of progress
between Palestine and Israel given the humanitarian,
political and security consequences it holds for both
countries, as well as the impact it has on the entire
Middle East region.
Uruguay would once again like to reiterate its
support for the right of both Israel and Palestine to
live in peace within safe, secure and internationally
recognized borders in a environment of renewed
cooperation free of any threats or actions that could
threaten peace. We once again endorse the twoState solution for two independent States and we are
convinced that this is the only way that will make it
possible to ensure the peaceful co-existence of Israel
and Palestine. Today it is more essential than ever that
the international community reinforce its efforts to
support this process and encourage the parties to return
to the negotiating table.
Uruguay is also worried about the expansion of
settlements in occupied Palestinian territory and the
West Bank. As we have mentioned, these settlements are
illegal under international law and are in contravention
of the recommendations of the Quartet. Uruguay
reiterates its call to the parties to refrain from taking
any unilateral actions could undermine dialogue and to
abide fully by their obligations under international law.
We urge Israel to halt its settlement practices.
Futhermore, Uruguay emphatically condemns
terrorist acts and the glorification of violence occurring
on Palestinian territory. It is therefore extremely
important to give political signals to find a way out
of the current vicious cycle of withdrawal and violent
confrontation. It is important for the parties to refrain
from taking unilateral measures that undermine

S/PV.7839

dialogue and instead comply with all obligations under
international law and Council resolutions in good faith.
We reiterate our willingness to continue working
together in order to reactivate the peace process through
all existing initiatives in order to overcome the current
status quo, including some within the framework of the
Council. None of these initiatives can or should replace
the best way to achieve peace, that is, direct, bilateral
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians that
will make it possible to find a satisfactory solution to
this process.
In this Chamber in the past I quoted the American
poet Bob Dylan, specifically the old song The Times
They Are A-Changin’. I fear that, without decisive
and concrete action by the Security Council, we will
have to utter a different phrase as times will have
indeed changed.
Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): Let me
begin by thanking Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
giving us his final briefing on various aspects involved
in the Palestinian question. Like other speakers before
me, I would like to pay tribute to him once again for his
commitment to this issue.
The briefing we just heard is full of lessons, but we
must also face the sad reality of the Palestinian people.
Despite multiple initiatives, the future of the peace
process continues to offer little hope: in fact, we might
say that it has reached an impassse. Unfortunately,
we see the two-State solution disappearing more
rapidly each day — at a time when we are witnessing
the continued acceleration of settlement activities,
especially new units in Gilo, East Jerusalem, whereas
in 2006 such demolitions of homes, premises and other
buildings affected only 2,500 citizens.
At the last Arria Formula meeting on settlement
activity, on 14 October, thanks to the initiative of five
members of the Security Council, we heard statements
made by experts, including Israeli citizens, that there
is clear progress in populating occupied Palestinian
territory based on the official policies of the Israeli
Government. We therefore solemnly called for the
Security Council at last to work towards ending the
occupation and settlement activities, which, I remind
the Council, affects both Palestinians and Israelis alike.
I would also like to highlight the ongoing impact
of this conflict on children, mostly Palestinian;. But
we must also not forget that Israeli children, too, are

16-4440813/19

S/PV.7839

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

suffering from this conflict. As far as these children are
concerned, they have known only war and occupation.
However, along with Israelis and Palestinians alike, we
share the same aspirations for peace and stability. The
Council must act to restart negotiations leading to a
solution to those disputes.
In accordance with resolution 1860 (2009), we
reiterate our call to lift the blockade on Gaza, which
has had devastating humanitarian and socioeconomic
consequences, affecting around 2 million people, half
of whom are children. We recall the urgent need to
rebuild Gaza, in particular through the pledges that
were made at the international donors conference held
in Cairo in 2014.
Without progress in the peace process, there will be
no end to the violence that affects both Palestinians and
Israelis. We reiterate our disapproval and condemnation
of violence and terrorism, as well as incitement to
hatred, regardless of the perpetrators or the motivation.
We moreover reaffirm our position in favour of holding
a follow-up conference to the conference held in Paris
in June in order to give every chance of success to the
French initiative, for which our delegation renews its
support. We also support diplomatic efforts undertaken
by Egypt and the Russian Federation, which, in our
view, require further coordination.
It is the responsibility of the international
community, of the Security Council first, as the
guarantor of international peace and security, to work
for the two-State solution — one Palestinian and the
other Israeli, living side by side in peace and security
within internationally recognized, secure borders.
That is the intention of all the relevant United Nations
resolutions and what is recommended in the Quartet’s
report of 1 July. According to the report, the time
has come for this body, whose members agree on the
obstacles that stand in the way of a lasting solution to the
dispute, to take up this critical issue as soon as possible
and reaffirm the centrality of the two-State solution.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Out the outset, I thank
His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing, reporting the lack of progress and
the contradictions of the Organization with regard
to the Palestinian question. I would like to take this
opportunity to acknowledge the dedication of the
Secretary-General to peace in the Middle East and
his firm commitment to the women, men and children
14/19

16/12/2016

who have suffered because of the conflicts affecting
the region.
In the context of the various complex and tragic
events now taking place in the Middle East, which
continue to be a source of deep concern for the
international community, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela will focus its statement today — which will
probably be the last in the Security Council — on the
Palestinian question, one of the most unjust and tragic
situations that even the United Nations has not been able
to resolve. It is one of the deepest and most influential
with regard to the other problems and tensions affecting
that afflicted region. Moreover, it is a long-standing
issue that we have not be able to resolve. So far it has
been a massive failure of the Security Council, above
all of the permanent members, who through their veto
or their silence have encouraged Israeli violence against
the Palestinian people.
During our term as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council, we have witnessed with frustration
the disregard of continual appeals by Venezuela and
other Council members, as well as numerous Member
States and the international community in general, for
the Security Council to take decisive action and adopt
a unified position promoting peace, the end of the
Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem, the lifting of the blockade on the Gaza
Strip and the settlement of the conflict through the twoState solution.
We believe that the Organization’s ethical
commitment to the Palestinians and the responsibility of
the Security Council in maintaining peace and security
compel us to insist more forcefully, in this body,
that it take steps to move the peace process forward,
ensure that the Council continues to be actively and
constructively involved in the process to achieve a just
and lasting solution to the conflict and restore hope
to those who are suffering from the brutal occupation
that United Nations will honour its moral debt towards
the Palestinian people. Otherwise, this meeting will be
nothing other than an exercise in diplomatic rhetoric.
We believe the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is at a
total impasse. The occupying Power, Israel, remains
intransigent and not only continues its pernicious
and unjust occupation of Palestine, but also the
expansion of its territory through the expropriation
of land legitimately held by Palestinians and the
building of settlements. The aggression of the Israeli
16-44408

16/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Government against the Palestinian people through
the expropriation of land, the forced displacement and
expulsion of Palestinians, the demolition of Palestinian
infrastructure and homes and attempts to retroactively
legalize Israeli settlements in the West Bank is a clear
demonstration of an extremist and aggressive policy
launched by the Israeli Government and supported by
the colonist sectors of public opinion in Israel that see
the annexation of Palestinian territory as a fact on the
ground, thereby undermining of the two-State solution
and the viability of a Palestinian State. Approximately
700 Palestinian homes have been destroyed this year by
the occupying Power, while plans to expand settlements
and construction have not ceased. It is up to the Council
to take urgent action to condemn illegal settlements
and demand and require that Israel end this illegal
expansionist policy.
Furthermore, the Israeli authorities have insisted
on their intent to crush the will of the Palestinians by
ongoing violations of their most fundamental basic
rights in the occupied territories and in the Gaza Strip,
which has been under siege and blockaded by Israel.
Israel has made disproportionate and indiscriminate
use of force through its military and security forces,
with lethal consequences, including more than 220
Palestinian fatalities since October 2015 and more than
7,000 Palestinians wounded by real ammunition and
rubber bullets fired by the Israeli forces. That violence
has not subsided.
One must also take into account the more than 7,000
Palestinians who are being held in Israeli jails, including
more than 500 children, for whose release we continue
to call. We wonder how the permanent members of the
Council can remain silent on that situation, especially
those who provide Israel with political and military
support while in other situations they deliver emotional
statements on the subject of human rights. How is it
possible to sustain such a double moral standard?
Moreover, the situation of the more than 700
individuals who are suffering unjust administrative
detention is of grave concern. They include the recent
cases of Anas Shadid and Ahmad Abu Fara, victims
of administrative detention who have been on a hunger
strike for more than 50 days to protest the deplorable
conditions of detention in Israeli jails. Their health has
been seriously harmed by the authorities’ indifference
and refusal to release them. Israel does not care about
the fate of the Palestinian people. Its responsibility as an
occupying Power is totally ignored. We therefore once

S/PV.7839

again request the Council to consider the possibility
of seeking concrete and expeditious measures for the
effective protection of the Palestinian people from
the abuses by Israel in the occupied territories, in
accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention, on the
protection of Civilians.
There must also be an end to impunity, which shelters
those responsible for attacks, acts of aggresion, killings
and violations of the human rights of Palestinians.
Accountability for such reprehensible behaviour should
a part of the demands to which the Israeli authorities
must answer. In addition to the aggresion provoked
by institutional authorities, Palestinians are currently
suffering from the violence from more than 600,000
Israeli settlers — with the direct and implicit support of
the Israeli authorities to carry out their acts of extreme
violence — who are continuing to uproot Palestinians
from their own ancestral land in order to blot out the
notion and the very possibility of a Palestinian State.
The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, which
has been blockaded and besieged by Israel, as well as
in the other occupied territories, reveals a deteriorating
situation characterized by continuous violence and
ongoing pressure exerted by Israel, in violation of
fundamental norms of international law, including
international humanitarian law, so as to limit or deny
access to health care, education, housing, jobs and basic
services — such as water and electricity — and the
freedom of Palestinians in the West Bank to undertake
religious and cultural activities. Furthermore, the
blockade in Gaza has prevented the Palestinians from
even beginning to rebuild the territory after the criminal
Israel aggression of 2014. The blockade has cut all links
with the West Bank.
The people of Gaza are encountering similar
difficulties to those in other occupied territories
regarding access to basic services and fundamental
rights. All of this is due to the actions of the occupying
Power. The blockade of Gaza serves to further radicalize
the Palestinian population in order to maintain the
division between Gaza from the West Bank.
In that sombre context for Palestinians, the
possibility of negotations that might lead to a peaceful,
sustainable and fair two-State solution is more
urgent than ever. The role of the Security Council is
fundamental in moving towards the resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We must therefore abandon
inaction and commit ourselves to seeking effective

16-4440815/19

S/PV.7839

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

options to achieve peace. In that regard, there is a
need for a Security Council resolution demanding an
immediate cessation of the illegal Israeli settlements,
in order to send an initial message of the unity of the
Council, and thereby on an issue on which there is a
broad convergence of views with respect to settlements
being illegal, constituting an obstacle to peace and
a factor that negatively affects the possibility of a
two-State solution. We all agree that the end of the
settlement policy would be an important step towards
direct negotiations.
We would like to say that we think it inappropriate and
unjust to speak in this Chamber about disproportionate
resolutions against Israel. It is unacceptable when
the responsibility of the United Nations is to support
the weakest party to a conflict, who is often the
victim — in this case, that party is the Palestinian
people. The Palestinian people have been savagely
assaulted and violently punished by the occupying
Power, which violates international law with impunity
thanks to its military superiority and the political
support it has in the Security Council. We think that
the Council ought to assume its responsibility, which is
common but differentiated in this case, because a large
part of the Palestinian tragedy is the responsibility of
the Council due to its inaction and its veto of peace.
In the waning days of our country’s status as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, we
would like to reiterate the position that we expressed
on the very first day of our term on the Council,
namely, that the Israeli occupation of Palestinian land
must end — for we all know that it is the root cause
of the conflict — and that we must support the work
of the Middle East Quartet and all other efforts by
the international community, including initiatives by
various members of the Council, such as Egypt, France
and Russia, which we commend.
We also welcome the holding of an international
conference in January. We should do everything
possible to promote the political process and
negotiations between Israel and Palestine with a
view to establishing a peaceful two-State solution,
taking into account the Arab Peace Initiative and
acknowledging the right of the Palestinian people to
live in their own State — a full-fledged State Member
of the Organization that cosexists peacefully alongside
Israel, in line with the internationally recognized pre1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
All of this is in accordance with the Charter of the
16/19

16/12/2016

United Nations and the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions. These are inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people. My country, which
has always supported the just Palestinian cause, will
continue to advocate in this forum and others for urgent
action to end the conflict at hand and put an end to
the shameful and criminal occupation by Israel of
Palestinian territory.
As we have said on numerous occasions, and as
has been repeated numerous times here in the Council,
the status quo is unsustainable. We cannot continue
offering excuses and preconditions on events that
are the consequence of the occupation, including the
desperate acts of violence, which we also condemn;
or for the lack of unity among Palestinians. The
Security Council must act decisively to effect change
in this situation that demands and obliges both sides
to come back to negotiations. It must express support
for the Middle East Quartet in order to show support
for the efforts of other Member States in the Council
to bring the parties together. Venezuela is ready to
work on a draft resolution with Member States, such as
New Zealand, to provide impetus to work urgently on
this and constructively contribute to a document that
reflects the consensus that exists among the members
of the Council regarding the necessary condemnation
of illegal Israeli settlements and the need for progress
on the Palestinian question.
As this is our last statement as a non-permament
member of the Security Council on the Palestinian
question, we call on the conscience of all those present,
particularly the permanent members, so that we can
hear the clamor of the Palestinian people for their
inalienable rights to their own State and to peaceful
coexistence. We must take concrete steps forward on
the difficult path towards a peaceful resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his efforts
throughout his tenure to secure peace and protect
civilians in the Middle East and throughout the world.
With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the
trends are indeed discouraging, which is why it is so
critical that we all work to keep the possibility of peace
open. There really is no alternative. The United States
remains committed to achieving a lasting resolution of
the conflict and we will continue to work to advance
the interest that we all share — bringing about a
16-44408

16/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

lasting peace between Israel and Palestine. We remain
in close consultations with the parties to the conflict
and key stakeholders to try to move things in a more
positive direction. We continue to call upon all sides
to demonstrate with actions and policies a genuine
commitment to the two-State solution, which will
enable a resumption of meaningful negotiations in
the future.
The current United States Administration has
consistently opposed every effort to delegitimize
Israel or undermine its security, including at the
United Nations. We will continue to oppose any draft
resolutions that would seek to do so.
As the Council knows, we are very concerned about
the situation on the ground and believe that current
trends are moving in the wrong direction. That includes
our serious concerns about continued settlement
activities. Make no mistake: the United States views
settlements as illegitimate and counterproductive to
the cause of peace. In his recent remarks at the Saban
Forum, Secretary Kerry made clear that Israel now
faces a choice between continued settlement activity
and a two-State solution in the future. As he said, while
we do not believe that settlements are the root cause of
the conflict, they clearly represent a barrier to achieving
a two-State solution. The number of settlers in the West
Bank has increased from 110,000 at the time of the Oslo
Accords, in 1993, to nearly 400,000 today.
We are deeply disturbed by Israel’s moving
forward on the unprecedented legalization under Israeli
law of outposts deep in the West Bank. We believe
the potential legalization of thousands of settlement
housing units that are currently illegal under Israeli law
would profoundly damage prospects for a two-State
solution. We are further troubled when Ministers in the
Israeli Government say publicly that there will be no
Palestinian State.
Terrorism, incitement to violence, glorification
of terrorists and other violent acts also profoundly
threaten efforts to advance peace. We continue to stress
to the Palestinian leadership the importance of strongly
opposing violence in all forms. We continue to make
clear that the terrorism and incitement to violence
must end. Such acts run contrary to efforts to preserve
prospects for peace.
We strongly condemn terrorist acts and other
violence against Israelis and Palestinians. There is
absolutely no justification for such acts. We are also

S/PV.7839

deeply concerned about reports of excessive use of force
by Israeli security forces against Palestinian civilians.
Authorities should conduct timely and transparent
investigations into these incidents and ensure that
appropriate measures, including prosecution when
warranted, are taken to follow through on the findings.
There are some positive examples of coordination
between Israelis and Palestinians that should be
encouraged. For example, coordination between Israeli
and Palestinian security forces has played a key role
in preventing a greater deterioration in the security
situation, and that coordination should continue. We
have also seen coordination among civil-society actors
work to the benefit of both sides. Facing some of the
worst fires in recent memory, Palestinian civil-defence
teams funded by the United States Government again
came to the aid of their Israeli counterparts, battling
fires in Haifa and in Beit Meir and Nataf, near Jerusalem.
This is the type of cooperation that can benefit all.
Economic development is also necessary, and
the private sector can play a vital role. For example,
the first Coca Cola factory opened in the Gaza at the
end of November. The plant will create 300 direct
jobs and 3,000 indirect jobs in the Gaza supply chain.
The licensed manufacturer of Coca Cola in the West
Bank and Gaza also committed an initial $1.3 million
to a corporate social-responsibility fund to create
additional jobs for Gaza youth and improve access
to clean drinking water in a Gaza refugee camp. On
1 December, donors pledged at least $175 million in
grants and $270 million in soft loans for the trilateral
Jordanian-Israeli-Palestinian Red Sea-Dead Sea water
project. Cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority is vital to addressing the region’s water
scarcity and ensuring the survival of the Dead Sea.
Still, additional steps are urgently needed to
stabilize the economic situation, especially in Gaza,
and to reverse current trends. We continue to stress
the importance of both sides demonstrating through
policies and actions a genuine commitment to a twoState solution in order to reduce tensions, rebuild trust,
avoid a cycle of escalation and restore hope.
Mr. Martins (Angola): This is the last opportunity
for us to speak in this Chamber on the question of Palestine
and the Middle East peace process. As a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, I would like to take
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General and
commend him for his consistent engagement with the

16-4440817/19

S/PV.7839

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

peace process, and in particular for his work in favour
of the two-State solution. I would also like to express
appreciation the positive engagement of New Zealand,
and especially the presence in the Council this morning
of Foreign Minister Murray McCulley.
Over the past two years, a great amount of
information was provided from United Nations sources,
humanitarian agencies, civil society and warnings
made by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy
with regard to the unsustainable status quo on the
Israeli-Palestinian issue and the mounting threats to the
two-State solution. However, despite the overwhelming
evidence, the Council has been unable to effectively
address the situation.
The matter of the fact is that Israel, with its
relatively great military power, has pursued the
colonization of territories against the will of their
populations for almost half a century. Palestinians
living under harsh occupation and brutal blockade
face systematic discrimination and violations of their
basic human rights. We in the Security Council cannot
continue defending equal treatment of both sides
and shared responsibility for the lack of progress in
the two-State solution. We wonder how it is possible
to apply the same level of legal, political and moral
obligations and responsibilities to the Palestinians,
who are dispossessed of their homelands, deprived
of natural resources and economic development and
restricted in their movement. Such treatment is one
of the main root causes that creates, fuels and breeds
anger, frustration and despair, giving rise to acts of
violence and extremism.
In that context, we commend the drive in recent
months by the international community to mobilize
in order to salvage the process and prospects for
the two-State solution. Israeli policies of continued
settlement expansion is a real threat to the two-State
solution. All members of the Council reiterated that
point this morning. The Government’s latest move to
adopt a legalization bill aimed at sanctioning the illegal
settlements and outposts built on private Palestinian
property in the West Bank is a step further towards
annexation and a demonstration of our collective
failure to bring about dialogue between Israelis
and Palestinians. The Council is called upon to act
decisively and in unity if we are to defuse another
explosive ingredient in an already volatile region.
18/19

16/12/2016

Angola therefore welcomes initiatives by a number
of Council members to unblock the situation, especially
the French conference that is due to take place, seeking
to restart negotiations, since it is our collective
responsibility to act, and urges the Council to uphold its
responsibilities in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. We furthermore welcome efforts by the
League of Arab States and look forward to the outcome
of the ministerial meeting, which we hope will provide
a workable road map on the way forward. As important
as it is to get the parties back to the negotiating table,
however, we must insist that the Israeli Government
halt and reverse the illegal settlement activity and put
an end to the blockade of Gaza, which has been the
cause of a dire humanitarian situation so far and for
too long.
During the past two years, we have tried to actively
participate in all initiatives to revive the Middle East
peace process. In Security Council debates, in private
consultations, in several Arria Formula meetings, we
have tried to contribute to finding a solution for this
long-standing conflict. The international community
and the United Nations membership agree that the
Council has enough tools at its disposal to address the
issue of the settlements, since they are illegal under
international law and constitute the most concrete
threat to the two-State solution.
As we come to the end of our two-year participation
as a non-permanent member, let me reiterate the hope
that the Council will look at the two-State solution not
as a mere slogan, but as a workable, effective road map
towards peace in this very volatile region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a brief statement in my national capacity.
I should like to ask Mr. Mladenov to convey to
the Secretary-General, who had to leave the Chamber
because of other commitments, that he could not have
done more in 10 years. He has tried everything. He
maintained innumerable contacts with the parties and
we share his assessment.
Spain too will be leaving the Security Council in
two weeks. I will therefore provide a brief summary
of our position and what we are currently concerned
about.
We are concerned that the Knesset is considering a
draft law to legalize outposts in East Jerusalem and the
West Bank. We are concerned about the expansion of
16-44408

16/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

settlements and the demolition of Palestinian structures.
We are also concerned about the terrorist violence and
incitement to the use of force. Lastly, our understanding
is that reconciliation at the intra-Palestinian level is
essential if we are to reactivate the peace process.
Our commitment — Spain’s commitment — to
peace in Palestine has no expiration date. It began with
the Madrid Conference in 1991, and we have continued
to work since then. The most recent example of this
was the summit of religious leaders of the Middle East,
which was held in Alicante on 15 and 16 November.
I am pleased to say that this was a success and that a
press release was adopted that represented an important
step forward for tolerance and mutual respect. When
we leave the Security Council, we will continue to take
initiatives of this kind.
Over the past two years, at no time have we lost
hope that the peace process could be unblocked, nor did
we resign ourselves to seeing the Security Council fail
to play a role in this process. Peace, as many have said,

S/PV.7839

can be the only outcome of direct bilateral negotiations
and the support of the international community can be
a key factor. For that reason, we support the various
initiatives currently under way, in particular the French
initiative and the work of the Quartet. We also reiterate
the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative. Any action
in the Security Council must take this context into
account.
Like other representatives, we note that behind
all the Security Council’s initiatives there is a will to
preserve the two States and that there is a clear feeling
that the settlements are among the main threats. I
shall therefore conclude by saying that I trust that the
Security Council can give effect to concrete action
before Spain leaves the Council.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

16-4440819/19
