A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/161
9 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 97
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/607)]
49/161.

Implementation of the Nairobi Forward-looking
Strategies for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions, in particular resolution 44/77
of 8 December 1989, in which, inter alia, it endorsed and reaffirmed the
importance of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of
Women 1/ for the period up to the year 2000 and set out measures for their
immediate implementation and for the overall achievement of the interrelated
goals and objectives of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace,
Recalling also its resolutions 46/98 of 16 December 1991, 47/95 of
16 December 1992 and 48/108 of 20 December 1993,
Taking into consideration the resolutions adopted by the Economic and
Social Council on issues relating to women since the adoption of its
resolution 1987/18 of 26 May 1987,
Reaffirming its determination to encourage the full participation of
women in economic, social, cultural, civil and political affairs and to
promote development, cooperation and international peace,
Conscious of the important and constructive contribution to the
improvement of the status of women made by the Commission on the Status of
Women, the specialized agencies, the regional commissions and other

1/
Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development
and Peace, Nairobi, 15-26 July 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.85.IV.10), chap. I, sect. A.
95-76621

/...

A/RES/49/161
Page 2
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system and non-governmental
organizations concerned,
Concerned that the resources available in the Secretariat to the
programme on the advancement of women are insufficient to ensure adequate
support to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
and effective implementation of other aspects of the programme, especially the
preparations for the Fourth World Conference on Women: Action for Equality,
Development and Peace, to be held in 1995,
Taking into account Commission on the Status of Women resolutions 36/8
of 20 March 1992, 2/ 37/7 of 25 March 1993 3/ and 38/10 of
18 March 1994 4/ on the preparations for the Fourth World Conference on
Women,
Bearing in mind the important role non-governmental organizations play
in all activities for the advancement of women and the fact that some of them,
especially those from developing countries, do not enjoy consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council,
Noting with satisfaction that the preparations for the Fourth World
Conference on Women have entered a substantive stage, that the relevant United
Nations bodies, China, as the host country, and other countries all attach
great importance to the preparations for the Conference and that the various
preparatory activities are being conducted in an in-depth and comprehensive
manner,
Considering that 1995 will be a year of crucial importance to the
preparations for the Fourth World Conference on Women and that the Commission
on the Status of Women will deliberate the content of the Platform for Action
at its thirty-ninth session,
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General 5/ containing the
executive summary of the 1994 World Survey on the Role of Women in
Development,
Expressing its satisfaction that the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development 6/ establishes that
the empowerment of women is a key issue for the Fourth World Conference on
Women,
Also expressing its satisfaction that the regional preparatory
conferences for the Fourth World Conference on Women have produced plans or
platforms for their regions, which provide useful inputs for the Platform for
Action of the Conference,

2/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1992,
Supplement No. 4 (E/1992/24), chap. I, sect. C.
3/

Ibid., 1993, Supplement No. 7 (E/1993/27), chap. I, sect. C.

4/

Ibid., 1994, Supplement No. 7 (E/1994/27), chap. I, sect. C.

5/

A/49/378.

6/

A/CONF.171/13, chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
/...

A/RES/49/161
Page 3
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 7/

2.
Reaffirms section I, paragraph 2, of the recommendations and
conclusions arising from the first review and appraisal of the implementation
of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women,
contained in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1990/15 of
24 May 1990, which called for an improved pace in the implementation of the
Forward-looking Strategies in the crucial last decade of the twentieth
century, since the cost to societies of failing to implement them would be
high in terms of slowed economic and social development, misuse of human
resources and reduced progress for society as a whole;
3.
Urges Governments, international organizations and
non-governmental organizations to implement the recommendations;
4.
Calls again upon Member States to give priority to policies and
programmes relating to the sub-theme "Employment, health and education", in
particular to literacy for self-reliance of women and the mobilization of
indigenous resources, as well as to issues relating to the role of women in
economic and political decision-making, population, the environment,
information and science and technology;
5.
Reaffirms the central role of the Commission on the Status of
Women in matters related to the advancement of women, and calls upon it to
continue promoting the implementation of the Forward-looking Strategies to the
year 2000, based on the goals of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace and the sub-theme "Employment, health and
education", and urges all relevant bodies of the United Nations system to
cooperate effectively with the Commission in this task;
6.
Requests the Commission, when considering the priority theme
relating to development during its thirty-ninth session, to ensure its early
contribution to the preparatory work for forthcoming major international
conferences to be held in 1995, namely, the Fourth World Conference on Women:
Action for Equality, Development and Peace and the World Summit for Social
Development, and to address the impact of technologies on women;
7.
Also requests the Commission to give special attention to women in
developing countries, particularly in Africa and the least developed
countries, who suffer disproportionately from the effects of the global
economic crisis and the heavy external debt burden, and to recommend further
measures for the equalization of opportunity and for the integration of the
roles and perspective of women, as well as their needs, concerns and
aspirations, into the entire development process when considering the priority
theme of development;
8.
Emphasizes, in the framework of the Forward-looking Strategies,
the importance of the total integration of women of all ages in the
development process, bearing in mind the specific and urgent needs of the
developing countries, and calls upon Member States to establish specific
targets at each level in order to increase the participation of women in
professional, management and decision-making positions in the countries;
9.
Emphasizes once again the need to give urgent attention to
redressing socio-economic inequities at the national and international levels
as a necessary step towards the full realization of the goals and objectives
of the Forward-looking Strategies through meeting the practical and strategic
needs of women;

7/

A/49/349.
/...

A/RES/49/161
Page 4
10.
Strongly urges that particular attention be given by the competent
United Nations organizations and Governments to the special needs of women
with disabilities, elderly women and also women in vulnerable situations such
as migrant and refugee women and children;
11.
Urges the international community and the competent United Nations
bodies and organs to place more emphasis on the sharp increase in the
incidence of poverty among rural women;
12.
Welcomes the recommendations adopted at the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development on women, environment and
development in all programme areas, in particular those set out in chapter 24
of Agenda 21, 8/ entitled "Global action for women towards sustainable and
equitable development";
13.
Welcomes also the recommendations of the International Conference
on Population and Development regarding the advancement of women, contained in
the Programme of Action of the Conference; 6/
14.
Urges organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system to ensure the active participation of women in the planning and
implementation of programmes for sustainable development, and requests
Governments, in the context of General Assembly resolution 47/191 of
22 December 1992, to consider nominating women as representatives to the
Commission on Sustainable Development;
15.
Requests the Secretary-General, in formulating the system-wide
medium-term plan for the advancement of women for the period 1996-2001 and in
integrating the Forward-looking Strategies into activities mandated by the
General Assembly, to pay particular attention to specific sectoral themes that
cut across the three objectives, equality, development and peace, and to
include, in particular, literacy, education, health, population, the impact of
technology on the environment and its effect on women and the full
participation of women in decision-making, and to continue to assist
Governments in strengthening their national machineries for the advancement of
women;
16.
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue updating the World
Survey on the Role of Women in Development, 9/ bearing in mind its
importance, placing particular emphasis on the adverse impact of the difficult
economic situation affecting the majority of developing countries,
particularly on the condition of women, giving special attention to worsening
conditions for the incorporation of women into the labour force, as well as
the impact of reduced expenditures for social services on opportunities
available to women for education, health and child care;
17.
Requests Governments, when presenting candidatures for vacancies
in the Secretariat, in particular at the decision-making level, to give
priority to candidatures of women, and requests the Secretary-General in
reviewing those candidatures to give special consideration to female
candidates from underrepresented and unrepresented developing countries;

8/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I, Vol.
I/Corr.1, vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1))(United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
9/

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.89.IV.2.
/...

A/RES/49/161
Page 5
18.
Requests the Secretary-General to invite Governments,
organizations of the United Nations system, including the regional commissions
and the specialized agencies, and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to report periodically to the Economic and Social Council,
through the Commission on the Status of Women, on activities undertaken at all
levels to implement the Forward-looking Strategies;
19.
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide for the
existing weekly radio programmes on women in the regular budget of the United
Nations, making adequate provisions for broadcasts in different languages, and
to develop the focal point for issues relating to women in the Department of
Public Information of the Secretariat, which, in concert with the Department
for Policy Coordination and Sustainable Development, should provide a more
effective public information programme relating to the advancement of women;
20.
Further requests the Secretary-General to include in his report on
the implementation of the Forward-looking Strategies, to be submitted to the
General Assembly at its fiftieth session, an assessment of recent developments
that are relevant to the priority themes to be considered at the subsequent
session of the Commission and to transmit to the Commission a summary of
relevant views expressed by delegations during the debate in the Assembly;
21.
Requests the Commission to continue to examine the implications of
the World Conference on Human Rights and the Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action 10/ adopted by the Conference for its central role in matters
related to the rights of women within the United Nations system and to report
to the Economic and Social Council at its substantive session of 1995;
22.
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report for the
Commission, for consideration at its thirty-ninth session, on steps to be
taken by the Division for the Advancement of Women, in cooperation with other
United Nations bodies, specifically the Centre for Human Rights of the
Secretariat, to ensure that relevant human rights mechanisms of the United
Nations, such as treaty-monitoring bodies, rapporteurs and working groups,
regularly address violations of the rights of women, including gender-specific
abuses;
23.
Recognizes that the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence
against Women, proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/104 of
20 December 1993, is essential to the attainment of full respect for the
rights of women and is an important contribution to efforts aimed at achieving
the objectives of the Forward-looking Strategies by the year 2000;
24.
Expresses its satisfaction for the smooth conclusion of the
regional preparatory meetings, the results of which constitute important
inputs to the Platform for Action, the final document of the Fourth World
Conference on Women;
25.
Requests the Secretary-General to give more support, from within
existing resources, to the Division for the Advancement of Women, acting as
secretariat of the Fourth World Conference on Women, by providing sufficient
financial and human resources and giving wide publicity to the Conference and
its preparatory activities;
26.
Appeals to countries that have not done so to compile their
national reports in earnest and to forward them in time to the secretariat of
the Conference;

10/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
/...

A/RES/49/161
Page 6
27.
Decides that, in order to support developing countries, in
particular the least developed among them, in participating fully and
effectively in the Conference and its preparatory process, each least
developed country, to the extent that extrabudgetary funds are available, may
be provided from the trust fund established by the Secretary-General for the
preparations for the Conference with travel expenses and, on an exceptional
basis, daily subsistence allowance for representatives attending the thirtyninth session of the Commission, which is the preparatory body for the
Conference, and the Conference itself;
28.
Expresses its gratitude and appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have already contributed to the Trust Fund
for the Fourth World Conference on Women;
29.
Recommends the further development of methods of compilation and
data collection in areas of concern identified by the Commission, and urges
Member States to improve and broaden collection of gender-disaggregated
statistical information and make it available to the relevant bodies of the
United Nations system with a view to preparing, in all official languages, as
a background document for the Fourth World Conference on Women, an updated
edition of The World’s Women 1970-1990: Trends and Statistics; 11/
30.
Endorses the request by the Commission that the Secretary-General
should include information on the decision-making position of women in public
life and in the fields of science and technology in the preparation of the
priority theme on peace, "Women in international decision-making", for the
Commission at its thirty-ninth session, in 1995;
31.
Requests the Secretary-General to make available for the Fourth
World Conference on Women reports and decisions of the World Conference on
Human Rights, the International Conference on Population and Development and
the World Summit for Social Development;
32.
Emphasizes that the success of the Fourth World Conference on
Women will depend largely on the follow-up to the Conference;
33.
Invites United Nations bodies and specialized agencies and other
relevant intergovernmental organizations to consider making concrete
commitments and specifying actions to meet the global priorities for the
advancement of women by the year 2000 which will be reflected in the Platform
for Action;
34.
Invites Member States similarly to consider specific action which
they could take in their own countries to bring about change by the year 2000;
35.
Reaffirms its decision, taking into account Commission resolution
37/7, to adopt the modalities for the participation in and contribution to the
Fourth World Conference on Women and its preparatory process by
non-governmental organizations, particularly those from the developing
countries, set out in the annex to General Assembly resolution 48/108;
36.
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report for the Fourth
World Conference on Women, to be held at Beijing in 1995, on the extent to
which gender concerns have been included in the activities of the relevant
human rights mechanisms of the United Nations, such as treaty-monitoring
bodies, rapporteurs and working groups;

11/

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.90.XVII.3.
/...

A/RES/49/161
Page 7
37.
Requests that the report of the Fourth World Conference on Women
be submitted to the General Assembly at its fiftieth session for consideration
and action;
38.
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare for the consideration of
the General Assembly at its fiftieth session a report on follow-up to the
Fourth World Conference on Women, taking into consideration the
recommendations made at the Conference;
39.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its fiftieth session on measures taken to implement the present
resolution.
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
