S/2018/923

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 October 2018
Original: English

Situation in Abyei
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 32 of Security Council
resolution 2416 (2018), in which the Council requested to be informed of progress in
implementing the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). It covers the period since the issuance of my previous report ( S/2018/293),
from 30 March to 7 October 2018, and should be read in conjunction with my letter
to the Council dated 20 August (S/2018/778), in which I provided detailed
reconfiguration recommendations, and the briefing of my Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations of 20 September, 1 in which he updated the Council on
the efforts that the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan had made towards
implementing the steps outlined in Council resolution 2412 (2018).

II. Abyei
A.

Security situation
2.
During the reporting period, insecurity in the Abyei Area related mainly to
intercommunal clashes linked to the migration of the Misseriya through the Area and
to the Amiet common market and weak rule of law. During the annual migration in
2018, an estimated 37,000 Misseriya pastoralists arrived in the Abyei Area then
returned northwards between May and June, following the onset of the rainy season.
Some pastoralists continued to remain in northern Abyei Area, because of the stable
security situation, opportunities afforded by the Amiet common market and the
increased access to water through quick-impact and humanitarian projects.
Intercommunal relations improved through the proactive engagement of UNISFA
with the communities and its robust military posture, particularly along flashpoints.
Consequently, the communities have stayed within the agreed areas to avoid conflict,
no longer necessitating the disengagement line first instituted by UNISFA three years
ago to prevent large-scale intercommunal violence during the migration season.
3.
Notwithstanding those improvements, intercommunal tension and violence
around the Amiet common market persisted owing to the population influx to the
Abyei Area and the presence of different communities trading at the market, including

__________________
1

18-16869 (E)

See www.un.org/press/en/2018/sc13513.doc.htm.

221018

*1816869*

S/2018/923

Darfuris, Nuer and nationals of neighbouring countries. On 27 June, two Ngok Dinka
were shot dead by unidentified gunmen, believed to be Misseriya, at Wut Amath,
Sector Centre. In what seemed to be a retaliatory act, on 11 July, n ine armed men
attacked a group of Misseriya returning from the market along the Todach -Goli road,
Sector North. One Misseriya was killed and three were injured. On 15 July, one Ngok
Dinka was shot dead at Dungop, Sector South, by armed men, allegedly Misse riya.
4.
Tensions between the Misseriya and Nuer entering into the Abyei Area from
Unity State, South Sudan, were largely centred around the south -east of the Area. On
17 April, three Misseriya and one Nuer were killed at Dem Dem, on the MayomMarial Achak road, Sector South. A vehicle belonging to a Nuer was also burned
during the incident. On 11 May, armed men suspected to be Nuer attacked Misseriya
herdsmen at Myordol, near Marial Achak, Sector South, resulting in three fatalities.
The reason for the attack was not established. The period also witnessed clashes
between Ngok Dinka and Nuer when, on 27 April, a Nuer was prevented by a Ngok
Dinka from driving through the Amiet common market. Shortly thereafter, Nuer men
mobilized and attacked Ngok Dinka, resulting in minor injuries to three persons.
5.
Some intracommunal clashes also occurred during the reporting period, owing
to weak rule of law and ineffective criminal and justice systems. On 5 April, within
the Misseriya Awlad Kamil community at Dawas, Sector North, two persons were
reported killed. There followed another clash on 6 April within the Misseriya Awlad
Kamil community at Um Khaer market, Sector North, in which one person was
stabbed and six others were beaten. On 20 April, armed men attack ed a vehicle
belonging to an international non-governmental organization (NGO) polio
vaccination team at Tajelei, Sector South. In the attack, the driver was killed and three
people were wounded. On 18 May, a national staff driver for the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) was arrested and detained at a community
protection committee security check point at the Amiet common market over a
misunderstanding with the Dinka staff at the check post. A UNISFA armed escort
intervened and the driver was released. On 4 September, Ngok Dinka subtribal groups
clashed with each other at the market, resulting in injuries to two persons.
6.
Several security incidents related to cattle rustling. On 8 April, Misseriya men
rustled 51 goats from the Ngok Dinka in Mabok, Sector South. Of those, 34 were
retrieved and returned to their owner. On 15 April, unidentified armed men rustled
200 Misseriya cattle at Atay-2, near Marial Achak, Sector South. Of those, 160 were
recovered. On 1 May, eight unidentified men rustled 70 goats at gunpoint at Wunrouk,
Sector South. The goats were later located at Makuac Alrbek, Sector South, and
returned to their owner. On 16 August, a group of armed men believed to be Misseriya
from the Awlad Kamil tribe rustled 31 cattle from Ngok Din ka herdsmen at Mirok,
Sector Center. The cattle were recovered at Sink and El Shamam, Sector North, after
the rustlers abandoned them to avoid being apprehended by UNISFA troops.
7.
While the current military threat to the Abyei Area remains limited, the p resence
of armed groups has the potential to inflame tensions between the communities. There
were nine sightings by the local population of armed men around Noong and Mulmul
in Sector Centre and in Sector South, at Abyen Theny, Bokchop, Wunduop, Bachuol
Malual and Abathok. Most sightings were between the Amiet common market and
Abyei town and along the rivers, in Nymora and Kiir/Bahr-al-Arab. In two instances,
UNISFA apprehended individuals suspected of belonging to the Sudan People ’s
Liberation Army and other armed groups within the Abyei Area. On 30 March, a
suspected Sudan People’s Liberation Army soldier was arrested by UNISFA at the
market. The suspect claimed he had been an officer of the Army but was currently a
trader. The next morning, the suspect escaped from the Amiet common market
detention centre. On 5 June, six persons suspected of being members of an armed
group were arrested and detained at Goli, Sector North. On 15 June, following an
2/12

18-16869

S/2018/923

investigation, the suspects were escorted to Farouk, Sector North, where they boarded
a vehicle to El Muglad, Western Kordofan, the Sudan. In September, two reports were
received of armed men from Twic State, South Sudan, entering into southern Abyei
Area on 16 September and 27 September. The reports could not be verified as the
roads were inaccessible because of rain. The occasional presence of South Sudanese
armed men in the Abyei Area and the continued presence of Sudanese police at the
Diffra oil complex in Sector North remained in direct violation of the Agreement
between the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People ’s Liberation Movement
on temporary arrangements for the administration and security of the Abyei Area (the
Agreement of 20 June 2011).
8.
In order to maintain relative calm in the Abyei Area, the UNISFA military
component continued to maintain a robust deterrent posture, with day and night
patrols. UNISFA also ensured security through the implementation of its conflict
prevention and mitigation strategy; an enhanced presence in vulnerable areas,
including flashpoints, such as water sites, villages adjoining rivers and the Amiet
common market; the deployment of static patrols at the market and observation posts
at the four watch towers; and the confiscation of weapons. More than a dozen join t
security committee meetings were held each week throughout the area to provide an
early warning capability and a quick response to the presence of armed groups.
Furthermore, an early warning system was instituted involving the local authorities
and village heads to improve the collection of information and provide a quick
response by a dedicated quick-reaction force/team designated in all Sectors.
9.
During the reporting period, UNISFA conducted 19,022 day and night patrols
and 6,284 escort patrols. Given that the Abyei Police Service had not been
established, the UNISFA police component continued its efforts to support the
maintenance of law and order, with 12 or 13 joint military and police observation
patrols per day throughout the Abyei Area, including interaction with community
protection committees, traditional authorities and local community members. With
the prevailing rainy season, special aerial patrols were conducted in addition to the
regular weekly aerial patrols to monitor inaccessible waterlogged areas. From August,
the national monitors of South Sudan and the Sudan have also accompanied the aerial
patrols.
10. UNISFA continued its efforts to keep the Abyei Area weapons-free. On 26 June,
a UNISFA patrol confiscated an assault rifle, four magazines and 20 rounds of
ammunition from a Misseriya man near Marial Achak, Sector South. On 3 July,
United Nations police handed him to the Government o f the Sudan through the
Sudanese national monitors, as witnessed by Misseriya traditional leaders.
Furthermore, on 15 August, the Diffra oil police handed over three rocket -propelled
grenades and one fragmentation grenade to the UNISFA Sector North battali on at
Diffra, that it alleged had been fired at an oil installation. The grenades were then
disposed of by the United Nations Mine Action Service.
11. During the period, the United Nations Mine Action Service continued to enable
UNISFA operations in the Abyei Area through the removal of explosive remnants of
war and by delivering risk education. It assessed 17,116 m 2 as safe from explosive
hazards and collected and destroyed 47 explosive remnants of war and 171 rounds of
ammunition. It maintained the mission’s storage facility for the weapons and
ammunition confiscated by UNISFA troops in line with its standard operating
procedures. It continued to deliver mine risk education to the Abyei population, not
only in central and southern Abyei, but also for the first time in northern Abyei, the
latter through a partnership with a local Sudanese NGO. In total during the reporting
period, 39,087 people (14,866 boys, 12,546 girls, 6,328 men and 5,347 women) were
given mine risk education in 1,081 sessions. Teams fro m the Mine Action Service

18-16869

3/12

S/2018/923

also distributed 18,044 school bags equipped with school accessories and mine risk
education materials to schools throughout northern, central and southern Abyei.

B.

Rule of law issues
12. The Amiet common market continued to grow as the economic hub of the Abyei
Area, attracting foreign nationals and traders from Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and
Uganda, as well as traders from Khartoum and Juba. It also provided opportunities
for dialogue between the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya on continuing their mutual
trading and coexistence. However, criminals also took advantage of the booming
business and the increase in population at the market. During the reporting period, a
total of 586 crimes were committed at the market, ranging from theft to incidents of
shooting, robbery, cattle rustling and public disorder. The sporadic public disorder
incidents and increase in criminal activities at the common market were addressed by
the joint peace committee, which is advised and mentored by the traditional justice
expert with the UNISFA community liaison section and the United Nations police.
The joint peace committee, along with the joint traditional court, the market
committee and the community protection committee, including members from both
sides, is responsible for maintaining law and order at the market.
13. The joint traditional court at the Amiet common market, along with the
community protection committee, continued to play a pivotal role in the dispensation
of justice. They received guidance from the mission’s traditional justice expert on
basic legal principles, such as the right to a fair hearing, the rights of anyone accused
of a crime and the need for judicial independence. UNISFA, along with other United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, supported a request by the community
protection committee to improve living conditions at the Amiet common market
detention centre, based on a human rights due diligence policy.
14. The proliferation of makeshift residential huts in the vicin ity of the market also
posed a great threat to peace and stability in the market. In that regard, other markets
emerged in Aniet, Agok, Sector South, and in Abyei’s Mul-Mul market, creating a
need for a greater United Nations police presence to maintain la w and order amid an
expanding population and increased number of returnees and internally displaced
persons from South Sudan conflicts.
15. In that respect, in June, UNISFA issued notes verbales to South Sudan and the
Sudan in which it encouraged them, in compliance with paragraph 7 of Security
Council resolution 2416 (2018), to appoint the relevant officials to join UNISFA in a
joint integrated planning exercise and in developing a road map towards the
establishment of an Abyei police service. UNISFA followed up with two reminders
but has yet to receive a response.
16. In the absence of an Abyei police service, the United Nations police continued
to advise and mentor the community protection committees o n maintaining law and
order. More specifically, United Nations police conducted 1,830 interactive
community patrols to mobilize members of the public to participate actively in
peacebuilding initiatives; trained some 105 community protection committee
members (90 men and 15 women) in basic policing principles and compliance with
human rights standards; conducted 16 crime prevention and reduction awareness
campaigns; and conducted seven road safety campaigns targeting drivers, pedestrians
and schoolchildren. The United Nations police mentored members of the community
protection committees at detention centres on international standards when handling
accused and detained persons. Despite those efforts, overcrowding, the prolonged
pretrial detention of accused persons, poor hygiene and sanitation, food shortages and
the detention of juveniles persisted at the detention centres.

4/12

18-16869

S/2018/923

17. With regard to sexual and gender-based violence, on 10 April, UNISFA
interviewed two women who had allegedly been raped at gunpoint by Misseriya at
Wankir, Sector Centre, on 8 March as they gathered grass in the bush. The perpetrators
had not been apprehended. Victims of sexual and gender-based violence often found
it difficult to report such incidents for fear of being stigmatized. T hey also lacked
access to health care and psychological or social support. UNISFA conducted seven
awareness campaigns on sexual and gender-based violence in an effort to minimize
the abuse of women’s and children’s rights.

C.

Local-level peace process
18. UNISFA continued to facilitate community-level peace processes during the
reporting period, particularly through regular joint meetings of the joint peace
committees. The meetings were instrumental in addressing grievances, including
those related to cattle rustling and other forms of crime, and in promoting dialogue
and reconciliation between the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya, and, more recently, in
addressing tension between the Misseriya and members of the South Sudanese Nuer
community. UNISFA facilitated and observed 18 such meetings during the reporting
period.
19. The issue of payment of “blood money” continued to be divisive during joint
peace committee meetings, with aggrieved families of victims holding joint peace
committee members accountable over delays. The Misseriya accused Ngok Dinka
counterparts of a lack of commitment to the agreement on the payment of blood
money. The Ngok Dinka community leaders clarified that they found it increasingly
difficult to raise funds owing to lack of cooperation from the community. The joint
peace committee therefore proposed in August that a joint conference be organized
early in the coming dry season for traditional leaders of the two communities to
deliberate on a number of outstanding issues, including the payment of blood money,
ahead of the migration.
20. UNISFA, in collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and IOM, facilitated a post-migration conference on 25 June at
Todach, Sector North, which brought together 20 participants each from the Ngok
Dinka and Misseriya communities. At that conference, the communities discussed the
lessons they had learned from the previous migration season and reached an
agreement on various issues ranging from sharing water resources a micably and
equitably to preserving the environment.
21. While most intercommunal tensions involved the Ngok Dinka and the
Misseriya, within the past year, friction between the Misseriya and the Nuer in the
neighbouring Unity State in South Sudan has also spilled over into the Abyei Area.
On 4 April, a joint peace committee meeting was held to deliberate on the rustling by
the Nuer from South Sudan of 250 cattle belonging to the Misseriya at Mabok, Sector
South, in the eastern migration corridor. The Misser iya held their Ngok Dinka
counterparts responsible for aiding the Nuer rustlers. The stolen cattle, allegedly
taken through Rumamier, Sector South, to Unity State were never recovered.
Furthermore, an incident on 11 May at Marial Achak, Sector South, in wh ich three
Misseriya were killed by the Nuer prompted the joint peace committee on 17 May to
invite representatives of the Nuer at the Amiet common market to their meetings.
Tensions between the Ngok and Twic Dinka over alleged land encroachments by Twic
Dinka in southern Abyei also persisted but have been comparatively low -key.
22. UNISFA also facilitated a number of other workshops and events affecting the
local-level peace process. To shape their understanding of the roles of traditional
justice practitioners in peacebuilding, human rights and promoting communal

18-16869

5/12

S/2018/923

harmony, a workshop on customary law, international human rights standards and
peacebuilding was held on 8 and 9 May at Diffra, attended by Misseriya
representatives, including customary court judges and community leaders. Two
workshops on women’s and gender issues were organized for the Ngok Dinka
community from 17 to 19 April in Abyei, with a total of 300 participants, on the
theme: “Together for a community of equality, peace and prosperity”. For the
Misseriya community, a workshop was organized at Diffra on 20 June involving 56
participants to raise awareness about gender equality and the importance of education.
That followed two consultative meetings that had been held with Misseriya women
by the UNISFA gender unit. From 25 April to 5 May, UNISFA facilitated a two -week
youth sports tournament in Abyei, Todach and Amiet, with participants from both
communities at the latter two locations, on the theme: “Abyei Youth Promoting Peace
through Sports”.
23. In order to better facilitate monitoring and reporting and mission interventions
on the protection of women and children, as the Council requested in paragraph 28 of
its resolution 2416 (2018), the mission has recruited a staff member whose visa
request was submitted to the Government of the Sudan on 2 September.

D.

Political process
24. While UNISFA operations continued to enhance peace and stability within the
Abyei Area through a robust military presence and by supporting local-level dialogue,
the parties to the Agreement of 20 June 2011 made little progress on the
implementation of the commitments therein. No meetings of the Abyei Joint
Oversight Committee were held during the reporting period, the most recent meeting
having been in November 2017.
25. To encourage both parties to meet their commitments and promote the
resumption of regular meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, UNISFA
held separate meetings with Committee co-chairs, on 14 May in Khartoum and on
6 June in Juba. It also met with relevant government interlocutors, including
representatives of the ministries of foreign affairs and defence of both parties.
26. UNISFA continued to interact with other stakeholders, including the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel and regional organizations based in Addis
Ababa to further efforts to advance the political dialogue. It also met with my Special
Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan on 28 May in Addis Ababa, and with the
leadership of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan on 5 June in Juba.
27. The African Union High-level Implementation Panel had intended for there to
be a ministerial meeting following the Joint Political and Security Mech anism
meeting, to discuss Abyei, and specifically the final status and the establishment of
the interim institutions envisaged in the June 2011 Agreement. However, as the
Mechanism met on 24 September, both foreign ministers were already committed to
official duties at the General Assembly in New York. The Abyei issue was therefore
deferred.

E.

Humanitarian and recovery situation
28. Humanitarian and recovery needs remained significant in the Abyei Area. The
dire economic situation in South Sudan and the Sudan has further affected the services
and livelihoods of the communities throughout the Abyei Area. In addition, in 2018
the Abyei Area has faced new small-scale emergencies, including spikes in

6/12

18-16869

S/2018/923

malnutrition and flooding that have resulted in new displacements. Currently, some
2,000 people have been affected by floods, mainly in Athony, Sector South.
29. The United Nations and partners continued to assist some 182,000 vulnerable
people across the Abyei Area, including: 87,000 people from the Ngok Dinka
communities, including returnees; 15,000 Ngok Dinka displaced within the Abyei
Area; 9,000 people displaced from neighbouring states in South Sudan; 34,000 people
from the Misseriya communities; and 37,000 seasonal Misseriya migrants who had
entered the area in October 2017 and migrated back in June and July.
30. To protect the most vulnerable people and support the rule of law, the aid
community rehabilitated the existing detention facility in Abyei town and provided
non-food items to the local communities as well as conflict-affected displaced people
from South Sudan who transited through the Abyei Area. However, the absence of
formal authorities in Abyei continued to pose challenges in carrying out and
coordinating humanitarian and recovery interventions. While the aid community
working in the area has limited capacity, community expectations are high.
31. The absence of development projects and the inability to deliver basic social
services continued to have an adverse effect on people in the Abyei Area and their
perception of UNISFA. With a view to enhancing community engagement and
building local support, UNISFA facilitated the delivery of humanitarian assistance by
providing logistical support, especially during the rainy season. From August, among
other measures, special flights were arranged for humanitarian partners and force
protection was provided in order to conduct humanitarian assessments and to address
the mounting number of malaria cases. For example, a visit was made on 5 September
to Athony, where 600–700 flood-affected people were located.

F.

Administrative aspects and mission support
32. As at 3 October, the UNISFA military component stood at 4,531 personnel
(4,289 troops, 130 military observers and 112 staff officers), against an authorized
ceiling of 4,500. The mission has already identified 34 troops to be repatriated in
order for the mission to conform to its authorized strength. The United Nations police
strength stood at 36 officers — 25 male and 11 female — against an authorized total
of 50. The number of civilian staff stood at 142 international staff, 33 United Nations
Volunteers and 76 national staff, against an authorized total of 161 international staff,
33 United Nations Volunteers and 86 national staff. The Government of the Sudan
issued 138 visas for UNISFA personnel during the reporting period, while 48 visas
remained pending, for 3 international staff members, 10 military personnel, 11 United
Nations police personnel, 1 United Nations Mine Action Service staff member,
9 official visitors and 14 contractors. A note verbale requesting visas for an additional
11 officers was sent to the Government of the Sudan on 10 September to ensure that
police personnel reached the authorized ceiling of 50 officers, as the Council
requested in paragraph 4 of its resolution 2416 (2018).
33. With the onset of rains late in May, the temporary operating bases of Um
Khariat, Alal, Agony Tok and Dungoup were withdrawn. However, company
operating bases remained deployed in the three sectors at Farouk, Diffra, Goli and
Todach in Sector North; Dokura/Rumajak, Noong and Abyei in Sector Centre; and
Marial Achak, Athony, Banton, Tejalei and Agok in Sector South.
34. Infrastructure and environmental installations are being upgraded at all camps.
A new mission headquarters is being substantially completed. New accommodation
facilities for military staff officers and observers and United Nations police within
the Abyei camp are at an advanced stage of completion. Drainage in the Abyei camp
has been improved, but partial flooding in July and August owing to severe rainy

18-16869

7/12

S/2018/923

spells indicates that drainage work needs to be expanded. Other infrastructure work
to improve conditions in the Abyei camp has been suspended owing to a shortage of
marram and fuel from the Sudan. During the rainy season, some company operating
bases were cut off owing to bad road conditions, which made it challenging to perform
maintenance tasks at those locations.
35. Of the 33 wastewater treatment plants planned for all UNISFA bases, 18 have
been installed and the remaining 15 will be installed during the upcoming dry season.
It is anticipated that all will be installed by 30 December. There was a delay from the
Government of the Sudan in giving clearance to the contractor for the installation of
the pending plants. Relying on local, individual contractors for the operation and
maintenance of wastewater treatment plants exposes the mission to risk, owing to the
lack of adequate skills or an accountability framework. To address that risk, a camp
services contractor will be deployed to start work in the dry season.
36. During the reporting period, UNISFA operated three fixed -wing aircraft and
four helicopters, of which two were under a letter-of-assist from the Government of
Ethiopia. The mission undertook a total of 39 aerial patrols for the Abyei Area. The
mission completed the rotation of two infantry battalions and one utility helicopter
unit, for a total of 3,982 troops (1,993 inbound and 1,989 outbound), and the
transportation of 330 tons of inbound and outbound troops ’ luggage through Kadugli
airport. All of the luggage was transported by road between Kadugli and Abyei, as
the Government of the Sudan continued to withhold permission to use the airstrip at
Athony, Sector South, which is 90 per cent completed. Since June, owing to the poor
road conditions, the mission started airlifting rations to troops at five company
operating bases within the Abyei Area and to one team site of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. Such activities continue to put a strain on
the mission’s limited air assets. The mission continued to receive ground -handling
support from the contracted service providers of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in Entebbe, Uganda,
and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur in Khartoum. In
May, UNISFA aircraft supported a United Nations-African Union hybrid operation in
Darfur for 22 delegates travelling from Khartoum to Addis Ababa.
37. Notwithstanding damage caused by a lightning strike on 11 September, the
extent of which is currently being verified, UNISFA improved and expanded its
information and communication technology infrastructure and the wireless coverage
of its sectors and team sites. The aim is also to address welfare concerns, notably the
sense of isolation of troops and staff members stemming from the remoteness of the
deployment areas. Challenges in providing effective medical services include the lack
of night flying capability for emergency casualty evacuation and medical evacuation
and vulnerability to malaria.

III. Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
A.

Operations
38. During the reporting period, the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism planned 54 aerial monitoring missions, of which 43 were undertaken. All
missions received clearances, but 11 patrols were cancelled, four of which owing to
adverse weather conditions, five to non-availability of aircraft because of technical
issues and two as a result of holidays. Aerial patrols continued to be a critical aspect
of all operations under the Mechanism, particularly during the rainy season, when
ground mobility is limited. On 3 October, an aerial patrol observed a suspected
military camp near As Sumayah/Wierayan.

8/12

18-16869

S/2018/923

39. Ground operations from the sector headquarters in Gok Machar, South Sudan,
remained hampered, with local communities preventing the move ment of UNISFA
personnel and demanding that land occupied by UNISFA and the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism be paid for or vacated. In particular, the
Mission has been unable to conduct ground patrols and establish team sites within the
14 Mile Area. Even as the inaugural meeting of the ad hoc committee of the 14 Mile
Area was under way in Abyei on 21 May, local people in Gok Machar staged a
demonstration in front of the sector headquarters, blocking its access and demanding
the removal of the sector commander. Despite efforts by the South Sudanese
delegation to the ad hoc committee of 14 Mile Area, the community is opposed to any
operations by the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, for fear that
their land will be appropriated by the Sudan. On 31 May, traditional chiefs reiterated
their objections to the planned deployment of team sites within the 14 Mile Area. At
the second meeting of the ad hoc committee in Gok Machar, on 28 August, the South
Sudanese delegation recommended that the matter be referred to the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism. At the extraordinary meeting of that Mechanism, held under
the auspices of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel in Addis Ababa
on 24 September, South Sudan agreed to establish by 1 October a high-level team,
which would work in collaboration with the ad hoc committee of the 14 Mile Area,
to sensitize the communities, with the aim of allaying their concerns that the
operations of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism would
prejudice the current or future legal status of the border, and to allow free movement
for the operations of that Mechanism by 10 October.
40. The Tishwin/Panakuac team site remained in the same location since its
establishment on 26 January and continued to report on security forces’ deployment
within the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone. The Sudan maintained a well -armed
military camp that included tanks and artillery pieces in location, as well as a police
camp, while South Sudan had two police camps along the Heglig-Bentiu axis. All
53 ground patrols from the Tishwin/Panakuac team site were given clearances and
44 were undertaken, while 9 were cancelled owing to impassable roads caused by
heavy rains.
41. Following on from the 24 September meeting of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism, South Sudan has not formed a high-level team to move forward
sensitization efforts. Preliminary reconnaissance ground patrols prior to the arrival of
the South Sudanese high-level sensitization team were to take place at Safaha/Kiir
Adem and As Sumayah/Wierayan on 29 September and 1 October, respectively, but
both had to be cancelled because the traditional chiefs did not give their permission
to gain access to the 14 Mile Area.
42. Also at the 24 September meeting of the Mechanism, the parties requested
UNISFA to deploy to Abu Qussa/Wunkur in Southern Kordofan, the Sudan, by
10 October, in order to establish a team site. On 3 October, a joint team comprising
UNISFA personnel as well as Sudanese and South Sudanese national monitors
proceeded to Alerie, 38 kilometres north of Abu Qussa/Wunkur, to ascertain whether
the security conditions there would make it possible to establish a team site. At Alerie,
the team met with Sudanese armed forces, who reported that the presence of rebel
groups made it impossible for them to guarantee the security of the team site if it were
deployed at Abu Qussa/Wunkur.
43. Regarding the phase I border crossing corridors, at the 24 September meeting
of the Mechanism, the parties confirmed that all 10 crossings were open and requested
UNISFA to verify free movement along the corridors. The above -mentioned highlevel sensitization team has also been requested to undertake sensitization efforts in
the Kosti-Renk corridor, to finalize its opening. For the Timsaha-Buram border
crossing corridor, the parties requested the Mission’s assistance in opening the
18-16869

9/12

S/2018/923

corridor. In that regard, the Mission awaits the plan of the African Union Border
Programme technical team and the Joint Technical Border Corridor Committee to help
assist with the marking.
44. At the 24 September meeting of the Mechanism, the parties also identified two
additional corridors along the River Nile at Kosti-Renk and Talodi-Tonga. The parties
agreed to present a plan for the remaining border crossing corridors at their next
meeting, scheduled to be held in Juba on 12 October.

B.

United Nations Mine Action Service operations
45. The United Nations Mine Action Service continued to support the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism with mine-protected vehicles, the provision
of explosive ordnance disposal, demining capacity and medical and mechanical
support. Teams from the Mine Action Service were currently deployed to the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism headquarters in Kadugli and Gok
Machar, and to the Tishwin/Panakuac team site. On 6 July, following the request by
the Sudanese senior national monitor that approximately seven kilometres of road to
the Toma South oil field be cleared of mines within the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone, the Mine Action Service undertook limited demining operations until the
request for termination was received from the Sudan on 31 July. No landmines or
explosive remnants of war were encountered. The demining request had come in
follow-up to the two sides jointly opening up the Toma South oil field in early July.

IV. Financial aspects
46. The General Assembly, by its resolution 72/289, appropriated the amount of
$263.9 million for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2018 to
30 June 2019. As at 3 October 2018, unpaid assessed contributions to the Speci al
Account for UNISFA amounted to $78.5 million. Total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to
$2,475.9 million. Troop costs have been reimbursed for the period up to 30 June 2018,
while the costs of contingent-owned equipment have been reimbursed for the period
up to 31 March 2018, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

V. Observations and recommendations
47. UNISFA fulfilled its core mandate by stabilizing the Abyei Area, in anticipation
of a negotiated settlement of the Area and the border areas between South Sudan and
the Sudan. However, neither party has taken advantage of that relative calm, and
implementation of the agreements remains limited. As a result, while envisaged as an
interim security force, UNISFA remains in place seven years after its establishment,
with little progress having been made in the political process.
48. However, I would like to commend the commitment of the two communities in
the Abyei Area, the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya, to the local-level peace process.
Undeterred by the lack of progress made by the two national Governments regarding
the resolution of the final status, they have achieved a degree of peaceful coexistence.
49. The presence of UNISFA in the Abyei Area and within the border monitoring
mechanism remains crucial to sustaining the stability achieved thus far. However, the
mission must adapt to the situation on the ground and work proactively to create the
space needed for a viable political process. Essentially, UNISFA must continue to

10/12

18-16869

S/2018/923

support the two Governments and the African Union to work towards achieving a
political resolution to the conflict.
50. In the past year, the relationship between South Sudan and the Sudan has
improved, in particular in the most recent few months, given the role of the Sudan in
facilitating talks between the South Sudanese parties in Khartoum. I urge the Security
Council to build upon that momentum by supporting both parties in their efforts to
implement their agreements, and to work towards a political resolution.
51. In that regard, I urge the Council to view the progress described in the present
report as only part of what could be achieved if UNISFA were enhanced to provide
further support to the parties and the African Union. In the light of Council resolution
2378 (2017) on the reform of United Nations peacekeeping operations, by which in
its paragraph 1 the Council stressed that the primacy of politics should be the hallmark
of the approach of the United Nations to the resolution of conflict, I submitted in
August a reconfiguration proposal to adapt UNISFA to realities on the ground. A
reconfigured mission would benefit from the ongoing reconciliation process between
South Sudanese opposition and government forces that resulted in the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan, signed in Addis Ababa
on 12 September. In the event that this initiative leads to a retur n to stability in South
Sudan, the two sides would be better positioned to discuss the outstanding issues from
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement of 2005.
52. The efforts of South Sudan and Sudan remain central to progress, and the failure
of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism to hold regular meetings threatens the consolidation of the gains made so
far. I urge both Governments to undertake discussions at the ministerial level to
review the implementation of their agreements, and I pledge the support of the United
Nations to such a focused endeavour. I believe that the two sides have the ability,
political will and capital to resolve their outstanding disputes in a finite timeframe.
53. Building on the positive momentum in the region, I urge the Council to consider
positively my reconfiguration proposal of August 2018 and the extension, with
modifications, of support to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism,
whose invaluable work I would like to acknowledge. In the main, my proposal aims
to enhance the capacity of UNISFA to support the political process with respect to the
Abyei and border issues and the efforts of the African Union Commission and the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel in that regard. I therefore
recommend that the mandate of UNISFA be extended for one year based on the
reconfiguration recommendations provided earlier, to assist the Governments and the
communities to make additional progress towards achieving the goals they have set
for themselves.
54. Finally, I would like to thank the new acting Head of Mission and Force
Commander, Major General Gebre Adhana Woldezgu, who has led UNISFA in
fulfilling its current mandate. I acknowledge with thanks the outstanding w ork of my
Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan, Nicholas Haysom, who moves to an
equally challenging assignment as Head of Mission of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia. I also wish to extend my gratitude to the African Union High level Implementation Panel and the African Union Commission for their stewardship
of the peace process.

18-16869

11/12

S/2018/923

12/12

18-16869
