A /70/PV.111

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

111th plenary meeting

Thursday, 7 July 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Sevilla Borja
(Ecuador), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting rose at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/70/674,
A/70/826 and A/70/826/Corr.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Members
will recall that the General Assembly adopted resolution
70/291 at its 110th plenary meeting, held on 1 July.
We shall now continue with the remaining speakers
on the list for this item.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): Let me begin by
extending our sincere sympathies and condolences to
the people and the Government of Iraq on the terror
attack in the Karada district of Baghdad, as well as to
the people and the Government of Bangladesh on the
barbaric attack in Dhaka.
Armenia thanks the Permanent Representative of
Argentina and the Permanent Representative of Iceland
and their efficient and able teams for successfully
facilitating the consultations on resolution 70/291.
We reiterate our full commitment to supporting the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, an
important framework for international action against
terrorism. However, Armenia regrets that, in the eighth
preambular paragraph of the resolution, the principles

16-20732 (E)

of international law are reflected in a selective way,
thereby failing to embrace the full letter and spirit of
the Charter of the United Nations. Armenia recalls
and reiterates that the self-determination of peoples
constitutes a fundamental principle of the Charter of the
United Nations. The failure to reflect the fundamentals
of the Charter in its entirety in that paragraph is a
serious flaw of the resolution.
International terrorism continues to pose a highly
significant threat to global peace and security. The
scourge of terrorism has become more diffuse with the
increase in terrorist acts, including those motivated
by intolerance and extremism. We note with profound
concern that terrorism continues to seriously threaten
international peace and security and believe that
terrorism is one of the most dangerous challenges facing
us today. Combating it is no longer a national issue, but
one for the entire international community. We strongly
condemn the indiscriminate killing and deliberate
targeting of civilians; mass executions; extrajudicial
killings; the persecution of individuals and entire
communities on the basis of their religion or belief; the
kidnapping of civilians, including for the purposes of
receiving ransom; the forced displacement of members
of minority groups; attacks on schools and hospitals;
and the destruction of cultural and religious sites.
Armenia strongly supports the Secretary-General’s
call upon national authorities to make more concerted
efforts to mainstream human rights and the rule of law in
their counter-terrorism policies and practices. We have
therefore supported and particularly welcomed recent
Security Council resolutions that tackle the important

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1620732*

A/70/PV.111

issues of foreign terrorist fighters, countering violent
extremism, the financing of terrorism and kidnapping
for ransom, among others. The international community
should stand united to step up our efforts to work
hand-in-hand towards further strengthening the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which is a
key framework to address all dimensions of terrorism.
No country in the world is immune to terrorism.
Those supporting extremist groups and terrorist
networks by financing, training, supplying and allowing
terrorists to freely roam across their borders should be
reminded that foreign terrorist fighters pose a serious
threat not only to the States to which they travel, but
also to their States of origin and transit. Those who
encourage widespread manifestations of intolerance
and hate speech against another State, nation and/or
persons, who consider themselves to be of a different
origin, and preach hate speech through social media
and education institutions should be reminded that such
actions may constitute incitement to extreme violence,
mass atrocities and the fuelling of terrorist ideology.
It is high time to implement those various
international legal instruments dealing with terrorist
crimes, including cross-boundary terrorist activities.
Most of those conventions require States to establish
jurisdiction over terrorist offenses committed by
their nationals abroad. We would like to highlight the
specific roles of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate in promoting and facilitating cooperation
across multiple jurisdictions. In the same spirit,
Armenia also supports the Secretary-General’s calls to
contribute to security-sector reforms.
I would like to emphasize that Armenia has
continued to take important steps in the fight against
international terrorism, which includes improvements
to its border security, significant changes to exportcontrol laws and the holding of, and actively
participating in, international anti-terrorism workshops
and training courses. With regard to regional and
international cooperation in countering terrorism, I
would like to point out that Armenia has been actively
engaged in the relevant initiatives of organizations such
as the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO),
NATO, the European Union (EU), the Commonwealth
of Independent States and the Council of Europe.
Armenia was one of founding members of the Rapid
Reaction Collective Forces of the CSTO, which enables
2/23

07/07/2016

rapid deployment for the purposes of preventing
military aggression and conducting special operations
against international terrorism and organized crime.
Through a new individual Partnership Action
Plan on terrorism with NATO, my country continues
to develop its cooperation on counter-terrorism issues
with that organization. We continue to collaborate
effectively with the Council of Europe’s Committee
of Experts on the evaluation of anti-money-laundering
measures and the financing of terrorism. Armenia has
been extensively engaged with EU in initiatives such
as the South Caucasus Integrated Border Management
project, which facilitates enhanced and integrated
border-security operations.
In conclusion, Armenia reiterates its determination
to work together with other Member States to redouble
our collective efforts to combat international terrorism
and fight violent extremism, whatever form it takes and
wherever it occurs.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): In the face of terrorism, it is
our duty to stand together and united; it is our duty to
send a strong and positive signal to the world.
Terrorists strike all over the world, and they strike
indiscriminately and blindly. The past year — indeed,
the past weeks — have been an edifying reminder of
the cruelty of terrorist acts. We are all shaken by the
horrifying attacks that took place recently around the
world, including in my own country. Let me take this
opportunity to convey my condolences to all those
affected by all heinous terrorist acts.
We can never overstate enough that terrorism
should not and cannot be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group. It has no
identity but that of barbarity and hatred. We reaffirm
once again our unequivocal condemnation of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations.
We welcome the consensus adoption of resolution
70/291, the review resolution on the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In that regard,
I would like to pay tribute to the Permanent
Representative of Argentina and the Permanent
Representative of Iceland, as well as their respective
teams, for their tremendous efforts in facilitating the
fifth review process of the Strategy. The adoption of this
consensus resolution, in particular on the occasion of
the tenth anniversary of the Strategy, is an opportunity
to reaffirm our relentless efforts to prevent and counter
16-20732

07/07/2016

terrorism, as well as our commitment to the continued
implementation of the Strategy.
The review resolution reaffirms the central role
of the General Assembly in combating terrorism
and underscores once again the importance of an
integrated, comprehensive and balanced approach to its
four complementary pillars. That is critical given that
terrorism is a multifaceted and global threat that cannot
be addressed without strong international cooperation,
as no country can eliminate it alone and as no country
is immune from it. However, while no country is
immune from terrorism, some countries happen to be
more affected than others.
In Lebanon, which is tragically and continuously
stricken by terrorism, our people are still mourning the
loss of families and friends after the two consecutive
attacks last week in the village of Qaa. I wish to
reiterate that Lebanon, which is party to most of the
counter-terrorism conventions, and consistent with its
Government’s 2014 policy declaration, remains on the
front line of the fight against terrorism. We remain
convinced that prevention is fundamental to eradicating
once and for all the plague of terrorism.
In that context, we welcome the reference in the
resolution to youth empowerment, as they have a
significant role to play in the prevention of terrorism
and the violent extremism that is conducive to it. Youth
communities play a key role in my country, where a
vibrant civil society offers platforms for inclusive
dialogue for its youth, with full respect for their
intellectual diversity.
The attention given to education is also highly
important in addressing the drivers of terrorism.
Education should disseminate values of openness,
understanding of the other, critical thinking and
dialogue, as well as the ability to foster solutions together.
Let me also highlight the positive contribution of
women, as they undeniably contribute to stable and
peaceful societies.
The protection of cultural heritage is another
instrumental element. When terrorists pillage,
destroy and burn to ashes cultural heritage preserved
throughout centuries, they wipe out evidence of our
common humanity and our immutable memory.
We cannot let terrorist groups exploit the growing
frustrations of individuals to lure them onto this dark
path. We therefore need to be aware of the crucial

A/70/PV.111

need to uproot the causes that lead to terrorism and
violent extremism conducive to it, such as protracted
conflicts, foreign occupation, poverty, marginalization,
xenophobia and double standards in the application
of international law. While all of these causes do not
necessarily lead to terrorist radicalization of individuals,
those groups use those injustices and grievances to fuel
their hate speech and justify their narratives.
When dealing with counter-terrorism, we must
also keep in mind that it should not be associated with
other principles recognized under international law,
such as the right to self-determination and to resist
foreign occupation. In that regard, my delegation would
like to denounce the attempts of one delegation to
label as terrorism the legitimate right to resist foreign
occupation. The same delegation turns a blind eye to
terrorist acts committed by its citizens in territories it
continues to occupy in flagrant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and the principles and rules of
international law.
In conclusion, our ability to uphold human rights
standards while countering terrorism — which are
convergent objectives — has been severely tested during
these times of turmoil. We must be up to this challenge.
Mr. Bailen (Philippines): The Philippines joins
previous speakers in reaffirming its commitment
against terrorism, one of the gravest threats to
international peace and security. Terrorism is criminal
and unjustifiable, regardless of the motivation behind it
and whenever and by whomever it is committed.
We condemn in the strongest terms all acts of
terrorism committed anywhere in the world, most
recently in Orlando, Florida; in Istanbul, Turkey; in
Dhaka, Bangladesh; in Baghdad, Iraq; and in Medina,
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which have killed many
innocent people and injured hundreds more.
We especially condemn terrorism committed in our
own country, most recently by the Abu Sayyaf group,
which senselessly took the lives of Canadians John
Ridsdel and Robert Hall. We reiterate our pledge to
capture the murderers and to bring them to justice. We
again extend our sincerest condolences to the families
and friends of the victims.
In the decade since 2006, when we adopted the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, we have
become even more undaunted and determined. Today,

16-207323/23

A/70/PV.111

we appreciate learning about one another’s success
stories when it comes to national implementation of
the Strategy, even as we note the gaps speakers have
identified so that together we can address them. That has
been true for our own region, through the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Convention on
Counter Terrorism.
We thank and congratulate the delegations
of Argentina and Iceland for co-facilitating the
consultations on resolution 70/291, which we recently
adopted. It was not an easy task. We also extend
our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (A/70/826) on the implementation
of the Strategy.
Since the fourth review, two years ago, and through
international, regional and bilateral cooperation,
including through the exchange of information and
best practices, the Philippines has accomplished the
following.
On pillar I, on addressing conditions conducive to
the spread of terrorism, the Philippines has prepared
a framework for countering violent extremism
through the whole-of-nation approach. This engages
non-traditional Government agencies, the academy and
the private sector as partners in counter-radicalization
and/or deradicalization by implementing community
awareness campaigns and targeting programmes on
hardening against terrorism, within the framework
of the rule of law and human rights. Intercultural and
interfaith dialogue lies at its core, because we believe
that respect for human dignity is the basis for greater
understanding, respect and tolerance among peoples.
As Chair of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
(APEC) last year, the Philippines negotiated the
inclusion of initiatives on countering foreign terrorist
fighters and violent extremism in the work plan of the
APEC Counter-Terrorism Working Group.
The Philippines has also harnessed the key role of
women and youth in counter-terrorism. Through the
Philippine Center for Islam and Democracy, we have
organized Muslim leaders and teachers, particularly
women, into a national network and force for moderation,
peace, democracy and development. Through the
Philippine Marine Corps, we also sustain our annual
Football for Peace competition, not only to hone the
sports skills of young people from conflict areas, but
also to engender a culture of peace in their outlook.
4/23

07/07/2016

On pillar II, on preventing and combating terrorism,
the Philippines has long supported global efforts to
counter violent extremism, even before last year’s
adoption of Security Council resolution 2178 (2014), on
foreign terrorist fighters. We continue to develop our
capacity to win hearts and minds in order to detect and
prevent homegrown violent extremism. That has raised
security awareness among local communities and
served in training them in monitoring and preventing
terrorist attacks against vital installations and critical
infrastructure, including economic key points and
places of convergence.
Last November, the Philippine Congress adopted
the Strategic Trade Management Act, a law that seeks to
uphold national security and support counter-terrorism
efforts by preventing the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction in our country. The Act complements
our legal regime against terrorism and extremism,
namely, our Human Security Act of 2007, as well as our
Anti-Money-Laundering Law and our Anti-Terrorist
Financing Law, both of which were adopted in 2012.
Our Anti-Money-Laundering Council, in cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
has been conducting training sessions for policymakers,
prosecutors and law enforcement and intelligence
authorities on countering the financing of terrorism.
On pillar III, on capacity-building and strengthening
the United Nations role, the Chemical, Biological,
Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) Centre of Excellence
Initiative regional headquarters was established in
Manila in 2014. The Anti-Terrorism Council Program
Management Center is acting as the secretariat. In that
regard, the Philippines adopted its national action plan
and hosted, in August 2015, an ASEAN Regional Forum
(ARF) workshop on raising awareness and promoting
ARF cooperation in CBRN risk management. Nineteen
CBRN projects enjoy the cooperation of the European
Union and the United Nations Interregional Crime and
Justice Research Institute. At the United Nations, the
Group of Friends of CBRN Risk Mitigation and Security
Governance was launched by Georgia, Morocco and
the Philippines.
Finally, on pillar IV, on ensuring respect for human
rights and the rule of law as the fundamental basis in
fighting terrorism, earlier this year the Philippines
finalized its national strategy against terrorism — a
product of a series of workshops involving members
of the Anti-Terrorism Council and the Office of the
Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process. The strategy
16-20732

07/07/2016

is built on four work streams, namely, preventing,
protecting, preparing and responding with whole-ofnation and rule-of-law-based approaches as guiding
principles.
I wish to conclude as I began: by repeating that we
remain undaunted, we remain determined, with all our
partners, in the fight against terrorism. And with our
collective will and efforts, we will overcome.
Mr. Idrizi (Albania): My delegation would
first like to express its appreciation to the
co-facilitators — Argentina and Iceland — and to
the diligent experts involved in preparing the review
document of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(resolution 70/291), which we adopted on 1 July.
Special acknowledgement goes to the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative to strengthen the joint efforts of
the international community in preventing violent
extremism and terrorism through his Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism. For over a month, we
experienced a degree of cooperation, understanding,
flexibility and involvement that proves that every
Member State is committed to a comprehensive and
consensual Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
With the conclusion of the fifth review process of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
Albania reiterates its alignment with countries that
have strong expectations for the implementation of the
resolution. We also align ourselves with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union on 1 July
(see A/70/PV.109).
We should all unite in our efforts and commitments
to fight against violent extremism. Concrete actions
by every single country are required to strengthen the
ability of the international community to confront the
threats and challenges of terrorism. The Government of
Albania expresses its solidarity and deepest sympathy
to all the people and the Governments affected by the
violent tactics causing the loss of innocent human lives.
Albania continues to encourage the activities of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
and remains committed to supporting international
cooperation and United Nations instruments on counterterrorism, in particular those based on the protection of
human rights and the promotion of the rule of law.
Regional cooperation is of the utmost importance
in effectively addressing the phenomena of violent
extremism and foreign terrorist fighters. We continue

A/70/PV.111

to join efforts in the implementation of all four
pillars of the Strategy as part of a balanced approach.
Furthermore, we believe it is essential to develop
comprehensive strategies to counter violent extremism
at the national level — not just to counter radicalization
and recruitment, but also to properly assess and, where
possible, reintegrate returning foreign terrorist fighters.
On 18 November 2015, Albania adopted a strategy
on countering violent extremism, which is currently
being implemented. We are also working to improve
regional cooperation on the implementation of
conventions aimed at countering and preventing violent
extremism by streamlining and better coordinating
with the regional cooperation council. In addition,
inter-agency work is under way to draft a national
strategy on counter-terrorism for the period 2016-2020,
which will harmonize the energy and commitment of the
Government, civil society and religious communities
to make our fight against terrorism more targeted
and efficient.
I would like to conclude by welcoming the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy review.
Albania remains committed to efforts to removing the
root causes of terrorism, to building a society that resists
the spread of radicalization, to empowering youth and
women and to providing support and education, thereby
countering extremist ideology at the local, national,
regional and international levels.
Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): My delegation welcomes
the statement issued by the Secretary-General, as
well as the statement delivered by the President of
the General Assembly (see A/70/PV.109) during this
debate on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy review, which underlined the urgent need to
send a strong and unequivocal message that the world
will no longer condone or countenance terrorism.
The most recent events of unparalleled carnage
across the globe — including in our own region, in
Bangladesh, and, preceding that, at Istanbul’s Ataturk
Airport, and thereafter the carnage in Iraq — even while
this debate is being held in the General Assembly, are
grim reminders, if reminders are still necessary, of the
urgent need for determined, collective and concerted
action by the international community to counter
terrorism. We extend our most sincere condolences to
the families of the victims of those dastardly attacks, and
we sympathize with those who have suffered injuries.

16-207325/23

A/70/PV.111

As a country that suffered under the yoke of
terrorism for nearly 30 long years, Sri Lanka stands
in solidarity with the friendly Governments and the
peoples of Bangladesh, Turkey and Iraq at this sad
moment. We condemn those heinous acts of terrorism
in the strongest possible terms. These attacks, from
Istanbul to Dhaka to Baghdad and elsewhere, are, as
the Secretary-General said, an attack on all of us, and
it is indeed time for all of us to show solidarity and
unity of purpose in combating this scourge. It is in that
context that the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
becomes essential as a rallying call to action. All acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless
of the motivation behind them and wherever, whenever
and by whomsoever they are committed. Sri Lanka
condemns terrorism and violent extremism conducive
to terrorism in all of its forms and manifestations.
As we witnessed in the series of tragic events last
week, terrorism and violent extremism conducive to
terrorism is not exclusive to any one country or region,
but spreads across national borders. This increasing
transnational phenomenon challenges existing borders
and threatens the very principle of the sovereignty of
States, upon which the international legal order is based.
We continue to be deeply concerned about the
acute and growing threat of foreign terrorist fighters.
With tens of thousands of such fighters hailing from
more than 100 States, it is imperative to harness global
support and respond more urgently and with greater
determination to these threats.
International networks with linkages to organized
crime are a critical lifeline for violent extremists and
terrorist groups. This is not a phenomenon that a single
State or a few States can deal with; rather, it demands
a concerted global effort. It is therefore imperative
for all Member States to pool their resources and, in
particular, share intelligence to prevent and counter
this phenomenon.
We must also give due consideration to the
fourth pillar of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy — ensuring that human rights and the rule of
law are observed in global efforts to counter terrorism.
While terrorists have dehumanized us in every way,
the international community should not embrace the
lawlessness of the terrorist and must never abandon its
common humanity, which is what binds us together in
our fight against terror. As stipulated in the resolution
on the review of the Strategy (resolution 70/291),
6/23

07/07/2016

that would not only betray the values that we seek
to uphold, but may also further fuel terrorism and
violent extremism.
At the same time, terrorism and violent extremism,
as and when conducive to terrorism, cannot and
must not be associated with any religion, nationality,
civilization or ethnic group. As the resolution
emphasizes, tolerance, pluralism, respect for diversity,
dialogue among civilizations and the enhancement of
interfaith and intercultural understanding and respect
among people are among the most important elements
in promoting cooperation in combating terrorism.
In many parts of the world, violent extremism
targets vulnerable and marginalized communities,
children, minorities, women and girls. It is therefore
imperative that we proactively include and engage
those entities of the United Nations system that deal
with children, minorities, women and girls. The large
number of children who were victims in the massacre
in Baghdad underlines the urgency of such engagement.
The General Assembly unanimously adopted the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy to enhance national,
regional and international efforts to counter terrorism.
As noble as those objectives are, we must also avoid
lapsing into bureaucratic and cyclical practices. States
must demonstrate the requisite political will and
commitment to close ranks and make a determined
and singular effort to overcome this challenge amid
the rising toll of innocent human lives around us. We
must recognize that the building blocks for a normative
framework for enhancing international cooperation
in those areas lie in the efforts undertaken by the
General Assembly, in particular the work of the United
Nations Ad-hoc Committee on Measures to Eliminate
International Terrorism, which has already resulted in
a series of sectoral conventions on the suppression of
terrorism being adopted.
In that context, I must mention that, despite the
support of most Member States and the mandate by the
General Assembly to come up with a comprehensive
legal framework to fill possible gaps in the existing
sectoral conventions on terrorism, it is regrettable
that there has been a failure to muster the necessary
political will to break the current impasse surrounding
the draft comprehensive convention on international
terrorism. It is also pertinent at this time to recall
that the conclusion of a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism was one of the key components
16-20732

07/07/2016

of the 2006 United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. Detailed elements of a compromise package
have been before the Ad-hoc Committee and the working
group since 2007. The search for an ideal and a perfect
instrument must not become the enemy of the good and
result in a collective failure of the Organization and all
of its Member States. Any legal instrument we develop
will require judicial interpretation having regard to the
specificities of particular situations that may arise from
time to time. Such provisions are not cast in stone, but
must include the elements of flexibility of interpretation
and application over time.
The role of the General Assembly over the years
in standard-setting has contributed markedly to the
progressive development of international law and its
codification. However, it is time now to act as one
body. Our efforts must not be ones of business as
usual. It is time for all Member States to muster the
necessary political will to conclude a comprehensive
convention, so that the international community sends
out a strong and unequivocal sign of its collective will
to combat terrorism and contributes to the effective
implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. As someone who has been closely associated
with the norm-creating process since the establishment
of the Ad-hoc Committee, way back in 1998, let me
reiterate to all delegations — with all the sincerity that
I can command — that the time for sterile polemic and
political debate is over. Too much innocent blood is
being spilled with alarming frequency across national
frontiers. It is urgent that we act now.
Although much more could have been achieved,
nevertheless Sri Lanka welcomes and supports the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We wish to express
our deep appreciation to the co-facilitators of the fifth
review of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the
Ambassador of Argentina and the Ambassador of
Iceland, for their indefatigable efforts in this complex
task, as well as to reaffirm Sri Lanka’s commitment to
the effective implementation of the Strategy.
Mr. Waweru (Kenya): Kenya wishes to join
previous speakers in congratulating the President
and the presidency for the manner in which they have
steered the affairs of the General Assembly. Kenya
also wishes to thank the delegations of Argentina
and Iceland, co-facilitators of the intergovernmental
process on the fifth review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy at its tenth anniversary, for
their tireless efforts to build consensus and, at the same

A/70/PV.111

time, facilitate agreement among Member States on a
balanced document (resolution 70/291) that reflects our
aspiration to eradicate terrorism.
At the outset, allow me to reiterate my delegation’s
commitment to the implementation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its four pillars as the
basis of our collective action against terrorism in a
balanced and sustainable manner and in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
At this time, we express our solidarity with the
Governments and the peoples of the countries that have
suffered, and continue to suffer, unnecessary loss of
life perpetrated through cowardly, backward and evil
terrorist attacks by retrogressive forces in various parts
of the world.
On 1 July, when we were last here (see A/70/
PV.l10), near our northern border two passenger buses
were sprayed with bullets by a cowardly gang and
criminal group associated with the Al-Shabaab terrorist
network. On that day, six innocent Kenyans lost their
lives. Those cowards have now resorted to targeting
innocent civilians going about their daily lives. They
include children, as in the case of the attacks in Israel;
travellers, as in the case of the attacks in Turkey; and
worshipers breaking their fast, as in the case of the
attacks in Cameroon. Also since we were last here a
week ago, we have seen attacks in Bangladesh, Iraq and
Saudi Arabia. We commiserate with the delegations
and the peoples of those countries. However, Kenya
will not be cowed into a state of fear. Kenyan security
forces are actively pursuing that criminal gang. On this
occasion, we also want to thank the United Nations and
all Member States for their kind words at yet another
difficult time.
The threat posed by international terrorism is the
greatest challenge to sustaining peace and sustainable
development. It is a global challenge that requires
concerted international efforts to eradicate. Terrorists
have become more sophisticated, globalized, cruel
and brutal as they continue to proliferate into various
forms, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria/
Da’esh, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and other
groups emerging in various parts of the world. Kenya
welcomes the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism as a basis for each Member
State to put its political will into concrete action
against terrorism according to its unique national

16-207327/23

A/70/PV.111

characteristics. We are currently aligning our counterterrorism strategy and national action plan with the
Plan of Action to enable us to enhance preventative
actions, in particular through early-warning systems at
the local and grass-roots level, as that is one of the most
effective ways to snuff out the terrorist supply chain
of new recruits. Prevention will also delegitimize the
radicalization of violent extremist narrative online and
off-line before it gains ground.
Both the resolution we adopted and the Plan of
Action focus on and call upon Member States and the
entire United Nations system to cooperate, collaborate
and work together to conclusively address this problem.
In order to succeed, the international community must
fully unite. We must never allow political differences
to divide us in our efforts against a common existential
threat. The United Nations, in particular the General
Assembly, has an important role to play in order to
positively advance the war against terror in a focused
and united manner.
At the national level, Kenya has established a national
counter-terrorism centre that serves as an inter-agency
organization to coordinate the implementation of our
national counter-terrorism strategy and action plan.
Our national efforts are inspired by the four pillars of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
With the enhanced coordination of national efforts, we
have achieved a dramatic reduction in the number and
intensity of terrorists attacks. Through increased public
engagement at all levels, the war against terrorism is
being prosecuted and executed by law enforcement
agencies, the citizenry and local communities as a call
to defend national values, democracy, freedom and our
way of life.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm our delegation’s
commitment to the realization of a stronger United
Nations counter-terrorism architecture through
sustained engagement and cooperation to ensure the
adaptation and timely implementation of various
recommendations in the outcome of the current review.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me
begin by condemning the recent terrorist attacks in Iraq,
Syria, Bangladesh, Saudi Arabia, Turkey and Lebanon
and by expressing my condolences to all the victims of
terrorism. These tragic events demonstrate how united
and global action is imperative to countering terrorism.
I would also like to begin by commending the
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Iceland
8/23

07/07/2016

and the Ambassador and Permanent Representative
of Argentina and their colleagues for the hard work
in facilitating the text of the fifth biennial review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(resolution 70/291).
As we convene today to commemorate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of the Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, and in the two years since we adopted
resolution 68/276, on the previous review, tens of
thousands of innocent civilians, including women and
children, have fallen victim to terrorism worldwide.
Meanwhile, the number of foreign terrorist fighters
has reached a record number of 31,000 individuals,
who pose a serious threat to international and regional
peace and security. There are still millions of people
living under terrorists’ domination in Iraq and Syria.
Terrorism is a multidimensional issue, and it can be
defeated only if a comprehensive plan is put in place
and implemented by the various relevant stakeholders
in a coordinated manner. There should also be a
certain level of cooperation among all actors genuinely
committed to fighting terrorism, in particular at the
regional level. The Strategy provides such a common
platform for cooperation.
This year we have before us the report of the
Secretary-General entitled “Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism” (A/70/674), which was drafted
in response to the request made in resolution 68/127,
on “A world against violence and violent extremism”,
which was initially proposed by President Rouhani
and adopted by consensus by the General Assembly
on 18 December 2013. President Rouhani’s idea in
proposing the resolution emerged from his insight
that extremist elements in the region and beyond were
becoming radicalized, leading to increased violence
and terrorism.
Violent extremism is the most critical challenge
the world faces today. It is clear that takfiri ideology,
which has nothing to do with Islam, lies at very core
of the great predicament of our time. The international
community needs, first and foremost, to focus on this
vicious ideology, which seeks to instil hatred and
anger in the hearts and minds of youth everywhere in
the world. Al-Qaida and the Taliban were the first socalled achievements of this extremist ideology, while
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
Jabhat al-Nusra and its affiliates are the most recent.
16-20732

07/07/2016

As a consequence of extremist ideologies held by
takfiri groups, thousands of individuals from more
than 100 countries have joined ISIL and Al-Qaida and
their affiliated networks, mainly in Syria and Iraq, and
have committed terrorist and other heinous inhumane
acts, thereby threatening security, stability and the
well-being of the societies where they operate. We
could have avoided the current situation had we earlier
addressed this phenomenon apart from any political or
short-sighted considerations. That is why we should
focus on prevention and address conditions conducive
to violent extremism and terrorism. In that regard,
we welcome this year’s debate on addressing the
implementation of the United Nations Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism. It is imperative that
Member States also strive to develop their own national
plans to deal comprehensively with all the drivers of
violent extremism, including by countering extremist
narratives that aim to incite mainly young individuals
to violence and terrorism.
For decades, a number of the root causes and factors
have led or contributed to the spread of terrorism. The
unlawful use of force against other States, foreign
aggression and occupation and foreign interference
in the internal affairs of other States, to name but a
few, are among such causes and factors. Moreover, the
excessive and disproportionate use of military force in
the name of countering terrorism creates fertile ground
for vicious cycles of violence and terrorism.
We are of the view that countering terrorism
should be done in full conformity with the Charter of
the United Nations, international law and international
human rights and humanitarian law. The use of force
in combating terrorism by outside forces without the
explicit consent of the State concerned constitutes a
flagrant violation of the principle of sovereignty and
territorial integrity, which in turn endangers the rule of
law at the international level.
Iran opposes any attempt to equate terrorism
with the legitimate struggle of peoples under colonial
or alien domination and foreign occupation for selfdetermination and national liberation. Such equivalence
is aimed at prolonging occupation of territories and
oppression of their peoples. The use of State power for
suppression and violence against peoples struggling in
opposition to foreign occupation and in exercising their
inalienable right to self-determination should continue
to be condemned.

A/70/PV.111

My delegation rejects the accusations made by
representative of the Israeli regime, which itself was
built on the basis of intimidation, terror and occupation.
The regime is well known as the single most significant
practitioner of State terrorism and is responsible for
many terrorist acts. Its atrocities against the Palestinian
people over many decades have fuelled the extremism
crisis and other crises in our region and beyond.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has been the target of
terrorist acts in many different forms and manifestations.
We strongly reject the unilateral preparation of lists
accusing certain States of being so-called sponsors
of terrorism, as well as any consequences thereof.
Unilaterally prepared lists are inconsistent with
international law and are being used as a political tool
to advance other agendas, with the political goal of
enlisting the support of Governments. Such unilateral
acts, including through the misuse of judicial means,
not only violate certain principles of international law
but also undermine urgently required joint efforts by all
States to counter terrorism.
The recent political decision of the courts of the
United States to seize properties of the Central Bank
of Iran is a clear example of abusing banking and
financial networks for fake and unsubstantiated claims
to pressure our nation. The Iranian Government is
committed to using all possible means at its disposal,
including making a claim at the International Court
of Justice, to recover its properties that were illegally
seized by the United States authorities.
In conclusion, we must recognize that selective or
double standards and the simple categorization of some
kinds of terrorism as “good” and other kinds as “bad”
terrorism based on short-term political interests will
not help us to uproot terrorism. Such wrong-minded
approaches only undermine international trust and
cooperation in countering terrorism. The international
community’s approach to fighting this scourge
should be unified and indiscriminate. Just as we have
successfully accomplished the fifth biennial review of
the Strategy over the past two days, so must we carefully
follow up with national, regional and global plans to
implement the Strategy in a comprehensive way, with
the cooperation of all, in a balanced manner and with
sufficient attention to the conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism while avoiding double standards
and discrimination for better and lasting results.

16-207329/23

A/70/PV.111

Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation would first like to thank the President of
the General Assembly for convening this fifth biennial
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. We also wish to thank the Secretary General
for his report on the implementation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy of the United Nations
(A/70/826), as well as for his Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism, contained in resolution 70/254,
adopted last February, the General Assembly called for
a review of the Plan of Action as part of the meeting to
be held to review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
My delegation warmly congratulates His Excellency
Mr. Martín Garcia Moritán, Permanent Representative
of Argentina, and His Excellency Mr. Einar Gunnarsson,
Permanent Representative of Iceland, for the efforts and
energy they deployed in co-facilitating the negotiations
on the important resolution 70/291, adopted at such a
difficult time. We also offer our congratulations to their
staff for the efforts they made in this laborious work.
Not a day goes by without terrorist attacks being
perpetrated here and there. The despicable terrorist
attacks that struck Saudi Arabia, Bangladesh, Iraq,
Turkey, Jordan, Brussels, San Bernardino, Orlando and
Paris, as well as other parts of the world, are horrible,
reprehensible acts. My delegation therefore condemns
these attacks in the strongest possible terms, offers its
condolences to the families of the victims and reiterates
the steadfast position of the Kingdom of Morocco in
firmly condemning terrorism in all its forms and
underlining that nothing can justify a terrorist act.
Terrorism must not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
The Moroccan delegation aligns itself with the
statement made by His Excellency Mr. Abdallah Y
Al-Mouallimi, Permanent Representative of Saudi
Arabia, on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (see A/70/PV.109), and wishes to make the
following remarks in its national capacity.
The adoption of the United Nations Global-Counter
Terrorism Strategy in September 2006 was a turning
point in the direction of the efforts of the international
community in the fight against terrorism. However,
since the review meeting of 2014 (see A/68/PV.94 et
seq.), the world has been turned upside down and is
reeling from the new reality that large swathes of
territory in Iraq and Syria are under the control of what
10/23

07/07/2016

is known as the Islamic State, or Da’esh. Moreover,
the world has seen the unprecedented proliferation of
terrorist groups affiliated with Da’esh or Al-Qaida.
Those terrorist groups lack all legitimate ties to Islam
and are far removed from the precepts of Islam. Their
ideology is one of death, obscurantism and the rejection
of all values ​​shared by humankind.
Da’esh continues to spread its destructive ideology
and recruits young people from throughout the world.
More than 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters have joined
its ranks. The financial rewards that have resulted from
the illegal trafficking of oil, works of art and cultural
property — as well as the exploitation of communication
technologies linked to the Internet and social media,
including Facebook and Twitter, among others — have
allowed Da’esh to recruit foreign terrorist fighters from
throughout the world, mobilize them and deploy them
to carry out attacks. Furthermore, a rivalry has emerged
between the terrorist groups Al-Qaida and Da’esh to
see how far each group can extend its influence and
perpetrate further bloody attacks.
The fifth review meeting, which coincides with the
tenth anniversary of the Strategy, is taking place in the
context of that growing terrorist threat. That calls for a
dynamic solidarity to counter the scourge of terrorism
and the violent extremism that leads to terrorism.
Consequently, the Moroccan delegation has participated
in the fifth review actively, seriously and constructively
in order to reach a consensual text. My delegation
welcomes the consensus adoption of resolution 70/291.
The text presented by the two co-facilators is built on
a compromise in which some of the concerns of each
delegation is addressed. The objective of this exercise
is to agree on suitable means for implementing the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
meet the challenges of terrorism and violent extremism
leading to terrorism.
The adoption of the resolution by consensus also
seeks to send a strong message of the international
community’s unity and solidarity in fighting terrorism.
Similarly, it recognizes the importance of the United
Nations as a cornerstone in coordinating the fight
against terrorism and the relevance of multilateral work.
It is also a means of invigorating the sustainability
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, giving it
life and the ability to meet the challenges. A sound
and balanced implementation of its four pillars will
surely contribute to countering terrorism and violent
16-20732

07/07/2016

A/70/PV.111

extremism. Those are the main elements that are
reflected in the resolution.

Counter-Terrorism Strategy and relevant Security
Council resolutions.

My delegation welcomes the resolution’s particular
focus on the fight against foreign terrorist fighters and
the threat of their return home through measures curbing
their movement, draining their financial resources,
controlling borders, fighting terrorist narratives and
ideologies, promoting international cooperation,
recognizing the role of young people and women in
the fight against terrorism and violent extremism, and
reaffirming the importance of respect for every State’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity. Those are
all shared points on which the international community
is in agreement in the resolution.

The Kingdom of Morocco’s approach to countering
terrorism and violent extremism was the subject of a
briefing to the Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism
Committee at a high-level event on 30 September 2014.
It was based on the following four principles.

It is in that spirit and objective that the Kingdom
of Morocco joined the consensus. On this occasion, my
delegation wishes once again to congratulate the two
co-facilitators for their efforts and the serious manner
in which they discharged their responsibility. The
interest of Member States in the implementation of all
four pillars of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the provisions of Security Council resolutions 2178
(2014), on foreign terrorist fighters, and 2253 (2015),
on suppressing the sources of financing for terrorism,
requires the United Nations to play an important
role to help them in that work by training leaders in
developing countries and supporting the upgrade of
their legal, criminal and security resources in order to
fight terrorism more effectively.
The Kingdom of Morocco takes this opportunity
to welcome the efforts of the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre and to thank Saudi Arabia for its
$100 million donation to enhance its operation. It
also welcomes the efforts carried out by the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and will
continue to fully cooperate with them.
The Kingdom of Morocco is committed to the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism at the United
Nations and in other forums, such as the Global CounterTerrorism Forum (GCTF), which it has co-chaired with
the Netherlands since April. In the framework of the
GCTF, our two countries also co-chair the Working
Group on Foreign Terrorist Fighters. At the national
level, Morocco has developed a comprehensive and
coherent approach oriented towards prevention and
action, while being consistent with the provisions
of the four pillars of the United Nations Global

The first involves optimizing security management,
upgrading the legal counter-terrorism framework,
adopting new laws and maintaining vigilance in
security, which has allowed for the dismantling of
several dozen terrorist cells.
The second involves the 2005 launch of the National
Initiative for Human Development, aimed at fighting
social disparity, exclusion and vulnerability.
The third deals with restructuring and reforming
the religious sector, in particular by establishing a
scholarly authority responsible for interpreting the
texts of the Koran and the Hadith — the explanations
of the Prophet — and by training young men and
women preachers in the authentic precepts of Islam,
based on the values ​​of dialogue, tolerance, moderation,
coexistence and respect for others advocated by our
religion, Islam.
The last involves the launch of a programme for
the deradicalization, rehabilitation and integration
of foreign terrorist fighters. Morocco has shared its
experience in training preachers with several friendly
countries in Africa, Europe and in the Muslim world
through bilateral agreements.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): The delegation
of Kazakhstan thanks the President for convening
this meeting and the Permanent Representatives and
delegations of Argentina and Iceland, our very able
coordinators of the consultations on the review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
activities of the United Nations system in implementing
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(A/70/826).
The fight against international terrorism demands
a long-term and comprehensive approach and regional
and global cooperation, with the active participation of
all States Members of the United Nations. As a party
to all major international conventions on the fight
against terrorism, Kazakhstan welcomes the consensus

16-2073211/23

A/70/PV.111

achieved by the General Assembly on the fifth review
of the Strategy.
Kazakhstan has always stood for strengthening
the national capabilities of the States Members of the
United Nations to address international terrorism and
violent extremism through regional and international
cooperation. We should never lose sight of the human
dimension of terrorism. My country is therefore of the
conviction that the implementation of the Strategy at the
regional and national levels is also crucial to promoting
the Sustainable Development Goals.
Kazakhstan is guided by the Strategy and the other
international universal instruments it has ratified and is
actively engaged in the work of regional organizations
such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building
Measures in Asia and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization. We are also enhancing our cooperation
with such United Nations entities as the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF), the
Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee
and others.
At the regional level, we are actively implementing
the Joint Plan of Action for the Implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in
Central Asia, adopted in 2011, which equally addresses
all four pillars of the Strategy and remains an important
instrument for enhancing cooperation in countering
terrorism among the countries of Central Asia. The
Plan was elaborated by States of the region, the CTITF,
the European Union and the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia.
At the national level, we have adopted a State
programme to counter religious extremism and
terrorism in the Republic of Kazakhstan for the 20132017 period, which is a significant tool that is fully
aligned with the ideas of the Global Strategy. The
main goal of the programme is to ensure the security
of the people, the State and society through improved
measures to minimize and eliminate the consequences
of this double scourge. Special attention is being paid
to increasing the active engagement of society, local
communities and non-governmental organizations in
prevention efforts and in revamping outreach activities
among target groups.
Recent developments in the different regions of the
world show the need for effective joint action in the fight
12/23

07/07/2016

against terrorism and violent extremism. In that regard,
we would like to mention the very relevant initiatives
undertaken by President Nursultan Nazarbayev of
Kazakhstan during the General Assembly’s debates last
year, such as establishing a United Nations-led counterterrorism coalition, developing a common mechanism
for tracing, detaining and extraditing the perpetrators
of violent extremism and terrorism, and establishing
a unified list of terrorist organizations. Therefore, we
welcome the adoption of resolution 70/291, on the fifth
review of the Global Strategy, as a step forward in
that direction.
Prevention is always among our top priorities; we
therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s initiative
to address this issue by presenting his Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674). We call on
delegations to further develop and extend the scope of
the Secretary-General’s initiative.
As an important measure to prevent terrorism
and violent extremism and with a view to promoting
dialogue, Kazakhstan triennially convenes in Astana
the Congress of the Leaders of World and Traditional
Religions, bringing together religious and political
leaders to promote peace. In like manner, we hold
inclusive and democratic gatherings of citizens and
youth groups in every locality of our country through
the Assembly of the People of Kazakhstan. On 6 May,
at the initiative of Kazakhstan and Jordan, Mr. Mogens
Lykketoft, President of the General Assembly, convened
a high-level debate on religions for peace, which issued
very significant recommendations for the future.
To conclude, we join with others in offering our
sympathy and condolences to those States that suffered
from the recent terrorist attacks. The Republic of
Kazakhstan reiterates its commitment to working
with other States Members of the United Nations to
more effectively combat the ever-increasing scourge
of terrorism.
Mr. Albatayneh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to express my deep thanks and gratitude
to the Permanent Representatives of Argentina and
Iceland for their commendable efforts as facilitators of
the fifth review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. I also wish to express my sincere
condolences to all of the victims of the terrorist acts,
especially in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
Republic of Iraq.
16-20732

07/07/2016

A/70/PV.111

This year’s review, which falls on the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of the Strategy, regrettably
coincides with an increase in terrorist acts throughout
the world. Last month, one such dastardly terrorist
act struck my country and soldiers. This year’s
review constitutes a turning point in the efforts of
the international community to combat terrorism and
address a variety of issues, including by striving to adapt
the United Nations and its specialized bodies to combat
terrorism internally and implementing the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674), which Jordan welcomes as an important,
non-binding guideline for Member States to develop
their national plans in consonance with the principle
of national ownership in order to address all the factors
that contribute to the growth of violent extremism.

I also thank the Ambassadors of Argentina and
Iceland and their teams for their professionalism and
commendable efforts to facilitate the negotiations
on the fifth review of the Strategy, and for obtaining
a consensus on resolution 70/291, adopted on 1 July,
which in our view marks an important step in the
adaptation of our response to the current challenges
posed by terrorism.

My delegation is fully satisfied with the resolution
and welcomes its adoption. We also welcome the
consensus reached despite some differences in points of
view. I would like to raise several issues in that regard.
First, it is important for Member States to develop
domestic plans to combat violent extremism according
to their national needs. Secondly, we must address the
threats posed by the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters and the exploitation of terrorists of information
and communications technology and social networks.
Thirdly, we must continue to empower our youth to
combat terrorism and violent extremism, and protect
them from falling prey to terrorist organizations.
Fourthly, we must prioritize strengthening cooperation,
integration, coordination and synergy among the
United Nations organs. Fifthly, before granting asylum,
all States should take the necessary steps to safeguard
their country and citizens.

Tunisia owes its success to the commitment of all
stakeholders to dialogue and compromise, and to the
active participation of civil society in overcoming the
difficulties of the democratic transition, including
through the adoption of a new Constitution and
the holding of free and transparent legislative and
presidential elections in 2014. These actions earned my
country, among other accolades, the Nobel Peace Prize
in 2015.

In closing, combating and preventing terrorism
requires the joint efforts and continuous coordination
of all stakeholders in order to support the countries on
the front line, such as Jordan.
Mrs. Zarrouk Boumiza (Tunisia) (spoke in
French): Allow me at the outset to express my
delegation’s sincere condolences to Saudi Arabia, Iraq,
Bangladesh, Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan following the
terrorist attacks in their countries. I would also like to
thank you, Sir, for presiding over this debate on the fifth
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and to commend the Secretary-General for his
report (A/70/826), which highlights the activities of the
United Nations system in implementing the Strategy.

My delegation welcomes the opportunity to
participate in this debate, which allows my country
to reaffirm its full support for the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and its global implementation,
and to reiterate that both the General Assembly and
the Security Council should continue to play a central
role in guiding future United Nations efforts to combat
terrorism and to prevent violent extremism.

These important and prestigious advances,
however, cannot hide the challenges we face. In
framing today’s debate, I would note in particular the
challenge of combating terrorism, because it is truly an
unprecedented challenge for my country. In addressing
it, Tunisia has adopted a comprehensive approach
based on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and relevant Security Council resolutions.
This fight is difficult and costly and requires
sacrifice. Tunisia pays a ringing tribute to those
brave men and women who have sacrificed so much
in defending its democratic achievements, protecting
human rights and fundamental freedoms, respecting the
decisions of our people, preserving our deeply rooted
Arab-Muslim identity, and translating the success of
our democratic transition into socioeconomic gains
that help the most vulnerable populations, thereby
pre-empting the radicalization of the most materially
and intellectually disenfranchised.
In the short term, this task is not easy. No one
will deny that the regional climate is under continuous
threat from successive waves of tension and conflicts,
without real prospects of sustainable solutions for

16-2073213/23

A/70/PV.111

some. However, Tunisia is committed to combating
this phenomenon through the rule of law. Tunisia has
therefore worked to align its new organic law to combat
terrorism and money-laundering, enacted in August
2015, with international counter-terrorism instruments
and the relevant Security Council resolutions. The law
criminalizes support, incitement, training, recruitment,
justifications, and travel to conflict zones, consistent
with relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2178 (2014). Through this law, we have also
established a legal framework to combat terrorism and a
national commission to combat terrorism and extremist
violence, which is tasked, inter alia, with ensuring
that we follow through with our international counterterrorism commitments.
We have also recently developed, in close
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, a national strategy inspired by
the United Nations counter-terrorism methodology
and approach. It is a comprehensive and multisectoral
strategy to combat terrorism and violent extremism on
the basis of four pillars: prevention, protection, followup and response. Under its prevention pillar, it seeks
to thwart the direct or indirect recruitment of youth,
particularly via the Internet, to counter the doctrines
of terrorist groups and thereby reduce their impact on
the most vulnerable populations in society. Moreover,
the strategy recommends bolstering pedagogical
approaches; promoting a culture of dialogue, peace
and tolerance; preventing radicalization; pursuing
development in marginalized zones and regions; and
rejecting any and all justifications for terrorist acts.
New measures have been implemented along
those lines. In that connection, in 2016 the Ministry
of Religious Affairs launched a campaign under the
slogan “Tomorrow will be better”, aimed at mentoring
our young people and promoting moderate Islam
through art, culture and communication. In particular,
the campaign intends to create an interactive website
and a call centre tasked with responding to young
people’s questions about religion. Events are also being
planned in schools, cultural venues and in other places
throughout the country where our young people need
the most guidance.
Similarly, the Minister of National Education has
published white papers on educational reform in Tunisia,
under the slogan “For high-performing, equitable
Tunisian schools that educate citizens and elevate the
country”. The fruit of in-depth national consultations
14/23

07/07/2016

with all stakeholders, the project primarily focuses on
the importance of protecting young people in schools
from violent extremism in the framework of social,
educational and cultural measures, and highlights the
importance of ensuring the interaction of educational
institutions with their social environment and civil
society. It also stresses the need to promote active
citizenry, bolster youth resilience to violent extremism,
and address all forms of violence at school.
In the same vein, we are ensuring that civil society
and all actors participate, because this fight — a fight
for the right to life that must triumph over the culture
of death, a fight against a common enemy — belongs
to us all. That is why we the peoples of the United
Nations, to echo the first words of the Charter of the
United Nations, must continue to play an essential role
in supporting the efforts of countries in need to end
this transnational threat. That is the common thread
we have detected in the many statements made at this
debate: a common enemy and a common strategy. This
strategy requires joint action at all levels. Our weak
link is that we have not yet been able to respond jointly
to the needs created by this common threat, despite the
commendable efforts of certain countries.
Consequently, we welcome the fact that the
resolution on the fifth review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy prioritizes the
strengthening of the capacities of Member State
to adapt to the constantly evolving international
terrorist trends, and that the text recognizes the need
to devote additional financial resources to this effort
and invites the Secretary-General to issue concrete
recommendations by May 2017.
Finally, we reiterate the resolution’s call for
Member States to allocate financial resources and
provide assistance of all types to the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and to the United Nations
Centre for Counter-Terrorism in order to implement
States’ capacity-building plans to curb the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters, which is a more concerted
and coherent approach.
Mr. Yusuf (Somalia): The vast majority of the
people of Somalia reject violent extremism. The
Somali Government would like to take this opportunity
to extend its heartfelt condolences to Saudi Arabia,
Turkey, Iraq, Bangladesh and the families, friends
and loved ones of all the innocent victims who were
affected by these evil tragedies. We stand in solidarity
16-20732

07/07/2016

with the brotherly people of Turkey, as well as the world
in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism.
We mourn with them and share their deep loss.
I commend the President of the General Assembly
on the successful completion of the fifth review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. I
would also like to thank the co-facilitators Ambassador
of Argentina Martín Garcia Moritán and Ambassador
of Iceland, Mr. Einar Gunnarsson, for their leadership
and assiduous efforts in the process of reaching an
agreement on resolution 70/291, on the fifth review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The Somali Government expresses its gratitude
to the United Nations for raising global awareness on
preventing and countering violent extremism, and to all
the participants, especially those Member States that
have shared with us their experiences, challenges and
practices. Working across Government, with the active
involvement of regional administrations, as well as
civil society, the Federal Government of Somalia, with
the support of the European Union and the blueprint
Somalia project, has developed a comprehensive
Somali-owned, Somali-led national strategy and plan of
action for preventing and countering violent extremism.
Our efforts in developing this strategy also
highlight the importance of working closely with our
international partners. The Secretary-General recently
recommended that each Member State develop a
national plan of action that sets national priorities for
addressing the local drivers of violent extremism. He
also stressed the importance of developing action plans
in a multidisciplinary manner to include countering
and preventing violent extremism measures, with
input from a wide range of Government actors, such
as law enforcement, social service providers and
ministries of education and religious affairs, as well as
non-governmental actors, such as women, the private
sector and civil-society leaders. Our strategy and plan
of action take all these recommendations on board. They
lay out the collective vision of the Federal Government
of Somalia and develop initiatives to better understand
and prevent and counter extremist influences, which
threaten Somalia’s security and stability. It forms an
essential and complementary element to the Somali
Government’s efforts to address national security
threats within a framework of good governance, human
rights and the rule of law.

A/70/PV.111

In conclusion, we are very encouraged by the
progress made towards the inclusive process, which has
gone into this Strategy and the Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism (A/70/694). We have no doubt that
the guidance this document provides will help Somalia
to become more resilient and to find the lasting peace
we all want and deserve.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): I would like to express
our profound gratitude to Ambassadors Moritán
and Gunnarsson for leading a fair, transparent and
consultative process of review. We commend their
tireless efforts towards a consensual adoption of
resolution 70/291.
We also appreciate the constructive spirit of
all delegations. Indeed, the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy deserves a strong and united
message from Member States.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Saudi Arabia on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (see
A/70/PV.109).
The sad events of the past few days in Turkey,
Bangladesh, Afghanistan and Saudi Arabia have served
as a harrowing reminder of the challenges we face
today — a reminder that our task does not finish with
the adoption of the resolution. The scourge of terrorism
continues and has indeed intensified. While our resolve
remains firm, our mission remains unaccomplished. The
revised and updated Strategy captures our collective
determination to continue pursuing recommendations
in four key areas: tackling the conditions conducive
to the spread of terrorism; preventing and combating
terrorism; building the capacities of Member States for
implementation and ensuring respect for human rights
while countering terrorism.
Pakistan condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations and reaffirms its unequivocal
commitment to fight this battle, regardless of the cost.
My country has made huge sacrifices in this battle, yet
we persevere. Our resolve and determination continue
to strengthen. No country is immune to terrorism or
its negative effects, and no country alone can defeat
this menace. The only way forward in this fight is
strengthening international cooperation. And the
United Nations, with its cardinal principles that seek
to enhance the same, provides the best vehicle for the

16-2073215/23

A/70/PV.111

purpose. The resolution we adopted last week represents
the collective will of the General Assembly.
Since the adoption of the Strategy 10 years
ago, Pakistan has accorded high importance to its
implementation. Few countries can match the national
efforts undertaken by Pakistan for the cause of counterterrorism; fewer still can match our sacrifices. Two years
ago, Pakistan elaborated in detail its comprehensive
efforts at the national level to counter terrorism.
Since then, we have further intensified measures and
organized our efforts. Our law enforcement operation,
Zarb-e-Azab, has had significant success. It is the single
largest national counter-terrorism operation anywhere
in the world. We will continue this operation until we
have achieved our objectives.
The establishment of special courts for terrorist
offenders, arms-control measures and the strengthening
of the national counter-terrorism authority and the
financial monitoring unit are all part of our robust
countermeasures against terrorism. Last year, thanks
to our national legislative measures, the Financial
Action Task Force acknowledged that our counterfinancing for terrorism measures were in line with
its recommendations.
We have also shaped a 20-point national action plan
to counter terrorism with a lot of focus on preventive
actions. This includes measures against hate speech
and sectarian violence, the protection of minorities,
the prevention of exploitation of the media and Internet
by terrorists and violent extremists, developing an
effective counternarrative to terrorist propaganda, the
reform of the educational system, the registration and
regularization of madrassas, political reconciliation
and economic uplift programmes for targeted areas,
criminal justice sector reform and, finally, the
registration of refugees.
Fully realizing the need for a whole-of-society
approach, the Government of Pakistan has undertaken
concerted efforts towards the promotion and protection
of women’s rights, enhancing the capacity of our lawenforcement agencies and harnessing the potential of
youth. The Prime Minister’s youth programme has
benefited thousands of youth in completing education
or pursuing higher studies, as well as encouraging
entrepreneurship with a view to providing them
hope and a future while saving them from despair
and despondency.
16/23

07/07/2016

In pursuing our goals, we have also benefited from
cooperation with United Nations agencies, in particular
our work with the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force for a youth skills development programme
and partnership with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate for enhancing the capacity of our
criminal justice sector. While Pakistan, in its national
capacity, will continue to do all it can, there are
many areas of work, both in countering terrorism and
preventing violent extremism, which require bilateral
and international cooperation for success. Pakistan is
keen on creating an environment that is conducive to
such cooperation.
Before I conclude, let me assure you, Sir, of
Pakistan’s continued and tireless efforts to counter
terrorism and prevent violent extremism nationally,
regionally and internationally, as well as to pursue our
constructive engagement with other Member States to
build a consensual and normative framework to counter
terrorism and violent extremism.
Mr. Al-Hajri (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Qatar aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (see
A/70/PV.109).
I wish to extend our appreciation to the
co-facilitators of the consultations on resolution 70/291
for their efforts.
I would like to express our condemnation of all
terrorist acts, including the cowardly criminal attacks
against Saudi Arabia. Those acts run counter to all
humanitarian and ethical values, as well as the tolerance
found in Islamic teachings. We would also like to
express our support for all measures and procedures
to be adopted by Saudi Arabia in order to protect its
security and stability.
The ongoing terrorist attacks in a number of
regions around the world mean that terrorism has no
religion, no identity and no nationality. Therefore,
we must fight it at all levels. The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is the appropriate
framework for such collective efforts. In that regard,
I would like to reiterate Qatar’s commitment to the
Strategy and its determination to safeguard peace and
security in the world. Therefore, we must reject any
association of terrorism with any culture or religion.
We must respect all civilizations and religions and
the values of coexistence and tolerance. We must
16-20732

07/07/2016

distinguish between the right to self-determination and
the fight against foreign occupation and terrorism. We
must also stress that, in countering terrorism, we must
also respect international humanitarian law and human
rights law.
In response to the aspirations of youth, we
need to establish programmes and an educational
framework that includes and integrates them, while
also addressing unemployment and countering terrorist
narratives. Concern for our youth therefore remains an
integral part of our policies at the national level. We
have also taken the initiative, in collaboration with
other partners, of convening a high-level meeting of
the General Assembly focused on children and youth
affected by violent extremism and on reintegrating
them into society.
The threat posed by terrorist groups that recruit
and move terrorists across borders also needs to be
addressed. However, the security response should be
complemented with addressing the root causes and
motivations behind this phenomenon. Terrorism was
not created in a vacuum; it grew and developed in
fragile environments. It should be addressed within
the framework of the rule of law and adopting a
comprehensive approach. Qatar is focusing greater
attention on working with national and international
mechanisms for uprooting terrorism and addressing
its root causes. We have adopted a number of laws
commensurate with the new challenges. We have also
established specialized national institutions, such as the
national counter-terrorism centre and a body to counter
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. Those
institutions are implementing instruments adopted by
the international community to eradicate terrorism.
In conclusion, representatives of the Syrian regime
have failed in their efforts to label as terrorists those
Syrians who are demanding their legitimate rights
and those countries that have expressed support for
such demands or that have condemned the regime’s
reppressive policies. It is ironic that the representatives
of a regime that practices State-sponsored terrorism is
labelling as terrorist countries that are known within
the United Nations system as being committed to
respect for human rights, as well as to international law
at the national and international levels. Those are the
very countries known for their active contributions to
resolving disputes through peaceful means.

A/70/PV.111

Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to join previous speakers in
expressing heartfelt sadness and condolences to those
countries that have lost citizens as a result of the recent
barbarous terrorist attacks. Many countries have been
affected in every region of the world.
I would also like to thank the Ambassador of
Argentina and the Ambassador of Iceland and their
teams for having passionately and positively negotiated
resolution 70/291, adopted by the General Assembly last
week, concerning the fifth review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which came into
being 10 years ago. The r resolution symbolizes the
international community’s shared determination
to stand together as we fight the forces of evil as
represented by terrorism. This common effort is very
much in line with the thinking of President Paul Biya
of Cameroon, who has repeatedly stated that a global
problem requires a global solution.
In the Lake Chad Basin generally, and in the far
north of my country in particular, the terrorist group
Boko Haram has struck once again, this time on 29 June
in the locality of Djakana, where they indiscriminately
killed 11 young people and seriously wounded four
others. The group was robustly confronted by my
country’s defence and security forces. Faced with that
determination, the terrorists have for some time chosen
the kamikaze method of action, which is cowardice
exercised by those who have no other way to respond.
My country is working together with a multinational
joint task force on the security front. We have no doubt
that we will prevail, as civil society has established
self-defence committees in the combat zones. The
people of Cameroon have risen up as one in the spirit
of national solidarity, and they are providing assistance
in kind to support the soldiers who are fighting. Our
forces obviously fight quite fiercely, while respecting
human rights and international law.
On the humanitarian front, intensive fighting has
been taking place with the support of United Nations
bodies and humanitarian agencies in the Lake Chad
Basin, in the far north, in the Adamawa region and
in the eastern part of my country, which have been
hosting a great number of refugees and internally
displaced persons.
On the diplomatic front, the Peace and Security
Council of the Community of Central African States,
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union and

16-2073217/23

A/70/PV.111

the United Nations Security Council have mobilized on
several occasions, and their support has strengthened
the fight of the countries in the Lake Chad region.
With regard to our efforts in the area of
socioeconomic development, on the initiative of
President Biya, the Government has put in place an
emergency plan to implement development projects in
the region in order to prevent poverty and abject poverty
from being used as a catalyst for further exacerbating
the conflict.
Lastly, Cameroon’s imams and religious leaders
are organizing nationally and locally regular sermons
on peace, equity, philanthropy, tolerance, love for one’s
neighbour, charity and moderation, which are the true
values of Islam. Those efforts are aimed at deradicalizing
the minds of people and avoiding extremism and
obscurantism, sources of indiscriminate violence.
Let me conclude by thanking all our bilateral and
multilateral partners that are actively supporting us in
many ways to help our country and the countries in the
Lake Chad Basin to eradicate Boko Haram, which the
Security Council has listed as a terrorist organization.
As is underscored by resolution 70/291, financial
contributions and capacity-building must be allocated
to our country and those in the Lake Chad Basin that
are facing the conflict and fighting the Boko Haram
group. Today more than yesterday, tomorrow more than
today and the day after tomorrow more than tomorrow,
the international community has to stand against Boko
Haram collectively and resolutely here in the General
Assembly and ask the Security Council to use all
the means at its disposal for prevention and action,
as provided for in the Charter of the United Nations,
in order to counter all the terrorist movements that
abuse Islam — which in fact has nothing to do with
extremists’ obscurantism, which is attributable to a
despicable charlatan.
Mr. Bessedik (Algeria): At the outset, I would like
to express our sincere thanks to the President of the
General Assembly for the importance he has attached
to the fifth Review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. I would also like to extend
our appreciation and thanks to the co-facilitators,
the Permanent Representative of Iceland and the
Permanent Representative of Argentina, for their
efforts in coordinating the process and helping to reach
consensus on review resolution 70/291.
18/23

07/07/2016

Algeria associates itself with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (see
A/70/PV.109).
My delegation would like to reiterate once more
its strong condemnation of terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, including those acts and activities
that support, encourage, justify or promote it directly
or indirectly. Terrorism has no religion, no homeland,
no borders and no justification. It should in no way
be associated with any particular culture, religion,
civilization or human community.
Algeria supports the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the outstanding
efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force through its work as a focal point for the bodies
and entities involved in implementing the Strategy.
In that regard, I would like to stress the necessity of
preserving the biennial review process of the Strategy,
aimed at the Strategy’s enrichment and its adaptation
to the changing requirements for combating terrorism,
including the evolving challenges that this transnational
scourge presents. That is also required to ensure the
effectiveness of the implementation of its four pillars
in a comprehensive manner. We note that the resolution
that we have adopted reflects that need.
My delegation would like to underline the
importance of consolidating efforts with regard to the
Strategy by enhancing cooperation at the bilateral,
regional and international levels, strengthening
capabilities and exchanging best practices and expertise
on combating terrorism. In that regard, it is important
to highlight the role of the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre in consolidating the Strategy’s pillars
and encouraging Member States to provide it with
adequate financial and human resources.
We welcome the reaffirmation in resolution
70/291 by the General Assembly of its respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence and
unity of all States in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
within the framework of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. On every occasion, Algeria has called for this
commitment to be observed. In addition, we believe
that any selective approach towards the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations is simply not acceptable. Such a selective
approach might have a counter effect. To be more
16-20732

07/07/2016

explicit: the international community cannot evade
its responsibilities with regard to the realization of the
right to self-determination of all peoples that are still
under foreign occupation and alien domination.
In that regard, we welcome the reaffirmation in
this year’s resolution of Member States’ determination
to continue to do all they can to resolve conflicts, end
foreign occupation, confront oppression, eradicate
poverty and promote sustained economic growth,
sustainable development, global prosperity, good
governance, human rights for all and the rule of law,
improve intercultural understanding and ensure respect
for all religions, religious values, beliefs and cultures.
Furthermore, the fight against violent extremism and
terrorism must also include the rejection of xenophobia
and Islamophobia, which are emerging as the new faces
of violent extremism.
Algeria has learned a precious lesson from its
bitter experience in the fight against violent extremism,
terrorism and its roots. Since the last review process
in 2014, and during the past two years, my country,
Algeria, has taken significant qualitative steps and made
tremendous efforts in preventing violent extremism
and countering terrorism. Those steps consolidate
the achievements of the historical reconciliation
policy submitted by the President of the Republic,
Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, in the form of the Charter
for Peace and National Reconciliation, which was
adopted in a referendum by an overwhelming majority
of the Algerian people.
Our experience shows that, as important as it may
be, the total defeat of terrorism using security measures
alone will always fail because terrorism will always
exploit and use the shortcomings existing in every
society to justify its actions. Algeria firmly believes
that the battle to be waged against this dreadful scourge
must be enacted daily and encompass all areas of
activity, including the political, institutional, economic,
cultural, religious, educational and social realms. Any
hope of success requires the active involvement of
all national institutions, all societal stakeholders and
all citizens.
The Algerian authorities therefore adopted a
strategy designed to shield each citizen and society
as a whole from any influence or manipulation by the
advocates of violent extremism and terrorism. That
strategy is implemented at several levels. It is based,
first, on permanently strengthening participatory

A/70/PV.111

democracy; secondly, on the rule of law and social
justice; and, thirdly, on promoting development
that offers equal opportunities for each and every
citizen. All those aspects are addressed and well
framed in a comprehensive way in our national
plan for deradicalization and prevention against
violent extremism.
Obviously, the fight against terrorism and violent
extremism requires greater attention, and must be the
subject of sustained bilateral, regional and international
cooperation. Algeria’s efforts to combat terrorism
have always been aimed at increasing regional and
international cooperation, even before the manifestation
of the major acts of international terrorism that the
world has known. From the outset, Algeria has sought
to strengthen Africa’s efforts against terrorism at
the Africa level, and, as a result, many international
instruments and initiatives have emerged and are
playing a very important role today in enhancing the
effectiveness of Africa’s efforts in that regard.
In the Sahel region, the concept of coordination
and cooperation finds its full potential in view of the
prevailing situation, which requires both coordination
and strengthening the capacities of the countries of the
region. In that regard, Algeria has engaged in a concerted
approach through various cooperation mechanisms. To
name just one recent activity at the regional level, on
27 and 28 April Algeria hosted the consultative meeting
on the start-up of the African Union mechanism for
police cooperation with the participation of the African
Union Commission and the African Centre for the
Study and Research on Terrorism. My country stressed
the need for enhanced cooperation among police and
law-enforcement agencies in Africa and the benefits
of such cooperation in the fight against transnational
organized crime and terrorism.
My country appreciates the level of our cooperation
with United Nations mechanisms and specialized
programmes in combating terrorism and is willing to
develop it further. In addition, Algeria’s membership
in the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum reflects its
commitment to participating in every relevant forum
to promote international cooperation against terrorism.
In that context, Algeria co-chairs with Canada the
working group on strengthening capabilities against
terrorism in the Sahel region. Algeria has also hosted
and participated in a number of coordination and
assessment activities aimed at strengthening capabilities

16-2073219/23

A/70/PV.111

and exchanging expertise in order to implement best
practices in addressing terrorism in all its aspects.
In conclusion, Algeria hopes that the resolution that
we adopted by consensus last Friday will be another
effective building block within our collective endeavours
to combat and eliminate international terrorism.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with resolution 48/5, of 13 October 1993, I
now give the floor to the observer for the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Ms. Deininger (Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe): I am pleased to deliver this
statement on behalf of the Anti-Terrorism Unit of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation (OSCE)
Transnational Threats Department.
For the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, it is an honour to participate in the fifth
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. The OSCE is a valuable partner in effectively
preventing violent extremism and countering terrorism.
In implementing the Strategy, the OSCE uses its
comparative advantages, namely, generating political
will among its 57 participating States; raising awareness
among State authorities, civil society and the private
sector; and building capacity on the ground.
Since the previous review, in 2014, the OSCE has
undertaken several key activities, first, to prevent and
counter violent extremism and radicalization that lead
to terrorism, and, secondly, to prevent the movement of
foreign terrorist fighters. We would also like to offer
three recommendations for improving collaboration
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
in particular the OSCE.
Let me outline our mandate in counter-terrorism.
As the largest regional security arrangements under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, the
OSCE is committed to support the implementation of
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We base
our action on a comprehensive mandate agreed by
consensus by our 57 participating States, which span
an area from Vancouver to Vladivostok, via Vienna. In
the light of the global increase in terrorist incidents,
that mandate has been reaffirmed and strengthened.
In 2014, the OSCE Ministerial Council in Basel
pledged our support for the implementation of Security
Council 2178 (2014), on the phenomenon of foreign
20/23

07/07/2016

terrorist fighters. In December 2015, the Ministerial
Council in Belgrade adopted a comprehensive
declaration on preventing and countering violent
extremism and radicalization that lead to terrorism,
as well as a second declaration underscoring our
cooperation as a regional body. The former declaration
identifies a number of good practices, also reflected in
the United Nations Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism, presented by the Secretary-General in
December 2015. The Plan of Action was welcomed
by the German OSCE chairmanship and by the
OSCE Secretary-General. We believe it can play a
critical role in galvanizing the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in
particular pillar I. The OSCE particularly welcomes the
emphasis that the Plan places on enhancing efforts at
the regional level.
Turning to our key supporting activities since the
2014 review, preventing terrorism and countering violent
extremism and radicalization that lead to terrorism has
remained a strategic priority for the OSCE over the past
two years. In the area of awareness-raising and political
will, we have pursued our decade-old efforts to raise
awareness and facilitate an exchange of good practices
on countering incitement to terrorism and countering
terrorist radicalization, while upholding human rights
and the rule of law.
The OSCE chairmanships in 2015 and 2016, of
Serbia and Germany, respectively, convened OSCE-wide
conferences at the level of national counter-terrorism
coordinators, focused on preventing and countering
violent extremism and radicalization that lead to
terrorism. We are also working hard to strengthen
our engagement and collaboration with the United
Nations, other regional organizations, OSCE Partners
for Cooperation and many others. For example, the
OSCE drafted the good practices document on women
and countering violent extremism, which was adopted
by the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum in September
2015 and recognized in Security Council resolution
2242 (2015).
The OSCE Transnational Threats Department
is working jointly with the OSCE Representative on
Freedom of the Media regarding counter-terrorism
policies and media freedom and responsibilities. We
held an initial workshop in Bucharest in October 2015,
and we will follow up in Sarajevo in September, with
a focus on preventing and countering online violent
extremism and radicalization that lead to terrorism.
16-20732

07/07/2016

Parallel to those discussions, we are developing an
OSCE e-leaming module on countering the use of
the Internet for terrorist purposes, with the support
of international experts, including those from the
United Nations.
With regard to capacity-building, the OSCE is
assisting several of its participating States to develop
and implement comprehensive national strategies
and action plans to counter violent extremism and
terrorism. The development of such plans is one of the
key recommendations of the Secretary-General in his
report (A/70/826) on the implementation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We are also launching a
new initiative called Leaders against Intolerance and
Violent Extremism to build capacity at the grass-roots
level. The aim is to empower local civil-society leaders,
including women and youth, to speak up and mobilize
their communities against violent extremism. Recently,
we organized several innovative training activities,
including social media training for youth on countering
violent extremist narratives and table-top exercises
to promote inter-agency coordination. We are also
developing a training programme for police officers
on the role of community policing in preventing and
countering violent extremism and radicalization
that lead to terrorism. The training is based on a
joint guidebook of the OSCE Transnational Threats
Department and the OSCE Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights.
All those activities are contributing to our
communications campaign, OSCE United in Countering
Violent Extremism. The campaign was kick-started last
year and seeks to leverage the potential of social media
to engage and rally youth and civil society in support
of the global consensus against violent extremism. We
have achieved an unprecedented outreach of 9 million
people in less than a year.
Preventing the movement of foreign terrorist
fighters is highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
report on the implementation of the Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. It points to three areas where more efforts
are required: first, strengthening border-control
capacity; secondly, enhancing the use of advance
passenger information; and, thirdly, increasing the use
of INTERPOL databases. The OSCE travel document
security programme focuses specifically on those
work streams in order to implement Security Council
resolution 2178 (2014).

A/70/PV.111

With regard to strengthening border control, we
see that, although the use of technology at borders has
increased, the importance of having border officers
with the ability to detect foreign terrorist fighters has
also increased. Therefore, we have organized a series
of national trainings on the latest forgery techniques
in passports, and we are developing a mobile training
team to support States in identifying foreign terrorist
fighters. We also have a dedicated Border Management
Staff College in Dushanbe, Tajikistan, which holds both
monthly and annual staff courses for border guards.
On enhancing the use of advance passanger
information, the OSCE is a partner in the global project
led by the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre to
raise awareness on the issue. Next month, the OSCE
will co-host in Vienna the third regional workshop.
In addition, we have been consistently briefing our 57
participating States on the requirement that airlines
provide States with such data, in accordance with
resolution 2178 (2014). The German OSCE chairmanship
is currently negotiating a politically binding
commitment that would call on States to implement the
advance passanger information exchange programmes
within the existing internationally agreed standards
to prevent the movement of foreign terrorist fighters.
Finally, we are working on capacity-building in order
to support and assist States in the establishment of
advance passanger information systems, in cooperation
with the relevant international organizations.
On icreasing the use of INTERPOL databases, the
OSCE had previously adopted by consensus decisions
on the use of INTERPOL databases. The challenge, as
highlighted by the Secretary-General, is to increase
the use of those databases. Therefore, as part of
the decision to be negotiated on advance passanger
information, we are making a push to increase the
political will for establishing the automated crosschecking of data against INTERPOL databases. On
the capacity-building front, the OSCE is working with
INTERPOL to increase access at border control points
to INTERPOL databases.
In summary, the OSCE is a valuable partner to
effectively prevent violent extremism and to counter
terrorism. On implementation, our existing capacitybuilding projects to counter violent extremism and
to enhance traveller identification at the border
make us well placed to partner with international
organizations in supporting States. On awarenessraising, we use a combination of conferences, targeted

16-2073221/23

A/70/PV.111

07/07/2016

workshops, online campaigning and focal-point
networks to raise awareness of the commitments in
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and how States
can implement them. On political will, the OSCE
increases standards and norms through the adoption of
politically binding decisions by consensus among the
57 participating States.

Agenda item 15 (continued)

We would like to offer three points about the OSCE
collaboration with the United Nations.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to inform members that the consideration of draft
resolution A/70/L.49/Rev.1, entitled “Third Industrial
Development Decade for Africa 2016-2025”, will be
held at a later date to be announced.

First, United Nations entities, coordinated through
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
should fully embrace regional organizations such as
the OSCE at the beginning of the planning process
whenever possible. Structurally, the OSCE has
programme managers dedicated to all aspects of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which allow our
joint efforts to be more sustainable and effective.
Secondly, our activities require a mechanism that
allows funding to be shared between organizational
structures. This allows much-needed grant money for
a partner organization to leverage regional capacity
when the grant terms reinforce joint activities
through subgrants.
Thirdly, our aim for two years from now, during
the sixth biennial review of the Strategy, should be
even more confidence-building and efficiency in
transforming the number of positive words expressed
today and the days before into sustainable actions. That
would allow us to unlock the human resources needed
for the countries that are most often the beneficiaries
of workshops, training and other events. Otherwise,
we would not have matched development goals with
sustainable counter-terrorism actions.
In conclusion, the OSCE stands ready to remain
a substantive contributor in generating political will,
in raising awareness and in capacity-building while
implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy in the area of the OSCE.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
thus heard the last speaker in the debate on this item for
this meeting.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
117?
It was so decided.
22/23

Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/70/L.49/Rev.1)

Agenda item 66 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
Draft resolution (A/70/L.50/Rev.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Members
will recall that the General Assembly considered, in a
joint debate, agenda item 66 and its sub-items (a) and
(b) and agenda item 14, at its 34th and 35th plenary
meetings, held on 16 October 2015.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Thailand to introduce draft resolution A/70/L.50/Rev.1.
Mrs. Aueareechit (Thailand): On behalf of
the Group of 77 and China, I have the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/70/L.50/Rev.1, entitled
“Implementation of the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”.
This new draft resolution recognizes that there has
been notable progress in achieving durable peace on the
continent. However, in order to achieve a conflict-free
Africa, the draft resolution calls for enhancing national
and regional initiatives with international support
to address the root causes of conflict and to resolve
conflicts in a peaceful manner.
On behalf of the Group of 77 and China, I would
like to thank our coordinator from Rwanda, the
facilitator from the Sudan and all partners involved in
the negotiation of this text. We hope that the General
Assembly will adopt this draft resolution by consensus.
16-20732

07/07/2016

A/70/PV.111

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/70/L.50/Rev. 1, entitled “Implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa”.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 66?

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/70/L.50/Rev.1, the following countries
have also become sponsors of the draft: Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Cyprus, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Netherlands,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden and Turkey.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft
resolution A/70/L.50/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/70/L.50/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 70/292).

It was so decided.
Agenda item 120 (continued)
Report of the Second Committee (A/70/518/
Add.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): If there
is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure,
I shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to
discuss the report of the Second Committee which is
before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that the General Assembly wishes to take note of
the report of the Second Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 120.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

16-2073223/23
