A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/214
11 January 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 24
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/48/L.24/Rev.2)]
48/214.

United Nations New Agenda for the
Development of Africa in the 1990s

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 46/151 of 18 December 1991, the annex to
which contains the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in
the 1990s,
Also reaffirming its resolution 45/253 of 21 December 1990 on programme
planning, in which the economic recovery and development of Africa are spelt
out as one of the five overall priorities reflected in the medium-term plan
for the period 1992-1997, 1/
Recalling its resolutions 45/178 A to C of 19 December 1990 and 45/200
of 21 December 1990 on the critical economic situation in Africa and on
commodity problems, respectively,
Taking note of decisions 92/19 of 26 May 1992 and 93/17 of 18 June 1993
adopted by the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme
on the New Agenda, 2/
____________
1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 6 (A/47/6/Rev.1), vol. I., Programme 45.
2/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1992,
Supplement No. 8 (E/1992/28), annex I, and ibid., 1993, Supplement No. 15
(E/1993/35), annex I, respectively.

/...

A/RES/48/214
Page 2

Taking note also of resolution CM/Res.1415 (LVI) of 28 June 1992 of the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity on the New
Agenda, 3/
Noting the continuing efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure the
successful implementation of the New Agenda,
Convinced that growth and development on a sustained and sustainable
basis can come about only as a result, inter alia, of the full participation
of the people, particularly women, in the development process,
Recognizing the persistent efforts undertaken by many African countries
to implement political and economic reform policies, and reaffirming the
crucial importance of adequate social services and facilities to meet the
basic needs of the populations and economic human-centred development, further
recognizing the importance of good governance to meet overall development
objectives,
Mindful of the need for African countries to diversify their economies,
particularly their primary commodities, with a view to modernizing African
production, distribution and marketing systems, enhancing productivity and
stabilizing and increasing African export earnings in the face of the
persistent decline of the prices of many primary commodities and the
continuous deterioration in the terms of trade of African economies,
Reaffirming the importance of addressing the challenges facing African
agricultural sectors, inter alia, drought, desertification, land degradation,
locust infestation, land management and incentive structures, so as to achieve
African food security as outlined in the New Agenda,
Deeply concerned by the constrained financial resource flows to Africa
aggravated by rising debt and debt-service obligations and low private
investment flows, and noting that Africa is the only continent experiencing a
negative net transfer of resources in the 1990s,
Acknowledging the positive impact of substantive official development
assistance transfers to Africa,
Reaffirming also the commitments on resource flows, including private
direct investment, as contained in paragraphs 29 and 30 of the New Agenda,
Mindful of the need for African countries to increase and mobilize
internal resources for sustainable development through, inter alia, policies
for the promotion of domestic savings, improved and accessible banking
facilities and further improvements in traditional practices of capital
formation at local levels,
Taking note of the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development, held on 5 and 6 October 1993, and of the Declaration adopted at
that Conference,
____________
3/

See A/47/558, annex I.

/...

A/RES/48/214
Page 3

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the preliminary
consideration of the implementation of the New Agenda, 4/ the report
transmitted by the Secretary-General on the need for and feasibility of the
establishment of a diversification fund for Africa’s commodities, 5/ and the
report of the Secretary-General on financial resource flows to Africa, 6/
1.
Reaffirms the high priority attached, in the medium-term plan for
the period 1992-1997, to Africa’s economic recovery and development, including
the effective implementation of the United Nations New Agenda for the
Development of Africa in the 1990s as integrated in Programme 45; 1/
2.
Notes with appreciation the establishment of a panel of high-level
personalities to advise and assist the Secretary-General on African
development, in particular on the implementation of the New Agenda, and
requests that this panel continue to meet regularly under the chairmanship of
the Secretary-General and that its recommendations be made available to the
Member States;
3.
Commends African countries for the actions undertaken to promote
an economic environment conducive to growth and development, in conformity
with their commitments under the New Agenda, and calls upon them to pursue
vigorously those responsibilities and commitments in order to achieve growth
and development on a sustained and sustainable basis;
4.
Urges all United Nations organs, organizations and programmes to
integrate the priorities of the New Agenda in their mandates, to allocate
sufficient resources for their operation and to improve further the use of
available resources;
5.
Recommends that, as part of capacity-building assistance,
interested African countries be assisted in the monitoring of the impact of
the work being undertaken in the context of the implementation of the New
Agenda and in ensuring the participation of community-based groups,
particularly women;
6.
Renews its call upon the international community to pursue
vigorously its responsibilities and commitments under the New Agenda in order
to provide full and tangible support to the African efforts;
7.
Recognizes the importance and high priority to be given to African
regional and subregional cooperation and integration, and urges the United
Nations system and its organizations to allocate sufficient technical and
financial support to African regional economic groupings, including the
African Economic Community, in order to contribute to their effectiveness in
the process of African economic development;
8.
Urges the multilateral financial institutions, recipient countries
and donor countries, within the conceptual framework and design and
____________
4/

A/48/334.

5/

A/48/335, annex, and Add.1 and 2.

6/

A/48/336 and Corr.1.
/...

A/RES/48/214
Page 4

implementation of structural adjustment policies in Africa, to pay special
attention to eradicating poverty and addressing the social impact of these
policies, while focusing on public investment, fiscal reform, reform of public
enterprises, export expansion and efficient public administration;
9.
Invites the preparatory bodies of all forthcoming conferences of
the United Nations system to take into account the specific needs,
requirements and priorities of the African countries, as outlined in the New
Agenda;
10.
Invites the Secretary-General to strengthen the capacity and
capability of the Secretariat to raise international awareness of the urgent
international and African actions needed to overcome the economic crisis in
Africa, and to reinforce the capabilities of the Office of the Special
Coordinator for Africa and the least developed countries to follow up, monitor
and evaluate implementation of the New Agenda and, in the process, provide an
effective framework for the Economic and Social Council to consider the
implementation of the New Agenda in 1995 as part of its high-level segment, as
well as for the General Assembly to conduct a mid-term review of the
implementation of the New Agenda in 1996, in accordance with paragraph 43 (b
and c) thereof;
11.
Calls upon the Secretary-General of the United Nations to work in
close coordination and cooperation with the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity, in particular, on the follow-up to and review
and evaluation of the implementation of the New Agenda;
12.
Welcomes the report prepared by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and transmitted by the Secretary-General
entitled "Need for and feasibility of the establishment of a diversification
fund for Africa’s commodities"; 5/
13.
Affirms the need for further efforts to promote the
diversification of African economies;
14.
Stresses the importance that the Secretary-General, Africa and an
increasing number of countries attach to the necessity of the proposed
establishment and operationalization of a diversification fund for Africa’s
commodities;
15.
Stresses also the need, in developing diversification projects and
programmes, to make full and effective use of existing funding mechanisms;
16.
Stresses further the need to fill gaps that may exist in the
funding available for diversification of related activities in Africa;
17.
Decides to address rigorously the full range of issues related to
the diversification of African economies, with particular attention to the
issues outlined in paragraphs 14, 15 and 16 of the present resolution, and for
this purpose to convene in the first quarter of 1994, on the basis of
background documents to be prepared by the Secretary-General, intensive
consultations involving concerned and interested States, together with
relevant financial institutions and United Nations organizations, including,
inter alia, the African Development Bank, the World Bank, the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the Economic Commission for Africa, the

/...

A/RES/48/214
Page 5

United Nations Development Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization;
18.
Decides also to take full account of the conclusions of those
consultations in determining, during its resumed forty-eighth session, the
appropriate actions to be taken to strengthen support for the diversification
of African economies, including the proposed establishment of new funding
arrangements, together with the organization of follow-up activities, such as
seminars or expert workshops;
19.
Encourages African countries to establish national diversification
councils, as recommended in the report transmitted by the SecretaryGeneral, 7/ including representatives from the Government and the private
sector;
20.
Urges the international community to increase financial resource
flows to Africa, as these are crucial to regenerate growth and sustainable
development of the African economies, to provide effective support to the
political and economic reforms in which many African countries are now engaged
and to help cushion adverse social impact;
21.
Reaffirms the recommendations stipulated in paragraphs 23 to 28 of
the New Agenda concerning Africa’s debt problem, and in that context invites
the international community to address Africa’s external debt crisis and debt
problems of African countries, including continuing to give serious
consideration to the proposal for the convening of an international conference
on Africa’s external indebtedness;
22.
Urges States to implement the undertakings they have made to
attain the agreed international targets of devoting 0.7 per cent of gross
national product to official development assistance and 0.15 per cent to least
developed countries as soon as possible and to provide a better environment
for the realization of the suggested estimate of the need to achieve an
average of a 4 per cent real growth in annual financial resource flows to
Africa, as outlined in paragraph 29 of the New Agenda;
23.
Requests the Secretary-General to undertake a study, in
consultation with relevant financial institutions, recommending appropriate
measures further to improve financial intermediation systems and practices in
African countries to be submitted to the General Assembly at its fiftieth
session, which should take into account an in-depth analysis of the current
traditional systems and practices of capital formation at the local level and
the kind of support measures the international community could provide;
24.
Urges African countries to continue their efforts for the
improvement of the investment climate, and urges donor countries to support
those efforts by, inter alia, providing increasing assistance to human
resources development and to the rehabilitation and development of the social
and economic infrastructure;

____________
7/ See A/48/335, para. 54.

/...

A/RES/48/214
Page 6

25.
Requests Governments and organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, within their respective spheres of competence, to take
appropriate measures in order to implement the commitments contained in the
Tokyo Declaration of 6 October 1993 and to take other initiatives, as may be
necessary, with the participation of interested parties from Africa and the
international community, to ensure an effective follow-up of the Tokyo
International Conference on African Development;
26.
Decides to include an item entitled "Implementation of the United
Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s" in the agenda
of its fiftieth session.

87th plenary meeting
23 December 1993
