United Nations

S/PV.5017

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

5017

th meeting
Thursday, 5 August 2004, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Denisov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Russian Federation)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Benmehidi
Mr. Lucas
Mr. Zinsou
Mr. Valle
Mr. Maquieira
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Trautwein
Mr. Khalid
Mr. Mercado
Mr. Motoc
Mr. De Palacio España
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Holliday

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2004/613)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-45050 (E)

*0445050*

S/PV.5017

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (S/2004/613)
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Albania, Japan, the Netherlands
and Serbia and Montenegro, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Security Council, I extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Zoran Loncar,
Minister of Public Administration and Local SelfGovernment of Serbia.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Loncar
(Serbia and Montenegro) took a seat at the
Council table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Hédi Annabi, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

2

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/613, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Hédi Annabi, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations. I now give him
the floor.
Mr. Annabi: Members of the Council have
before them the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK)(S/2004/613), which is dated 30 July
2004 and covers the activities of UNMIK and
developments in Kosovo from 1 April to 15 July. I
wish to thank the Council for the opportunity to brief it
on the main highlights of the report.
Following the widespread violence of midMarch, efforts in Kosovo have focused on creating an
environment in which confidence among Kosovo’s
communities can be strengthened and dialogue among
Kosovo’s political leaders can move forward. Efforts
have centred on the reconstruction of property
damaged or destroyed during the violence, on creating
conditions for the safe and sustainable return of those
who were forced to flee their homes during the
violence, on establishing the basis for the reform of
local government in Kosovo and on moving forward
the standards implementation process. While there
have been encouraging and concrete developments in
those and other important areas, overall progress
remains fragile and serious concerns persist.
The overall security situation in Kosovo has been
calm and stable, with few significant security
incidents — none of which have been attributed to
extremist groups. While instances of intimidation
against minorities have continued — in particular
against Kosovo Serbs — there has only been one
serious incident that appeared to be ethnically
motivated, namely, the murder on 5 June of a Kosovo
Serb teenager in the village of Gracanica, just outside
Pristina. That murder should be condemned in the
strongest terms. However, we are encouraged by the
rapid apprehension and arrest by Kosovo Albanian
officers of the Kosovo Police Service of two Kosovo
Albanian youths only hours after the murder. Those
arrests have contributed to preventing the escalation of
that incident into wider inter-ethnic violence.

S/PV.5017

Kosovo’s non-majority communities, and in
particular Kosovo Serbs, continue to live in precarious
security conditions. Their freedom of movement and
access to public services and facilities has been further
curtailed by the events of last March. Regrettably, there
have been few signs of tangible improvement since
then. Only through improved security conditions and
freedom of movement can Kosovo’s minorities be
confident that their future lies in Kosovo. Only then
will the internally displaced feel confident enough to
return to their homes.
Although there have been important steps
forward in the reconstruction of houses damaged or
destroyed during the March violence, some 2,400
people remain displaced as a result of the unrest.
Limited returns have taken place to temporary
accommodations next to sites where homes are being
reconstructed. But the overall returns process was dealt
a severe blow by the March violence. The effect on
returns to urban areas that had been planned earlier in
the year has been particularly damaging. Despite the
major setback to the returns process caused by the
March violence, UNMIK is working with Kosovo Serb
representatives to identify priority areas for the return
of Kosovo Serbs this year.
Following a slow start, the reconstruction of
damaged or destroyed properties moved forward
significantly during the reporting period. Kosovo’s
Provisional Institutions are responsible for postviolence reconstruction efforts, and an inter-ministerial
Reconstruction Commission has been entrusted with
managing and implementing the reconstruction
programme. As of 30 July, 331 of the 935 damaged or
destroyed properties had been rebuilt, and 277 were
under reconstruction. Contracts for a further 36
properties are about to be awarded, and technical
documentation is currently being prepared for an
additional 160 properties. While those results are
noteworthy, clearly much more needs to be done in this
area. A further acceleration of reconstruction efforts
will be required to ensure that all homes are rebuilt
before the onset of winter and that the reconstruction
of all schools is completed before the start of the
school year.
There have been encouraging steps by Kosovo
Albanian leaders to begin to mend the damage caused
to inter-ethnic dialogue and reconciliation by the
March violence by reaching out to Kosovo’s minorities
through visits to their communities. Those actions are

important, but they must be followed by sustained
public commitment and concrete action aimed at
rebuilding trust between Kosovo’s communities in
order to ensure that the difficult process of
reconciliation truly takes hold. Following the violence,
a resumption of political dialogue among the leaders of
Kosovo’s communities is of paramount importance in
order for Kosovo to make progress.
Despite the Kosovo Serbs’ continued nonparticipation in Kosovo’s Provisional Institutions, the
signing of a joint declaration by Kosovo Serb and
Kosovo Albanian leaders on 14 July, in which leaders
of the two communities committed themselves to
cooperate in a number of areas, was a significant
development. That important statement of intent of
course needs to be followed up by concrete actions.
The recent period has also seen progress in the
standards implementation process. Following the
launching of the revised Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan on 31 March, Kosovo’s
Provisional Institutions have shown a renewed
readiness and commitment to move that process
forward. Within the Provisional Institutions, detailed
assignments and timelines for the achievement of
targets set out in the Implementation Plan have been
drawn up, and a monitoring and assessment mechanism
is in place. Those are important steps forward, but
clearly the challenge is for the Provisional Institutions
to effect concrete change in line with the Plan’s
requirements, particularly in the areas of minority
protection and the promotion of minority rights, as well
as returns and freedom of movement. Kosovo Serbs are
called upon to engage in the standards implementation
process in order to address their concerns. The
Provisional Institutions should, in particular, focus on
implementing all of the priority actions included in the
Plan following the March violence.
There has been significant progress in joint
efforts by UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions to
initiate a process of reform of local government in
Kosovo. Following extensive deliberations by a joint
UNMIK-Provisional Institutions working group, on
23 July an agreed framework document on local
government was presented, setting out the principles
and framework for the devolution of responsibilities to
the local level. The document, which was approved in
principle by the Kosovo Government, is an important
step forward in developing the recommendations on
possible new institutional arrangements requested by

3

S/PV.5017

the Security Council in order to allow for more
effective local government through the devolution of
responsibilities.
The consultation process has been transparent and
inclusive and has benefited from the constant support
of the international community. Although they did not
formally agree to the document, representatives of the
Kosovo Serb community participated in an observer
capacity in the final four meetings of the working
group and contributed substantively to the agreed text.
UNMIK continues to consult with Kosovo Serbs, with
a view to exploring their position on the document. We
urge all stakeholders to continue their active
involvement in this process, with a view to achieving
practical results soon. In due course the Council will
receive recommendations from the Secretary-General
as requested.
Kosovo’s Provisional Institutions, and in
particular the Kosovo Government, continued to make
progress in improving their efficiency and
effectiveness. However, the Kosovo Assembly has
continued to focus on symbolic issues to the detriment
of concrete standards implementation and legislative
work aimed at improving the daily lives of all of
Kosovo’s residents. This was most evident in the
Assembly’s move to propose a comprehensive package
of amendments to the Constitutional Framework.
Despite UNMIK’s repeated warnings that such a move
went beyond the Assembly’s competence, and despite
the issuance of a press release by UNMIK on 8 July
reiterating that position, Assembly members voted on
28 July to propose a package of 38 amendments to the
Constitutional Framework and to forward those
proposals to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his approval. The proposals,
which have yet to be formally presented to the Special
Representative, impact on a number of areas that are
reserved for the Special Representative under the terms
of the Constitutional Framework. UNMIK’s position
on this is clear: it remains open to considering specific
proposals for amendments, provided that they are not
within the reserved powers of the Special
Representative.
Technical preparations for the Kosovo-wide
elections in October have begun, and to a large extent
operational responsibilities for running the elections
will rest for the first time with the people of Kosovo.
There have been difficulties in obtaining the required
level of cooperation and information from the

4

competent authorities in Belgrade, and as a result the
by-mail operation for the internally displaced outside
Kosovo has encountered serious difficulties. UNMIK
has therefore decided to proceed on the basis of the
information currently available.
While the technical groundwork for inclusive
elections with the participation of all of Kosovo’s
communities is being laid, the participation of Kosovo
Serbs in the elections remains unclear. Indications by
some representatives of the Kosovo Serb community of
a willingness to participate are encouraging, and
UNMIK continues to work with the Kosovo Serb
leadership with a view to ensuring their participation.
Participation in the democratic electoral process and a
re-engagement in Kosovo’s provisional institutions is
in the interest of Kosovo Serbs, and the international
community’s concerted support for efforts to ensure
their participation is crucial.
Overall, one can say that the period since the
violence in March has seen limited and encouraging
progress in Kosovo, but clearly Kosovo’s leaders and
population face an uphill challenge in moving Kosovo
forward along the path of normalization, ethnic
reconciliation, strengthening of still fledgling
democratic institutions and creation of a tolerant,
inclusive society. Consistent progress in implementing
the standards for Kosovo is central to the creation of a
democratic and tolerant Kosovo. We are encouraged by
the commitment shown by Kosovo Albanian and
Kosovo Serb leaders to the creation of a multi-ethnic
Kosovo and by efforts to move the political process
forward. Developments since March have shown that,
although responsibility for progress ultimately rests
with Kosovo’s representatives and its people, the
international community’s and, of course, the
Council’s, consistent support and active engagement in
our joint effort in Kosovo remain indispensable.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr.
Annabi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Serbia and Montenegro, His Excellency Mr. Zoran
Loncar, Minister of Public Administration and Local
Self-Government of Serbia.
Mr. Loncar (Serbia and Montenegro) (spoke in
Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation):
First of all, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. I would also like to

S/PV.5017

thank Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his
in-depth presentation of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2004/613).
I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to state the positions of Serbia and
Montenegro at today’s meeting of the Security Council
regarding the report before it on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija, Serbia and Montenegro, from 1 April to 15
July 2004.
Serbia and Montenegro appreciates the view
stated in the report that much of the political effort in
Kosovo and Metohija over the reporting period was
aimed at alleviating the consequences of the attempted
ethnic cleansing in the province in mid-March this
year. Without seeking to diminish the efforts of the
international community and UNMIK to rebuild
destroyed houses, schools and other structures, it is our
view that the consequences of the pogrom by Kosovo
Albanian extremists and terrorists committed against
the Serbs on 17 and 18 March 2004 are far from being
addressed. In addition, reconstruction has not yet even
begun of 35 destroyed and torched churches and
monasteries of the Serb Orthodox Church, a centuriesold testimony of the Serb presence in the area. I cannot
but mention that these include the cathedral and the
Metropolitan’s residence in the mediaeval city of
Prizren and the Church of Our Lady — the Bogorodica
Ljeviska — dating from the beginning of the fourteenth
century.
Moreover, Serbia and Montenegro does not
consider sufficient the efforts made so far to overcome
the political and moral consequences of the March
pogrom against Serbs. The basic human right to life in
safety, peace and dignity worthy of human beings
continues to be denied to Serbs in Kosovo and
Metohija. Adequate measures have not been
undertaken against extremists and terrorists, whose
influence was very much in evidence among Kosovo
Albanians in the March events. The fundamental
human right of a safe and peaceful life for Serbs cannot
be realized without decisive police and judicial
investigation and without putting a total end to the
contrary policy by the Kosovo Albanians themselves.
We note with regret that the past activities of
UNMIK and other representatives of the international
community in this respect have been insufficient. This

indirectly sends the message to Albanian extremist and
terrorist structures that their crimes may remain
unpunished and that they are tacitly tolerated and
hence may be repeated.
Serbia and Montenegro expresses its concern
over the fact that the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment in Kosovo and Metohija failed to
condemn the March ethnic violence and ethnic
cleansing promptly and willingly. How is it possible
that the bodies and institutions that should, according
to the Constitutional Framework, represent all
inhabitants of the province condemned the violence
only when compelled to do so by international factors?
How can it be that the majority Albanian community is
using this horrendous violence against the Serbs as an
excuse to demand new responsibilities since it
allegedly lacks the authority to prevent such brutality?
The collapse of the Kosovo Police Service in March
best disproves the validity of any such demand. Some
activities undertaken by the Kosovo parliament offer
similar examples. We therefore welcome the position
of the Secretary-General concerning the illegal
amending of the Constitutional Framework by the
Kosovo parliament, particularly the assessment in the
conclusions of his report that this was clearly outside
its competencies. This is an absolutely unacceptable
act.
Serbia and Montenegro wishes to reiterate the
position stated in the plan of the Republic of Serbia for
the political solution to the current situation in Kosovo
and Metohija, adopted by a resolution of the National
Assembly of the Republic of Serbia on 29 April 2004:
Serbia does not want to diminish any effort by the
international military and civilian missions in Kosovo
and Metohija to curb inter-ethnic conflicts. However,
Serbia and Montenegro still considers that UNMIK has
not yet fulfilled its mandate under Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). That mandate includes, inter
alia, “establishing and overseeing the development of
provisional democratic self-governing institutions to
ensure conditions for a peaceful and normal life for all
inhabitants of Kosovo” (para. 10), “assuring the safe
and unimpeded return of all refugees and displaced
persons to their homes in Kosovo” (para. 11 (k)), and
“protecting and promoting human rights” (para. 11 (j)).
We would like to point out once again that
UNMIK’s failure to fulfil those goals was not due to a
lack of good will or conscientiousness by a significant
part of the international mission. It is virtually

5

S/PV.5017

impossible for the international troops and civilian
presence to effectively protect the basic human rights
of Serbs when they have been exposed to expulsion by
well-organized Kosovo Albanian extremist and
terrorist structures. That is why the Government of
Serbia proposed its plan for a political solution through
territorial autonomy and firm institutional guarantees
as the only possibility for protecting the remaining
Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija. At the same time, the
plan creates the only realistic preconditions for the
return of internally displaced persons now in central
Serbia. The plan does not offer final solutions to all
issues and is open to amendment. It does, however,
proceed from a realistic assessment of the situation in
Kosovo and Metohija. The situation in the province is
not comparable to any other in Europe. As rightly
indicated in the Secretary-General’s report, “there
remains a long way to go until standards, particularly
in the areas of minority protection, returns and freedom
of movement, are met” (S/2004/613, para. 3).
The plan of the Government of the Republic of
Serbia guarantees institutional mechanisms for the
protection of the rights of minorities, with special
status for churches and monasteries and a lasting
security role for the international forces in the
protection of minorities. The plan would provide a
situation of safety in which, inter alia, parents would
not have to fear for their children as they leave for
school, the sick and the frail would be able to receive
medical care, citizens would be able to attend to the
administrative affairs of their local communities in
municipal centres, farmers would not be afraid to go to
their fields and small businesses would be able to
function. None of this is now possible for most of the
Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija, and it will remain
impossible if the majority Albanian population
continues to decide these issues.
The plan also represents a realistic response, not
only to the pogrom, but equally to the events of the
past five years that have resulted in two thirds of Serbs
leaving Kosovo and Metohija since the deployment of
UNMIK. Autonomy and institutional guarantees for the
Serbs and other communities in Kosovo and Metohija
are the only way to preserve the preconditions for a
future multi-ethnic and multicultural society. The
international community’s mission will avoid failure
only if institutions are created in which the majority —
specifically a majority that is constantly ethnically
defined — will not always be able to outvote the

6

minority and if institutions are established in which the
spirit of tolerance prevails and the legitimate concerns
of others are taken into account. It is our profound
belief that a Kosovo and Metohija without Serbs, and
one in which a cultural heritage more than six centuries
old continues to be torched and desecrated with
impunity, would not only represent the failure of the
international policy embodied in UNMIK, it would be
a defeat of the fundamental values of dignity and the
equal and inalienable rights of all people, on which
freedom, justice and world peace are based, as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
In past political activities concerning Kosovo and
Metohija, the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro
has steadfastly adhered to the goals specified in the
aforementioned plan and the resolution adopted by the
National Assembly of Serbia. We have noted that
international factors, in the weeks following the
presentation of the plan, have accepted this proposed
method of solving the problems in the province.
International circles showed great interest in the plan,
which was accepted as a good basis on which to start
talks on resolving the difficult position of the Serbs.
Some international factors initiated the establishment
of a working group within the provisional Government
of Kosovo and Metohija to formulate decentralization
proposals. The activities of the working group took
place as pressure was brought to bear on Kosovo and
Metohija Serbs to participate in its work, although they
had, in all forms of their political engagement,
embraced the Government of Serbia’s plan as their
own.
The draft text on the reform of local selfgovernment prepared by the group does not address the
essential and current problems faced by the Serbs. The
draft may represent a good long-term basis for the
reform of the entire local self-government of the
province. However, it does not address the urgent
needs of the Serbs, since it does not contain
meaningful solutions for their survival and return, as
are offered in the Government of Serbia’s plan. Under
such circumstances, the State authorities of Serbia are
not in a position to call upon the Kosovo and Metohija
Serbs to take part in the forthcoming parliamentary
elections. We would like to emphasize that the plan of
the Government of Serbia stipulates in particular that
the establishment of firm institutional guarantees for
the Serb community in Kosovo and Metohija would
serve as a significant encouragement to them to

S/PV.5017

participate in the October elections for provisional
authorities. We note with regret that no progress has
been made in that direction in the meantime.

We are honoured by the presence among us of the
Minister of Public Administration and Local SelfGovernment of Serbia.

Finally, Serbia and Montenegro considers that the
direct and heightened activities of the Contact Group,
which is representative of a wide spectrum of relevant
international factors, represent the best framework for
putting in place the possibility of an applicable policy
of standards in Kosovo and Metohija. The
implementation of those standards should lead to the
establishment of a system of European values. A
European character in Kosovo and Metohija, within
Serbia and Montenegro, would not be to the detriment
of Albanians, Serbs or others. It would be in the
interest of all citizens and peoples in Kosovo and
Metohija, in the interest of lasting Serbian-Albanian
reconciliation and common European future, and in the
interest of Serbia and Montenegro’s best relations with
all its neighbours. Any other solution would breed
dangerous new hatred, conflicts and policies of
revanchism and would represent a constant potential
source of new conflicts in the Balkans and elsewhere in
Europe.

Let me also thank Mr. Annabi, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
excellent introduction of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2004/613) on developments in Kosovo
since the violent events of March 2004. As we read this
highly instructive report, we sense that things are
gradually returning to normal and that there is every
reason to be optimistic about the prospects for
normalization of the situation.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Serbia and
Montenegro’s readiness to continue to be a
constructive partner of the international community in
resolving all outstanding questions in Kosovo and
Metohija, and to express our hope that the members of
the Contact Group will continue to energetically pursue
their efforts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Loncar for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in Russian): As the
first Council member to speak at today’s meeting, let
me congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I wish you every
success, and wish your wonderful country and your
great people all the best as well as peace. I would like
to assure you that my delegation stands ready to
cooperate with you in all sincerity to ensure the full
success of your presidency.
(spoke in French)
I would also like to reiterate here my admiration
of Ambassador Motoc of Romania for the skill with
which he guided the work of the Security Council in
July 2004.

In this respect, the joint declaration signed by
Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb leaders on 14 July
is a positive development. We fully support the
priorities set out therein with respect to managing the
situation resulting from the riots of March 2004. It also
represents a renewed commitment with respect to the
pooling the efforts of the two communities with a view
to overcoming the painful legacy of the past and
working together to achieve the primary goal: a multiethnic and democratic Kosovo.
My delegation welcomed the Standards
Implementation Plan when it was launched, as well as
its revision in the light of the events of March. The
adoption of a matrix setting forth tasks and
responsibilities for each of the ministries and
municipalities is a further step in the right direction.
However, this arrangement must be supplemented
through the establishment of rules of procedure
governing the functioning of the Government and the
central ministries and their overall coordination. The
lack of such a procedure is rightly regretted in the
report.
In the same spirit, we full endorse the principle of
holding the majority community responsible for the
welfare of the minority communities, and we support
specific measures taken to ensure the protection of the
vital interests of the Serb community in Kosovo. The
participation of the Serbs in local government bodies in
Kosovo is a key factor in that respect, as is their
representation in the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment, which continues to be very low, as the
report indicates.
We pay tribute to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and its
military force, KFOR, for the crucial role they are
playing in consolidating peace in Kosovo by

7

S/PV.5017

supporting the normalization process based on the
allocation of responsibilities pursuant to resolution
1244 (1999). We call on the Provisional Institutions
scrupulously to respect that division of responsibility
and to work to carry out the tasks that fall within their
purview. We would like here to highlight our support
for the early warning arrangements put in place by the
joint Kosovo Security Advisory Group with a view to
anticipating crises and acting quickly to prevent them.
The low rate of return of displaced persons
continues to be a cause for concern, especially in the
context of the legislative elections planned for October
2004. Over and above the need to increase the pace of
the rebuilding of destroyed homes, there is a sense of
insecurity among displaced persons, and due attention
must be paid to that. We believe that all of those
involved in the normalization process in Kosovo must
step up their efforts to build trust among the minority
communities so as to encourage their members to
return home. To that end, we must renew the intercommunity dialogue within the framework of the
working groups, both at the local level and with Serbia
and Montenegro and neighbouring countries. We must
ensure that property rights are protected and strengthen
the credibility of the judicial system in Kosovo through
ongoing efforts to give it a multi-ethnic composition
and make it effective. Dealing with the shortcomings
highlighted in the report is essential if the rule of law is
to be strengthened and corruption and impunity
combated.
In the final analysis, we encourage the
Provisional Institutions to strengthen their efforts,
undertaken together with UNMIK, to establish a legal
framework that provides incentives to promote
sustained economic growth in Kosovo to as to create
better prospects for the well-being of all the
communities in the province.
Finally, we fully share the Secretary-General’s
positive assessment of the work of his former Special
Representative for Kosovo and of the qualities of his
successor, Mr. Jessen-Petersen. We wish him every
success as he discharges his important task of
promoting peace and harmonious inter-community
relations in Kosovo.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Benin for the kind words that he
addressed to me in the great Russian language.

8

Mr. Motoc (Romania): First, I would like to say
that it is a distinct pleasure for me to be able to take
this opportunity, at this first public debate in the
Council for this month, to very warmly congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. We trust that you will be successful in
carrying out your mandate, and we pledge our full
support to that end.
I welcome the participation in this meeting of a
high-level representative of Serbia and Montenegro,
Mr. Zoran Loncar, and thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Hédi Annabi for his very useful update of the
Secretary-General’s
comprehensive
report
(S/2004/613).
I would also like at the outset to pay a tribute to
the personnel of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), as well
as to the men and women of KFOR. They are our
representatives in Kosovo; they implement the
Council’s policies and follow its guidance, and they
deserve all our gratitude and support. Full appreciation
should go to the European Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, United
Nations partners within UNMIK, and to the other
organizations, agencies, contributors and donors that
are helping with the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999).
We would also like to assure Mr. Søren JessenPetersen of our full backing as he prepares to take up
his duties in his new position of authority as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo.
As regards Romania, Foreign Minister Mircea
Geoana visited Belgrade and Pristina in July.
Romania’s Contact Office in Pristina was opened on
that occasion. The head of Romanian diplomacy had
extensive contact with representatives of UNMIK,
KFOR, the OSCE, the Contact Group, the provisional
authorities of Kosovo and leaders of the Serb
community.
There are many keys to addressing the situation
in Kosovo. They have to do, in particular, with the
course of action that will be chosen in the next one or
two years by Kosovo Albanians, Kosovo Serbs, the
Serbia and Montenegro Government and the
international community. But each one of those keys
involves dialogue, as well as enforcement of and
respect for standards based on fundamental values such

S/PV.5017

as human rights, the rule of law, democracy and
freedom.
Leaders in Kosovo bear a great deal of
responsibility
for
promoting
dialogue,
the
reconstruction of relations and, ultimately, a normal,
decent life for every Kosovo inhabitant, irrespective of
ethnicity or cultural background. Romania is
encouraged in this respect by some — albeit still
timid — relevant signs that the dialogue between
communities is being reinstated, that leaders at the
central and local levels are beginning to grasp their full
responsibilities and that Kosovo Serbs are increasingly
joining the process. We welcome the signing, on
14 July, of a joint declaration by President Rugova,
Prime Minister Rexhepi and Kosovo Albanian and
Kosovo Serb leaders, and we look forward to its
bearing fruit.
We also welcome the positive evolution of the
sustainable reform of local government as reported
today by Assistant Secretary-General Annabi along the
lines recommended in a presidential statement by the
Council (S/PRST/2004/13).
Unfortunately, the report before the Council also
shows in a detailed manner that the profound physical
and psychological negative impact of the March
violence has still not been overcome. The report
contains ample references to insufficient progress in
almost all categories of standards implementation and,
most importantly, in those fields that should be
priorities for healing after the March events, namely
reconstruction of patrimony, sustainable returns, the
rights of communities and freedom of movement. The
provision of adequate security for minority
communities and the protection of their rights are a
telling test for every democratic institution and society,
and they should be a political goal and motivation in
Kosovo.
Romania understands the bitter feelings of
Kosovo’s population at a time of difficult economic
conditions and the transition to democracy.
Nonetheless, we recall that violence is never a viable
option and that it only hampers aspirations for a stable
and prosperous future.
We have noticed the increased ownership of
responsibilities by Kosovo’s institutions in addressing
more and more of Kosovo’s problems. Romania
supports that trend — within the framework allowed by
the Council’s decisions — as long as it is connected to

consolidating
professional
policy-making
and
administrative capacity, bettering economic conditions,
enabling Serbs and other minorities to safely return and
live in Kosovo, establishing the rule of law and
fighting corruption and organized crime, all in close
partnership with UNMIK.
The situation ahead with regard to Kosovo is
complex and remains uncertain. Romania believes that
the Council needs to keep Kosovo under closest
consideration and to give the population of Kosovo and
the surrounding areas the clearest of all possible
messages.
We are not 100 per cent confident that the lessons
from the March violence have been adequately learned
in Kosovo, and many examples in the SecretaryGeneral’s report confirm that impression. There might
still be extremists and profiteers of instability willing
to derail Kosovo from the right path and prevent it
from addressing its most stringent priorities.
Nonetheless, we maintain hope, encouraged by
recent developments in Kosovo and the successful
completion of the presidential election in Serbia. We
trust that dialogue and a sense of responsibility will
prevail, backed by a strong and coherent response from
the Security Council and the mandated organizations in
the field.
Romania awaits with great interest the prompt
presentation of comprehensive recommendations from
the Secretary-General on the way forward for Kosovo,
based on recently finalized assessments and, especially,
on Ambassador Kai Eide’s review of the political
conditions in and surrounding Kosovo.
Also, while we appreciate the work of UNMIK
and the Secretariat in compiling a comprehensive
report on the status of standards implementation, we
consider that in future reports, an even more detailed
presentation is necessary. Such presentations should
follow the exact structure of the Standards
Implementation Plan, establish clear and realistic
priorities for each of the periodic reviews until mid2005 and take into account feedback from the “Contact
Group Plus”. We also believe that the Provisional
Institutions should make a cooperative contribution to
the reports.
Finally, I would like to associate my delegation
with the statement that will be made shortly by
Ambassador van den Berg of the Netherlands on behalf

9

S/PV.5017

of the European Union. Romania applauds the Dutch
presidency’s manifest interest in the issue of Kosovo,
especially since we believe that the best possible future
for the whole region lies within a united Europe.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Romania for his words of welcome.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): At the outset, we
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the Presidency of the Security Council. We extend our
delegation’s full cooperation to the presidency. We also
take this occasion to congratulate Ambassador Mihnea
Motoc and the Romanian delegation for the excellent
work accomplished during the presidency of the
Council in the month of July.
We are very honoured by the presence of the
Minister of Serbia and Montenegro. We appreciate his
insightful statement on the situation in Kosovo.
We thank Assistant Secretary-General Hédi
Annabi for presenting the Secretary-General’s report
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) covering the period subsequent to
the violent events of mid-March 2004 (S/2004/613).
The situation in the province of Kosovo that it
describes contrasts sharply with the climate of relative
optimism that prevailed before those events took place.
The events of March were, indeed, a wake-up call
to the international community and the Security
Council with respect to the need for greater realism and
the need to take into account the real situation in
Kosovo, with the background presence of extremist
forces for whom the international community’s high
hopes and expectations for the future of Kosovo are but
a hindrance to the attainment of their sinister agenda.
The implementation of the standards for Kosovo
policy remains the core of developments in Kosovo.
We understand the challenge of translating them into
real change on the ground. The lack of capacity and
experience within the Provisional Institutions is,
according to the Secretary-General’s assessment, the
main obstacle to standards implementation, which has
been slow and difficult. The decision of UNMIK to
make minority protection, returns and freedom of
movement key areas for standards implementation
reflects the central issue of the question of Kosovo.
In the final analysis, the standards for Kosovo
policy will make sense only if the rights of all
communities are fully protected and respected.

10

Anything short of the attainment of that goal will mean
failure for the great efforts and the investment that the
international community has made in Kosovo.
Thus, much remains to be done, without further
delay, in those crucial areas. To apply justice with rigor
to all those directly or indirectly involved in acts of
ethnic violence and deploy real and determined efforts
in the reconstruction of property damaged or destroyed
during the events of March creates the conditions for
the sustainable return of refugees and people displaced
by the March events and ensures the freedom of
movement of minorities living in Kosovo. In our view,
those are benchmarks that the Provisional Institutions
and UNMIK must achieve in the shortest possible time
in order to contribute to the re-establishment of interethnic confidence.
We have to acknowledge the profound differences
of analysis between the Secretary-General’s report
under consideration and the information provided by
Bishop Artemije of Raska-Prizren and KosovoMetohija to the Secretary-General. The perceptions of
Kosovo Serbs as conveyed by the Bishop without
diplomatic subtleties do not give much credit to what
has been done in the province in terms of
reconstruction, returns and freedom of movement.
Their rights scorned, their freedom of movement
impaired and subject to assault and discrimination, it is
not surprising that Kosovo Serbs refuse to participate
in political life. We take to be an encouraging sign the
recent initiatives for renewed inter-ethnic dialogue. In
that regard, we welcome the joint declaration of 14
July concerning the reconstruction of infrastructure and
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons,
as well as the creation of the Kosovo Security
Advisory Group, aimed at enhancing the flow of
security information and preventing the recurrence of
violence. As shown at various times in the course — of
the current inter-ethnic dialogue, direct international
involvement is a crucial element for promoting that
process.
The Secretary-General’s report states that the
concrete, sustainable reform of local government is
likely to be the most important political process that
will affect the Kosovo Serb community. We fully
concur with that proposition. We would go further by
considering decentralization of the administration as a
primary option aimed at the long-term normalization of
the situation and as a priority for action by UNMIK

S/PV.5017

and by the Provisional Institutions. We hope that, by
the time of the holding of municipal elections in mid2006, legislation on the devolution of competencies
and on the creation of new municipalities and
administrative units will be in place with the required
political framework, meeting with the agreement of all
who are concerned for real decentralization. We also
hope that the province of Kosovo will be able to
undergo this experiment, which, in our view, will be
rewarding if it creates conditions for the peaceful
coexistence of the communities, thus laying solid
foundations for a multi-ethnic and democratic society.
In conclusion, we believe that the standards
policy, in its philosophy, its character, its objectives
and its means to be translated into real change, will
require a great deal of political will, commitment and
perseverance. It will also require much investment in
the political and social processes, in youth, in men and
women, in the economy and in patience to see tangible
results that will take time to show.
The events of March in Kosovo proved, above
all, that the international community cannot force a
hasty withdrawal from Kosovo or a hasty definition of
the territory’s status. It is clear that the international
community must remain focused and determined for a
long period of time in implementing the policies
formulated for Kosovo. In our view, those policies are
just, sound and realistic, and they can surely succeed.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Angola for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to welcome you, Sir, to the presidency of
the Council and to wish you every success in guiding
our work. It is no easy task to begin a position of the
importance of Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation while simultaneously occupying the
presidency of the Council. We wish you every success
in both positions, and we offer you the cooperation of
our delegation. I also take this opportunity to commend
and thank Ambassador Motoc for his effective and
efficient presidency last month. That efficiency is
demonstrated by the fact that, three days after that
presidency was concluded, Council members already
had the assessment of Romania’s presidency of the
Council, which is quite notable. Finally, I should like
to welcome the presence of Mr. Zoran Loncar, Minister

of Public Administration and Local Self-Government
of Serbia.
We also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi for presenting the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2004/613), which enables us to appreciate
the actions undertaken by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, by local
political leaders and by other groups to recover from
the physical and psychological damage caused by the
March violence. While we are mindful of their
seriousness, the events of March — and this is very
important for us — cannot become a permanent
obstacle to the reconciliation and normalization
process in Kosovo. The significant setbacks
experienced in achieving a truly multi-ethnic, stable
and democratic Kosovo require long-term measures.
Therefore, efforts must continue in areas such as the
rights of members of minority communities, human
rights, equality with regard to security, the
implementation of standards, freedom of movement
and sustainable return for all inhabitants of Kosovo,
the reconstruction of property, initiatives to promote
inter-ethnic reconciliation and reform of local
government. Regarding this last point, we note the
adoption in principle on 23 July of the framework
document by the Government of Kosovo.
We reaffirm the validity of the policy of
“standards before status” and of the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan, presented on 31 March and
recognized by the Council through its presidential
statement of 30 April (S/PRST/2004/13). Cooperation
between the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment and UNMIK is now even more essential
for the implementation of the Plan.
We call upon the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment to continue to implement the six
emergency measures outlined in the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan in response to the March
violence, particularly the remaining task mentioned in
paragraph 4 of the report: investigating the instigation
of the violence by certain authorities and by some
sectors of the media.
We believe that any initiative aimed at interethnic communication and dialogue is key if we are to
avoid another March and therefore deserves our
support. Therefore, we note with great interest the
instances of reconciliation between Kosovo Albanians

11

S/PV.5017

and Kosovo Serbs promoted by various groups,
including the “Contact Group Plus”. It is essential to
continue to adopt measures to establish the rule of law
and to ensure its respect, including prosecuting the
perpetrators of acts of violence, confiscating illegal
weapons and suppressing organized crime. It is
promising to note the progress in that regard described
in the report. However, a multi-ethnic judicial system
must still be created, notwithstanding the setbacks of
March.
We believe it is urgent to rebuild damaged or
destroyed property or pay appropriate compensation
and to rebuild holy places and facilities for the return
of those displaced from their homes. Therefore, we see
as an important step the joint declaration signed in
Pristina on 14 July announcing that the reconstruction
of houses will be concluded before the beginning of
winter.
The constructive dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina and between UNMIK and the Kosovo
Assembly is an essential element for the success of this
undertaking. The Kosovo Assembly must keep to its
areas of competence, in conformity with resolution
1244 (1999) and the Constitutional Framework, to
avoid situations such as those that occurred on 8 and
28 July.
We reiterate that, without the significant and
sustainable return of internally displaced persons —
who total 2,400 as a result of March’s violence — and
refugees, despite the recent setbacks; without sufficient
freedom of movement; and without the disappearance
of the parallel institutions, the rebuilding of a multiethnic, democratic society capable of integrating all of
Kosovo’s inhabitants without exception will be
unfeasible.
In conclusion, I wish to acknowledge the efforts
of
Mr.
Charles
Brayshaw,
Acting
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General; to wish every
success to the new Special Representative, Mr. Søren
Jessen-Petersen; and to recall with gratitude the efforts
of Mr. Harri Holkeri.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Chile for the kind words he addressed
to me.
Mr. Trautwein (Germany): Permit me at the
outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I

12

welcome you to New York, and I wish you and your
delegation all the best for the month of August — and,
naturally, for the following months as well. Let me also
thank the Romanian Ambassador and his delegation for
the very impressive work they carried out during their
presidency in the month of July. I would also like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Hédi Annabi for his
comprehensive and instructive briefing based on the
Secretary-General’s detailed report (S/2004/613).
Germany subscribes to the statement that will be
delivered later by the Ambassador of the Netherlands
on behalf of the European Union.
We heard during the briefing that we are again
facing a mixed picture: there has been progress in
many areas but there is slow or no progress in others.
We heard again about the impact of the mid-March
violence on the standards implementation process. Let
me highlight a few aspects that we consider to be of
particular importance.
The events of mid-March dealt a severe blow to
Kosovo’s development in many areas, not least with
regard to the well-being of its people. Kosovo must
continue to concentrate on confidence-building and
reconciliation. A key factor in that process is the
reconstruction of damaged properties as a prerequisite
for the return of those who were displaced during the
course of the March violence. As we have heard, a
considerable number of those persons have been
willing and able to return to their homes. Germany
welcomes those positive achievements. The joint
declaration of 14 July establishing a ministry for
community matters, human rights and returns, and the
public commitment of the Kosovo authorities to
complete reconstruction within the agreed timelines, is
very good news.
An important aspect of confidence-building is the
punishment of those responsible for the violence at all
levels. We do see some results, but we believe that
further efforts are necessary.
In general, it still seems true that Kosovo
Albanians and Kosovo Serbs talk more about each
other than to each other. Both communities must
intensify their direct dialogue. It is up to the Kosovo
Albanian majority to reach out to the Kosovo Serb
communities, but the Kosovo Serbs have to respond to
Kosovo Albanian offers for dialogue and cooperation.
We feel it is essential that the Kosovo Serb population
become fully engaged in Kosovo’s political life. That is

S/PV.5017

in their own interest, and it is the best way to address
their concerns. Kosovo Serbs have to speak up for
themselves in the Provisional Institutions, where
Kosovo’s future is being defined. It is in their own
interest to participate in the forthcoming elections. In
that respect, we are deeply concerned about ongoing
discussions regarding boycotting the elections. We call
upon all Kosovo Serbs and Serb political leaders to
stop those discussions. We also want to see a
resumption of the direct dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade, which remains an important element for
improving the overall climate.
As far as the standards implementation process is
concerned, there again there is light and shadow. The
current report of the Secretary-General points out that,
in a number of fields, the progress is still too slow with
regard to putting words into action. In particular, the
economy is still a matter of grave concern. However,
there is progress in the efforts to establish a
comprehensive framework for a competitive market
economy.
There are other important areas of progress. I
would like to mention, with appreciation, that the
working groups on standards implementation have
begun their work and that they are working with
greater efficiency. In general, there seems to be a
genuine and increasing commitment to move ahead
with the implementation of standards, which remains
the basis for progress. In that regard, we look forward
to the next report of the Secretary-General, including
an assessment by the Special Representative, as set out
in the Council’s presidential statements of December
2003 and April 2004.
One further positive development was the
finalization by the end of July of the framework
document on local government reform, as mentioned
during the briefing. We call upon all Kosovars to
participate fully in the implementation of local
government reform. All communities in Kosovo will
benefit from that reform. It directly responds to their
needs and contributes to ensuring sustainable living
conditions. The reform is aimed at providing more
participation and more democracy for the whole of
Kosovo. We firmly believe that if we manage to
achieve the reform of local government, that will also
help to solve many of the current problems in the
standards implementation.

Let me conclude by thanking the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo for its
continued efforts in Kosovo and by assuring the new
Special Representative, Mr. Jessen-Petersen, of the full
support of my Government.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Ambassador of Germany for his kind words addressed
to me.
Mr. Valle (Brazil): First of all, I am very pleased
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I wish you a fruitful and productive term and I
pledge to you the full cooperation of the delegation of
Brazil. I would also like to extend my deep
appreciation to Ambassador Mihnea Motoc of Romania
for the excellent guidance he provided during July.
We welcome the presence here today of Mr.
Zoran Lončar, Minister for Public Administration and
Local Self-Government of Serbia.
I would also like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Hédi Annabi for his thorough presentation of
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/613).
Brazil reiterates its support for the work carried
out by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in the very volatile
circumstances that prevail in Kosovo. The Mission has
been able to deal with the extremely difficult situation
on the ground and to respond promptly to challenges to
its authority. We are also appreciative of the efforts of
the “Contact Group Plus” in promoting the
implementation of standards. In that regard, I would
like to express our appreciation for the work performed
by former Special Representative Harri Holkeri. I
would also like to welcome the appointment of Søren
Jessen-Petersen as the new Special Representative for
Kosovo, whose credentials certainly qualify him for
that difficult and sensitive task.
We note with appreciation that the task of
identifying and prosecuting those responsible for the
violent outbursts of last March has not been neglected.
We appreciate the fact that police in Kosovo have
arrested suspects in connection with the riots and that
many cases are in the initial stages of prosecution.
Although it is encouraging that effective steps are
being taken to avoid impunity, it is important to
guarantee that this effort does not lose momentum and

13

S/PV.5017

that cases of involvement by Kosovo police officers be
pursued.
We also appreciate the progress made in the
implementation of the reconstruction programme
following the violence in March.
Unfortunately, the overall minority rights
situation has deteriorated. Kosovo Serbs and other
groups are still facing severe restrictions to their
freedom to work and travel. In practice, they are being
denied the right to a normal life. The international
community must take a firm stance in protecting them
against the continued violation of their fundamental
rights and in encouraging the Provisional Institutions
to honour the commitments set out by the Kosovo
Standards Implementation Plan in that regard.
In recent months, many different plans for the
future of the province have seen the light of day. We
must remain aware of the dangers of solutions based on
changing borders or allowing internal cantonization.
They are artificial and in the past have proven to
increase volatility in the Balkans. We favour solutions
that rest on integration and that are capable of
preventing further division. Although Brazil does not
oppose decentralization and a degree of autonomy for
minorities, we remain faithful to the principal that
peace and reconciliation in the region must be based on
compliance with resolution 1244 (1999) and the
“standards before status” policy.
In that connection, we call upon the Provisional
Institutions to enhance their commitment to the
fulfilment of the Kosovo Standards Implementation
Plan, which is the only viable path towards meeting the
standards that will allow a future decision on the status
of the province. Progress towards peace will not be
fostered by unilateral acts, such as the recent
movement by the Kosovo Assembly to make
amendments to the Constitutional Framework on issues
that actually fall within UNMIK’s sphere of
competence. The Kosovo Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government would make a valuable contribution
to peace if they concentrated on helping to implement
the standards for Kosovo, a prerequisite for the future
discussion on the status of the province.
Firmer engagement is needed for achieving
adequate standards for minority rights. Minorities must
also
accept
the
responsibility
of
engaging
constructively in the building of peace. Effective
participation in the political process, and particularly in

14

the upcoming elections, is one of the ways to
strengthen such engagement. All minorities, and
especially Kosovo Serbs, must be aware that refusal to
participate in shaping a new political scenario will only
aggravate exclusion and helplessness. The lack of
tangible progress towards a political solution for
Kosovo magnifies the human dimension of the tragedy.
As long as the political situation remains uncertain,
prospects are bleak for economic recovery. In spite of
laudable efforts in this area by UNMIK and the
Provisional
Institutions,
unemployment,
rural
backwardness, gender disparities and deficient
educational, health and social welfare systems continue
to prevail.
The March riots in Kosovo and their
repercussions in Serbia and Montenegro have reminded
us that the persistence of an environment of underlying
violence and resentment in the province can threaten
the stability of the whole region and potentially
generate more ethnic clashes. Finally, we must call
upon the authorities in Pristina and Belgrade to ensure
the resumption of the work of the dialogue working
groups. Only by benefiting from the value of dialogue,
tolerance and diversity will Kosovo be able to leave
behind decades of conflict and destruction and pave the
way for a better future for all.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Brazil for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I welcome you, Sir, to
New York and wish to congratulate you on you
assumption of the Presidency of the Council for this
month. I also wish to take this opportunity to commend
Ambassador Motoc for the efficient and skilful way in
which he guided the Council’s work last month.
I wish to thank Mr. Annabi for introducing the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2004/613), as well as for
updating the Council on the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I also wish to recognize the participation of
Mr. Zoran Loncar in this meeting and to welcome him.
Pakistan welcomes the appointment of Mr.
Jessen-Petersen as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo; we continue to support
UNMIK in its efforts to implement its mandate,
provided by this Council. We also wish to acknowledge
the contribution of Mr. Holkeri, former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

S/PV.5017

The Secretary-General’s report is a sobering
assessment of the situation in Kosovo. While there has
been some progress in areas related to the rule of law
and in the development of the Kosovo Protection
Corps, other issues, such as freedom of movement,
sustainable returns, the rights of communities and
property rights, continue to suffer as a consequence of
the violence of last March. Above all, we remain
concerned that Kosovo’s economy needs considerable
international donor support. Pakistan continues to call
for an early resumption of the direct dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade. We note the willingness of
Prime Minister Rexhepi to resume the dialogue, and we
urge the authorities in Belgrade to reciprocate. In the
meantime, we welcome the positive developments in
regional dialogue and cooperation with Kosovo, as
mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report. We
believe that these are steps in the right direction.
The violence of last March continues to cast its
shadow and hamper the building of trust and
cooperation between the main communities of Kosovo.
This is currently the main hurdle in the implementation
of standards in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999). However, a deeper problem —
indeed a more fundamental problem, as we have
consistently stressed — is that the “standards before
status” approach is flawed. The longer the clarification
of Kosovo’s status is delayed, the more it will feed into
frustrations and tensions in Kosovo. It will continue to
hamper the transition from war to peace and delay
investments from international financial institutions,
which are so vital for the economic recovery of
Kosovo. The longer Kosovo remains in international
political limbo, the more this perpetuates a situation
where frustrations and violence will continue to fester.
In our statement in May (see S/PV.4967), our
delegation proposed that instead of a “standards before
status” approach the Council should consider
promoting a “status with standards” approach as a twopronged effort, which would on the one hand hold the
Kosovars — both the people and the leadership —
accountable to implement the standards programme, to
work to end extremism and intolerance and to create
friendly and cooperative relationships with their
neighbours. This approach would also see simultaneous
progress on clarifying Kosovo’s status issue,
identifying ways of promoting self-determination for
all Kosovars while seeking to uphold the rights and
interests of all its minorities. A change of course is

essential to create hope for peace and to end the legacy
of war in the entire region. We once again urge the
Council to give this option some serious thought.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Pakistan for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Before starting my formal statement, let me first thank
Mr. Motoc of Romania, under whose able leadership
the Council successfully completed its work in July.
I also wish to congratulate the Ambassador
Denisov of the Russian Federation on his assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
August. We look forward to working with him, and I
pledge that I personally and the entire Chinese
delegation will fully cooperate with him.
I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2004/613) and to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
supplementary briefing. I welcome the presence and
the statement of Mr. Loncar. I also wish to take this
opportunity to thank the former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri, for his
unremitting efforts in promoting the peace process in
Kosovo. I also wish to congratulate his successor, Mr.
Jessen-Petersen. I wish him every success in his new
capacity.
We note that in the recent past Kosovo has
witnessed some progress in implementing the relevant
standards, in rebuilding the communities of ethnic
minorities and in promoting inter-ethnic reconciliation.
However, as stated in the Secretary-General’s report,
despite that progress, the international community still
has a long way to go to fully reverse the negative
impact of the large-scale violence that took place last
March, and especially to heal the psychological
wounds and finally to achieve harmonious multi-ethnic
coexistence and common development in Kosovo.
In that regard, all the parties in Kosovo are dutybound to play a bigger role. We fully share the view of
the Secretary-General that at present the most pressing
task for all political leaders in Kosovo is to translate
commitments into actions, so as to ensure that the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
administrative organs at all levels fully implement the
Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan and effectively

15

S/PV.5017

observe resolution 1244 (1999) and the Kosovo
Constitutional Framework. The interim Kosovo
Assembly should work strictly within its mandate and
should not interfere in the powers reserved for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
resolution 1244 (1999).
A proper solution to the issue of ethnic minorities
is an important element of a fundamental and
comprehensive solution to the Kosovo issue. It is also
the priority for UNMIK and all the parties in Kosovo.
In our view, it is important first of all to do a good job
of conflict follow-up, including improving living
conditions and ensuring the safety and freedom of
movement of ethnic minorities, ensuring proper
compensation to victims, rebuilding damaged facilities,
and, on this basis, accelerating the return of refugees
and making returns attractive. In addition, efforts to
investigate the incidents in March must be
strengthened and the perpetrators must be brought to
justice, so as to enhance inter-ethnic trust and
reconciliation.
It is also important to use legal and institutional
measures to ensure the legitimate rights and interests of
ethnic minorities. All the parties in Kosovo should
work to strengthen the rule of law and administrative
capacity-building in order to further enhance the
reform of local institutions. Pristina and Belgrade
should resume direct dialogue at an early date so as to
find proper solutions to all the problems relating to the
daily life of the people of Kosovo. We hope that
UNMIK and the international organizations working in
Kosovo will continue to support the Kosovo
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and to
create the necessary conditions for the legislative
elections in the autumn, so as to lay a solid foundation
for peace and stability in Kosovo and throughout the
Balkans.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of China for his kind words addressed to
me.
Mr. De Palacio España (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation joins other Council members
in expressing our sincere congratulations to you, Sir, as
you assume the presidency. We would also like to
reiterate our appreciation and congratulations to the
Permanent Representative of Romania, the previous
President, for the work he accomplished.

16

We would particularly like to thank Mr. Annabi
for his introduction of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2004/613) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We also
welcome the recent appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of Mr. JessenPetersen, whom we have known for many years, since
he held the high post of Assistant High Commissioner
for Refugees. We know well the many personal
qualities he brings to the task at hand. Spain will
cooperate fully with him in the fulfilment of his
functions at the head of UNMIK. I would like to pay
tribute to the work carried out by the former Special
Representative, Mr. Holkeri, and by Mr. Brayshaw.
We
welcome
the
Minister
of
Public
Administration and Local Self-Government of Serbia,
Mr. Zoran Loncar.
Spain also associates itself with the statement that
will later be made by the Permanent Representative of
the Netherlands on behalf of the European Union.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report,
much still remains to be done to repair the physical and
psychological damage that resulted from the violence
that took place in March. A number of positive steps
have been taken, such as the beginning of the
rebuilding of homes and schools, and the commitment
to this that is reflected in the joint declaration that
Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb leaders signed on
14 July. However, the representatives of the people of
Kosovo still need to demonstrate, through concrete
actions, their genuine commitment to creating a truly
multi-ethnic and democratic society in which the rights
of all will be respected. The leaders of the Albanian
community have a particular responsibility to redress
the situation created in March so that the 2,400 people
who had to flee the violence can return to their homes
as soon as possible. Moreover, they must create the
conditions necessary for the sustainable return of the
very large numbers of displaced persons, mostly
Kosovo Serbs, who have not yet returned.
Unfortunately, we note that today minorities do not
enjoy real freedom of movement and that their security
conditions and access to public services are fragile, to
say the least. We reaffirm the appeal that we made on
11 May in this Chamber (see S/PV.4967), that all those
responsible for inter-ethnic violence be brought to trial
and sentenced, and we welcome the first steps made in
this direction.

S/PV.5017

We are, however, concerned that UNMIK’s
efforts to create a multi-ethnic justice system that is
accessible to all communities have been seriously
undermined by the violent events of March. Likewise,
it is disquieting to note that the Kosovo media, with
certain honourable exceptions, have not yet begun to
apply the principles of tolerance, impartiality and
veracity set out in the implementation plan.
The working group on local Government,
established in line with the 30 April presidential
statement of the Council (S/PRST/2004/13) so as to
make local Government more effective by devolving
powers to local authorities, has come up with a number
of interesting recommendations for the reform of
municipal administration in the territory of Kosovo.
This municipal reform proposal, for which the main
frame of reference is the European Charter of Local
Self-Government,
envisages
a
fundamental
contribution to establishing and building genuinely
democratic institutions, which, let us not forget, is one
of the standards for Kosovo. We believe that the
recommendations of the working group deserve to be
put into effect.
At the same time, the Provisional Institutions
need to implement all the priority steps established in
the revised Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan. If
this is done properly, it will undoubtedly bring about
tangible changes that will benefit the entire population.
In this regard, we hope that the next report of the
Secretary-General will include a detailed assessment of
what
has
been
accomplished
in
standards
implementation, as called for by the Council in
December 2003 (see S/PRST/2003/26) and in April
2004 (see S/PRST/2004/13).
However, attempts such as that by the Kosovo
Assembly on 8 July to go beyond the provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework are unacceptable and counterproductive.
We reaffirm the validity of the principle of “standards
before status” and recall that there is still a long way to
go to achieve this. For its part, the Kosovo Serb
community cannot remain on the sidelines of political
life in Kosovo and should get involved in its
development by participating in it in a more active
fashion, including, of course, in the upcoming elections
in October. For this purpose, all the necessary
conditions must be put in place. In addition, we feel it
is vital that direct dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade resume and be strengthened. Both parties

must make every effort in that direction, and the
working groups should begin meeting again.
In conclusion, Spain, which contributes to the
maintenance of security through its participation in
KFOR, will continue to support the commendable work
done by UNMIK. We once again appeal to the
Provisional Institutions and all competent actors to
work, within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999),
to establish a multi-ethnic, democratic Kosovo, based
on the rule of law and integrated into Europe.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Spain for his kind words addressed to
me.
Mr. Mercado (Philippines): We join other
delegations in welcoming you to the Council, Sir, and
in congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of August. We
would also like take this opportunity to congratulate
Ambassador Minhea Motoc of Romania for the highly
professional and efficient manner in which he and his
delegation conducted the work of the presidency for
the month of July.
We also join other members of the Council in
commending the Secretary-General’s former Special
Representative for Kosovo, Mr. Harri Holkeri, for his
outstanding leadership during his term of office as
head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We welcome the presence here today of
Mr. Zoran Loncar, Minister of Public Administration
and Local Self-Government of Serbia. We would also
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Hédi Annabi
for his comprehensive briefing on the latest situation in
Kosovo.
On 17 and 18 March, Kosovo was convulsed by
the worst outbreak of inter-ethnic violence since the
international community stepped in five years ago.
That latest violence claimed the lives of 19 people,
destroyed more than 900 houses and did untold damage
to Kosovo’s religious, historical and cultural sites. The
Philippines, which is a troop contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping efforts in Kosovo, joined other
delegations in expressing its indignation about the
violence, which undoubtedly undermined the gains
made by the international community during the past
five years of United Nations administration.

17

S/PV.5017

In our statement to the Council on Kosovo two
months ago, we mentioned the fact that UNMIK’s most
important challenge is building the necessary trust and
confidence to bridge the gap between the two
communities. It is therefore disheartening to note that,
four months after those incidents, little progress has
been made in efforts to bridge the ethnic divide. We are
also saddened by the fact that, five years after UNMIK
took over, the peoples of Kosovo have still not
mastered the confidence and trust needed to address the
province’s ethnic dilemma.
My delegation reiterates its support for and
commitment to the international community’s vision of
a tolerant, multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo. While
we take note of the progress that UNMIK has made in
its efforts to meet the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan, as mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, my delegation believes that UNMIK
should exercise a greater degree of flexibility by giving
priority to the concerns of ethnic Serbs and other
minorities in the province. Likewise, the international
community should place the onus for protecting
Kosovo’s ethnic minorities on the Albanian majority.
For their part, Kosovo’s leaders need to
collectively demonstrate their genuine and concrete
commitment to creating a society in which all
communities can coexist peacefully and in which the
rights of members of all of Kosovo’s communities are
respected, safeguarded and guaranteed. They should
exert greater efforts to prosecute those responsible for
the March violence and make good their promise to
proceed with the reconstruction of the homes and
churches that were ravaged during the March riots.
Lastly, we agree with Romania on the need for
the Council to keep the situation in Kosovo under the
closest consideration. In this regard, the Council may
wish to explore the possibility of sending a mission to
Kosovo to see for itself the situation on the ground and
to convey a strong message to Kosovo’s leaders about
the need to work together and take the measures
required to help the standards process move forward.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of the Philippines for his kind words
addressed to me.
Mr. Holliday (United States of America): First of
all, I would like to express our delegation’s thanks to
Minhea Motoc for the fine work that he did as
President of the Council during the month of July. We

18

would also like to welcome the Russian presidency; we
look forward to working with you, Sir.
We would like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Annabi for his briefing and welcome Minister
Loncar and his presence here on behalf of Serbia and
Montenegro.
We welcome the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Kosovo, Søren JessenPetersen. He is taking up his post at a crucial time and
will have the strong support of the United States. The
violence in March was truly a wake-up call, and we
welcome the progress being made in reconstructing
damaged and destroyed property, rebuilding an interethnic dialogue and reforming local self-government; it
must continue.
Much work remains. Concrete accomplishments
are needed in the overall implementation of the
standards, security and the rights of all communities.
The mid-2005 review of progress in implementing the
standards for Kosovo is around the corner. It is time for
concrete action on implementing the standards. The
review mechanism established by the Council rightly
puts the emphasis on action, not words. The standards
process puts responsibility for Kosovo’s progress in the
hands of Kosovo’s leaders, who are, of course,
responsible for implementing those standards.
The international presence in Kosovo should
move increasingly to words a monitoring role and have
less of a governing role. We would not, of course,
support the wholesale transfer of reserved authority
that the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of
Kosovo proposed last month, but the United Nations in
Kosovo can further shift additional competences to the
local authorities, or further share those competences
with them.
With regard to standards implementation, we look
forward to an assessment by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on progress in implementing
the standards, as called for in the presidential
statements that the Council issued earlier this year.
In order for Kosovo to move ahead it is also
essential for all of its communities to participate in the
October elections. A boycott by any community would
be a mistake. Participating in elections and acting
within the institution of representative government are
the best ways for a community to defend its interests.

S/PV.5017

We look to Prime Minister Kostunica, President
Tadic and the Serbian Government to send a clear
signal that Kosovo Serbs should, without precondition,
participate in the elections. We appreciate very much
Belgrade’s participation in discussions on confidencebuilding measures and its introduction of a plan for the
reform of local government.
We welcome and support the announced intention
of UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions to develop
more pilot projects. We call on the Government of
Serbia and Montenegro to encourage constructive
Kosovo Serb participation in this important process.
The process of restoring local government should be
substantial and include functions related to security
and justice. These pilot projects should mark only the
beginning of a long-term political process of designing
and implanting more effective local government in
Kosovo and should not exclude or prejudge any revised
or broader framework that might be agreed to in the
future. Nor should there be any preconditions attached
to the direct dialogue on technical issues between
Belgrade and Pristina. Those talks should resume
immediately. We have seen considerable progress in
recent weeks in dialogue between Serb and Albanian
leaders in Kosovo. We urge both sides to continue and
intensify this dialogue.
Let me close by saying that the treatment of
Kosovo’s minorities and ensuring that all of Kosovo’s
peoples can live in security will be the single most
important yardstick used to judge Kosovo’s
development and its fulfilment of international
standards.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of the United States for his kind words
addressed to me.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
would like first of all to convey to you, Sir, my
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. I would also like, on behalf of the
Algerian delegation, to thank Ambassador Motoc and
the Romanian mission for their excellent work during
the Romanian presidency in July.
I would like to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his
excellent introduction to the report on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I would also like to pay tribute to Mr. Harri
Holkeri for his endeavours and for the dedication that
he showed at the head of UNMIK. Our congratulations

also go to his successor, Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen,
and we wish him every success.
The current report is of particular importance as it
comes four months after the clashes and acts of
violence that shook Kosovo in March. It is important
also because it enables the Council to assess the
progress made in implementing the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan, in restoring trust and in
reconstructing property damaged or destroyed during
those deplorable events. Those are priority tasks that
promote understanding and coexistence among all
Kosovars.
In that regard, we welcome the progress achieved
in those areas. The commitment of Kosovo leaders to
completing rapidly the reconstruction of damaged
property and to relaunching the return process for
displaced persons, the adoption of a joint declaration
on the establishment of a ministry for community
matters, human rights and returns and the finalization
of a framework document for the reform of local
administration signal Kosovo’s positive development
and the beginning of a process of détente, which
augurs well for the improvement of the situation in the
interest of all. Such measures well help consolidate
Kosovar society and prevent regrettable inter-ethnic
clashes from recurring. They will also create
conditions of security and will have a positive impact
on the process of sustainable return for displaced
persons and on the freedom of movement.
The creation of an economically prosperous,
democratic, tolerant and multi-ethnic Kosovo remains
our common goal. Achieving that goal will inevitably
require great effort and the full implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999) and the policy of “standards
before status”. The leaders of Kosovo must shoulder
their responsibilities and constructively support their
implementation. We believe that a discourse promoting
unity and not the division of Kosovars according to
their ethnic background would assist the efforts
undertaken in Kosovo, because Kosovo belongs to all
Kosovars.
The international community must create the
right conditions for the rapid and successful
achievement of the eight standards in order then to
address the fundamental question of the final status of
Kosovo.
Furthermore, we believe that direct dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, the active participation

19

S/PV.5017

of all in the Provisional Institutions and the settlement
of the problem of parallel structures in Kosovo are all
necessary for the success of efforts to restore trust,
strengthen ties and promote reconciliation among all
Kosovars.
Finally, we believe that Kosovo’s economic
recovery, the reduction of the troubling unemployment
rate and the improvement of social conditions will
contribute to the implementation of all priority
measures and enable progress in achieving the
standards for Kosovo.
In conclusion, I would be remiss if I failed to
welcome Mr. Zoran Loncar of Serbia and Montenegro,
and I thank him for his excellent presentation on the
situation in Kosovo.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Algeria for his kind words addressed
to me.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I must
apologize. I was going to say that I was grateful for the
briefing. But as I was discourteous enough not to be
here to hear it, other colleagues will tell me exactly
what happened in my absence.
The United Kingdom associates itself with the
remarks to be delivered later by the representative of
the Netherlands.
All sides need to learn the lessons of 17 to 20
March this year. The Council looks forward to seeing
the recommendations of the Secretary-General
following Mr. Kai Eide’s report. The United Kingdom
specifically looks forward to a more coherent, focused
and efficient approach by the international community
in Kosovo. We would expect a constructive response
from the communities in Kosovo. The appointment of
Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen is very welcome, and he
enjoys our full support.
I would like to set out five priorities that the
United Kingdom sees for future policy.
First, the Special Representative should initiate a
programme by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to
transfer competences and authorities to Kosovo
institutions. Economic responsibility should be
transferred progressively to the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government over the period up to and beyond
the comprehensive review in mid-2005.

20

Next, this increased transfer of competences
should take place in conjunction with a
decentralization programme, with the aim of ensuring
more effective local government and protection of
minority rights. In our view, decentralization is basic to
better governance in Kosovo; at the same, it can
respect better the interests and the aspirations of
different communities and regions within Kosovo.
Thirdly, UNMIK should streamline its operation
and focus on priorities for action. We very much hope
that the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral will assess whether UNMIK has the right
structure and resources to meet the challenges
confronting Kosovo. I think I should say that, when
looking to see whether it has the right resources, my
working assumption is that it has too many resources
and that what we need is a more efficient use of fewer
resources.
Fourthly, standards remain basic to the
development of Kosovo. The standards review process
should be maintained, with a comprehensive review, at
the latest, in mid-2005. Implementation of standards
remains the best basis on which to build an inclusive,
multi-ethnic, democratic Kosovo in which all citizens
can live in peace and security. The standards which we
set out and which were accepted in the communication
of spring 2004 (S/PRST/2004/13) remain a vital goal.
But at the same time, to be realistic, what we need at
the moment is a robust prioritization focusing on those
standards to which we should try to give immediate
effect; that means minority rights. It should be clear
that this approach of prioritization is not to weaken
conditionality. It is actually to deepen it, but to deepen
it in the areas where there can be maximum impact. So,
we expect to see concrete action taken and having
effect to help minorities: not just pious statements of
commitment but delivery on the ground.
Priority work should continue on the three areas
relating to the minority communities: returns, including
the new ministry of returns; introducing one or two
decentralization pilot projects; and remembering that
decentralization is not only for Kosovo Serbs but is
part and parcel of more effective governance in
Kosovo as a whole. And participation by all sides in
the local Security Advisory Group is very desirable.
We look forward to considering the Special
Representative’s assessment of progress towards
meeting the standards. That has been asked for several

S/PV.5017

times. I hope that in the next discussion we do not have
to remind anyone — for the third time, I think — that
that statement is due. We need that report.
Lastly, there has to be a dialogue with Belgrade.
That is basic. But Belgrade cannot expect to exercise
oversight or veto. Belgrade’s proposals on
decentralization are a useful contribution to the debate
that ultimately needs to be held by the people who will
live under the arrangements in Kosovo. But I have to
say that the recent decision by Prime Minister
Kostunica to urge Kosovo Serbs not to participate in
the October elections is extremely disappointing. That
is British understatement. Non-participation will only
disenfranchise the Kosovo Serbs at a time when we
have seen real progress on their key concerns. The
Kosovo Serbs should participate in the elections and
should rejoin the institutions. Our vision — our
collective vision — of Kosovo is of a multi-ethnic
entity looking forward positively to a normal European
existence, reflecting the standards, the aspirations and
the behaviour which, I think, generally characterize the
reconciled Europe.
Those were my five points. It seems to me that
the immediate priority now is to build tolerance and
trust and to reassure the Kosovo Serbs. The Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government must demonstrate a
genuine commitment to strengthening the rights and
the protection of Kosovo minorities. We were
encouraged by the open letter of 14 June from Kosovo
leaders calling for all Kosovo citizens to build that
tolerant democracy based on the rule of law and laying
the foundation for establishing a ministry of returns,
communities and human rights. Belgrade and Kosovo
Serbs have an important role to play in that process,
and they have to make a constructive contribution; that
is part of the overall deal. Unilateral statements on
status by any side seem to the United Kingdom to be
totally unacceptable.
What this is all about is a simple decision to
decentralize, to actually give responsibility to people
where it ought to be exercised, to give greater
responsibility to the institutions in Kosovo. But, at the
same time, a new Special Representative needs to exert
himself on that process so that we have less UNMIK,
but also so that the UNMIK we have is more effective
and delivers on those objectives.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Hédi Annabi for his briefing. I must congratulate

Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen on his appointment as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), and I should like to
assure him once again of France’s full support.
I associate myself with the statement to be made
by the representative of the Netherlands on behalf of
the European Union. Therefore, I wish to confine
myself to a few observations.
We set a strategy for Kosovo last fall — a
strategy clearly expressed by the presidential statement
of 12 December 2003 (S/PRST/2003/23). The very
regrettable events of 17 to 19 March 2004 were a
particularly negative development. We strongly
condemned them, and we reacted energetically. The
fact remains that our strategy has not changed; we
simply know now that the situation is extremely fragile
and that we have little time in which to act, particularly
in the light of the date of mid-2005. We are totally
convinced that unwillingness to act would be the worst
possible attitude. Ambassador Eide has sent a report to
the Secretary-General in which he puts forth ideas on
that subject. Like others, we would very much like to
read it so that we can take that contribution into
account in our consideration of the matter.
On 14 July, the political leaders of Kosovo’s
various communities adopted a joint declaration that is
a step in the right direction towards getting the political
process back on track after the March violence.
However, that declaration will have value only if it is
translated into concrete action and progress in
implementing the standards, particularly with regard to
security and the rights of minorities. We welcome the
very positive results of the joint UNMIK-Provisional
Institutions working group on decentralization. The
framework document that came out of its work is a
good basis upon which to move in the direction
indicated by the Security Council in its presidential
statement of 30 April 2004 (S/PRST/2004/13). We
hope that the Kosovo Serbs and all other parties
concerned with this issue will take an active part in
finalizing the decentralization plan, particularly with
regard to pilot projects and the mapping of districts at
whose level decentralization will take place.
More generally, France wishes once again to
strongly encourage the Kosovo Serbs to participate
fully in the institutions that the international
community has created in Kosovo — and first of all in

21

S/PV.5017

the elections. My country is convinced that it is in the
greater and long-term interest of the Kosovo Serbs to
participate in the forthcoming general elections of
23 October 2004. We encourage them to register
immediately on the electoral rolls, which will be
irrevocably closed on 12 August: in exactly one week.
It is important that others also encourage them to do
that and, in any case, that Kosovo Serbs not be
dissuaded from doing so.

including in the areas of rebuilding the properties
damaged in March, resuming the process of returns to
the province by refugees and displaced persons and
ensuring freedom of movement. The facts speak for
themselves. Approximately 2,400 people are still
unable to return to their homes following the wave of
violence in March. Healthcare facilities that had served
minority patients have not been rebuilt, particularly in
the area of Kosovo Polje, in the Pristina region.

The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

The returns process has been reversed. One must
conclude that the key principle of multi-ethnicity
continues to be inoperative in practice, both at the
provincial and municipal levels, where Kosovo
Albanians are predominant. After all, as the SecretaryGeneral has correctly noted, it is specifically the
majority community that bears the primary
responsibility for the well-being of minorities.

At the outset, I should like once again to thank
the representative of Romania and his team for their
successful presidency in July. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2004/613) and Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi for his substantive briefing
on the situation in the province. We note the
participation in today’s Council meeting of Mr. Zoran
Loncar, Minister of Public Administration and Local
Self-Government of Serbia, on behalf of Serbia and
Montenegro.
The widespread surge of ethnically motivated
violence in March, provoked by extremists in Kosovo,
Serbia and Montenegro, and directed particularly
against Kosovo Serbs, dealt a serious blow to the
normalization process in the province and called into
question the timetable for implementing the democratic
standards established for Kosovo by the international
community. In those events, we see a conscious
attempt at the ethnic cleansing of the non-Albanian
population in Kosovo. We are certain that no one
should be allowed to benefit from, or to seek political
objectives through, the use of violent measures.
The current situation in the province requires full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). In that context, we remain committed to full
and consistent support for the policy of “standards
before status”. Only the genuine achievement of
democratic standards in Kosovo can serve as the basis
for the Council to take a decision on whether
discussions can begin on the issue of future status.
Unfortunately, the progress noted in the
Secretary-General’s report in the activities of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government is still
extremely limited, particularly with regard to the key
issues of the Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan,

22

It is of particular concern that neither local
leaders nor civil society supported UNMIK’s efforts to
maintain law and order in the wake of the violence in
March.
Unfortunately, we must reach the unequivocal
conclusion that minority rights — and in particular
those of Kosovo’s Serbs — continue to be violated.
Non-Albanian communities in Kosovo are today living
in greater isolation than they have at any time in the
past three years. Like the Secretary-General, we are
seriously alarmed at the lack of desire on the part of
the Kosovo Assembly to focus on the urgent priorities
associated with ensuring progress in the province. We
are particularly puzzled by the failure of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to enact
the Implementation Plan’s priority actions, especially
those aimed at investigating and punishing provincial
and municipal bodies and leaders of political
movements whose statements or actions condoned the
violence of last March. We are also puzzled at the
failure of the Provisional Institutions to condemn
inflammatory materials that appeared in the province’s
media at the time of the violence, as well as at their
failure to support recommendations made by the
temporary
Media
Commissioner
regarding
investigating incidents of violence.
We support the Secretary-General’s appeal to the
Provisional Institutions to implement all priority
actions set out in the revised Standards Implementation
Plan, as well as to immediately translate into specific
actions the promises they made regarding the

S/PV.5017

commitment to create conditions for the sustainable
return and integration of all displaced persons. The
Provisional Institutions must demonstrate genuine
results in their work in all the priority areas of the
standards process, including by establishing an intercommunity dialogue and investigating the actions of
political leaders, administrative mechanisms and media
that may have contributed to the spread of violence in
March. Additional robust steps are also needed to
ensure equal security for all the inhabitants of the
province, as well as to guarantee freedom of movement
and to protect the rights of minorities.
Reforming local government will also have an
important role in normalizing the situation in Kosovo.
Not just in words but in actions, local government
should ensure the conditions for all communities in
Kosovo to be able to live together in a single multiethnic and democratic society, as called for in Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).
We also take note of the framework document for
local government reform prepared by the joint
UNMIK-Provisional Institutions working groups. We
believe that document should further take into account
the interests and concerns of the non-Albanian
population, and of the Serbs in particular. We look
forward to the recommendations to be made by the
Secretary-General in accordance with the Security
Council’s request regarding a balanced model for the
devolution of authority from the provincial level to
local communities in Kosovo.
Along with other proposals, it would also be
appropriate to consider the Serbian plan for a political
settlement of the current situation in Kosovo. That is
particularly important in the context of establishing
constructive interaction by UNMIK and the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government with Kosovo Serbs
and Belgrade.
We agree with the Secretary-General that much
remains to be done to build capacity and enhance the
effectiveness of the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment. At the same time, however, the practice
of involving them in activities within the framework of
reserved powers must be brought into full compliance
with resolution 1244 (1999). Transferring those powers
at this phase is unacceptable. At any rate, such a
transfer must be preceded by a decision of the Security
Council in that regard.

We also view as unacceptable attempts by certain
political forces in Kosovo to pressure UNMIK and to
view it as an impediment to realizing the ambitions of
the Albanian majority in the province. We share the
Secretary-General’s concern that there continue to be
radical, extremist forces in the province preparing to
return to active political activities. We believe that it
would be useful once again to underscore that
premeditated attacks on UNMIK and KFOR are
unacceptable and that they must be condemned in the
strongest terms.
The forthcoming elections for the provincial
Assembly will be a serious test for the process of
implementing standards in Kosovo. In that regard, we
note in particular the conclusion of the SecretaryGeneral that it is the leaders of the Kosovo Albanian
majority who bear the primary responsibility to
establish a relationship with the minority communities
in the province, who were the ones subjected to
premeditated violence in March. Unless the Albanian
majority
actually
demonstrates
genuine
and
constructive interest, it is hard to anticipate Kosovo’s
Serbian and other minority communities returning to
provincial political processes.
My delegation welcomes the appointment of
Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Chief of the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo. Russia stands ready to cooperate
with him very closely in the context of existing
mechanisms, in the interest of quickly ending the
tragedy in the Balkans and bringing the situation in
line with resolution 1244 (1999), which continues to be
the sole legal basis for a settlement in Kosovo. We are
certain that only a coordinated effort by the
international community will contribute to bolstering
stability and security in the province. The
establishment of parallel tracks and outside efforts may
only send the wrong signal to the parties to the Kosovo
conflict.
We would also like to associate ourselves with
the kind words of gratitude conveyed to the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Harri Holkeri, in connection with his efforts to promote
the peace process in Kosovo.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

23

S/PV.5017

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Netherlands. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries of Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey and
Croatia, and the European Free Trade Association
countries of Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the
European Economic Area, align themselves with this
statement.
The European Union would like to welcome the
appointment of Mr. Jessen-Petersen as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Chief of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We look forward to cooperating
closely with him and wish him the best of luck in
carrying out his demanding job. The European Union
would like to thank the former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri Holkeri, for his
commitment to working in challenging circumstances.
Finally, I would like to welcome the presence of Mr.
Zoran Lončar, the Minister of Public Administration
and Local Self-Governance of Serbia, who represents
Serbia and Montenegro.
The violent events of mid-March constituted a
serious setback for the future of Kosovo and its people.
The report before us covers the period subsequent to
the events, from 1 April to 15 July 2004. As we take
stock of the progress made towards reconciliation and
mutual tolerance, the picture that emerges is mixed, but
moderately more positive than the violence of March.
Kosovo Albanian leaders have indeed reached out
to Kosovo minorities. During the last few months,
already half of the people that were displaced have
returned to their homes and villages. Around a third of
the properties damaged have been reconstructed, and
the authorities have pledged to rebuild the remainder of
the destroyed buildings. The intention to establish a
ministry for community matters, human rights and
returns is a promising sign, as is the recent agreement
on an anti-discrimination law.
While the European Union commends the
Kosovo Albanians for these efforts, it also calls upon
them to truly undo all consequences of the March riots.
Any person living in any part of the world wants to live
in a safe environment where he or she does not need to
fear the neighbours because they belong to a different
group. It is crucial that the people who are still

24

displaced should be able to return to their homes as
soon as possible. Efforts to punish those responsible
for the violence have been undertaken, but not at all
levels and not as vigorously as expected.
Likewise, we call upon the Kosovo Serbs to be
receptive and responsive to overtures made by Kosovo
Albanian leaders. In that respect, the lack of
involvement of the Kosovo Serbs in the political
process is still a cause for concern. Participation in the
Provisional Institutions at the political level and in the
upcoming elections in October is in the interest of the
Kosovo Serbs themselves. They should be strongly
encouraged to do so. The European Union believes that
resumption of the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina is essential. Now is the time to rise to the
challenge.
Violence of the kind that occurred in March has
to be, and indeed was, condemned. Those responsible
for the destruction must be brought to justice. We also
have to ask whether enough is being done to prevent a
repetition of the events. The Secretary-General took his
responsibility by requesting Ambassador Kai Eide to
make a comprehensive review of the policies and
practices of all actors in Kosovo. By now, the
assessment and analysis of Ambassador Eide have been
submitted to the Secretary-General.
The European Union believes that the mission of
Ambassador Eide was timely, and the sharing of his
conclusions will be welcomed. It seems that a broad
discussion on the fundamental questions regarding
Kosovo and the policies of the international
community should be held at the right time. As to the
structure of the presence of the international
community, the European Union looks forward to
working closely with the United Nations and the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Jessen-Petersen, in order to find ways to improve the
action of the international community in Kosovo.
Meanwhile, there ought to be progress on the
standards, not just in reports but also visibly on the
ground. As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Netherlands, Mr. Bernard Bot, stated on behalf of the
European Union during his visit to the region two
weeks ago, the Union is committed to the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and the policy of “standards before status”. The
standards are aimed at promoting values such as
respect for minorities, tolerance, democracy and the

S/PV.5017

rule of law. Their implementation will be key for
Kosovo’s future. The implementation of standards will
be a long-lasting process and will continue after the
mid-2005 review. It is part of the process drafted
during the Thessaloniki Summit of June 2003 on the
perspectives of inclusion of the western Balkans
countries in the European Union.
The European Union considers the joint
declaration of 14 July to be a step in the right direction
and a positive signal of commitment by Kosovo leaders
of all origins. As stated earlier, the declaration
announced the establishment of a ministry for
community matters, human rights and returns. All
parties expressed a shared commitment to do their
utmost to ensure that sustainable return of internally
displaced people can take place.
The declaration also supported the current
promising efforts on reform of local government. In
that regard, the European Union welcomes the progress
achieved and commends the working group on local
government, co-chaired by UNMIK and the
Provisional Institutions, for its proposals. Reform of
local government and decentralization are important
steps towards ensuring sustainable government, the
protection of minority communities and better living
conditions for all inhabitants in Kosovo. The European
Union calls upon all communities and interested parties
in Kosovo to fully engage in this important process and
to undertake concrete steps to start implementation of
the reforms as soon as possible.
The European Union is a strong contributor to the
economic development and reform efforts in Kosovo.
As indicated in the report of the Secretary-General, the
third wave of privatization has been launched. The
European Union looks forward to a renewed
momentum for this process and calls on all parties
involved to take a rational, non-political approach to
the issue of privatization.
Let me finalize by stating that the commitment of
the European Union to Kosovo is not limited to Pillar
IV. We strongly believe that the future of Kosovo is
within the European structures. Consequently, the
European Union continues to be the largest donor of
financial support to Kosovo. It will do its utmost to
enable Kosovo to become part of not only the political
and economic union that the European Union
constitutes, but also of the community of values it
stands for.

The President (spoke in Russian): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Japan, whom I invite to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): First of all, I wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. I begin today by
expressing Japan’s sincere respect for the efforts of Mr.
Harri Holkeri, former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, to improve the situation in Kosovo.
We also extend our heartfelt congratulations to Mr.
Soren Jessen-Petersen on his appointment as the next
Special Representative for Kosovo.
As the new Special Representative is expected to
commence his work in the near future, today’s public
meeting will be an excellent opportunity to reassess the
situation and the policies in place up to the present. I
am confident that Mr. Jessen-Petersen will also make
his best effort in his new post, taking into consideration
the conclusions drawn from today’s discussion.
The Government of Japan wishes to make three
points today. First, against the background of the
lessons of the March violence, we welcome the fact
that the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
and UNMIK, with the help of concerned countries,
have drafted a framework document for the devolution
of responsibilities to local authorities. My Government
hopes that, through the careful implementation of the
framework, the human rights of minorities will be
better protected and the establishment of a democratic
and multi-ethnic society will be accelerated.
At the last public meeting on this item (see
S/PV.4967), a number of representatives mentioned the
importance of making tolerance a reality in Kosovo.
Japan firmly believes that establishing such tolerance
is the key to the successful implementation of the
Kosovo standards. In this context, we welcome the
implementation of inter-community talks on several
subjects, and particularly the consultations that
included both Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs,
which have led to an agreement on the establishment of
institutions for human rights and the return of refugees.
We would also like to emphasize that the rebuilding of
homes destroyed in the March violence should be
completed as soon as possible in order to improve
mutual trust among the communities involved.
Lastly, building tolerance will require a positive
change in the mental attitude of the people; that is, they

25

S/PV.5017

must have reason to hope for a better life for
themselves. Regrettably, recent news reports indicate
that the unemployment rate in Kosovo is again rising
and is now approaching 70 per cent. This situation, in
which the people are enduring unacceptably high
unemployment and are thus unable to have any hope
for their future, must be changed. UNMIK and the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, with the
assistance of the international community, must
redouble their efforts to address this issue within the
framework of the Kosovo Standards Implementation
Plan.
Based on our firm belief that stabilizing the
situation in Kosovo is essential for the stability and
prosperity of the entire region, my Government has
contributed, to date, approximately $186 million in
assistance for that purpose. We remain committed to
the goal of achieving stability and prosperity in SouthEastern Europe, in cooperation with the international
community as a whole.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Japan for the kind words he addressed
to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Albania. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Nesho (Albania): At the outset, Sir, allow me
to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to wish you
every success.
Our delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General
(S/2004/613)
and
today’s
comprehensive briefing by Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi. We believe that the recommendations of the
Secretariat and of the Security Council on the
improvement of the situation will serve to overcome
the impasse concerning the destabilized situation
brought about by the events of March 2004. Reflection
on these events highlights the need for fundamental
changes and a realistic evaluation of the situation by
the international community.
First, there is a need for the rapid implementation
of the “standards before status” policy, focusing on the
attainment of a democratic, multi-ethnic and
multicultural society in which the rule of law and
tolerance prevail. This can be achieved when the
legitimate organs of the democratic institutions in

26

Kosovo possess complete responsibility for building up
their society. For that to happen, competences of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) must be transferred to Kosovo’s
executive institutions and UNMIK’s role must be
restructured, from that of a decision-making body to
that of an advisory and monitoring body.
Secondly, the international institutions must
maintain a continued presence as a guarantee of
stability and peace in the region. Albania is grateful for
the role of UNMIK and for the role and the
commitment of the military forces of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), including the
United States, and those of the other nations of the
KFOR contingent in the region, and emphasizes the
need for their continued presence in Kosovo. Albania
also appreciates the establishment of the “Contact
Group Plus” for Kosovo as an important step towards
fulfilling the Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan.
In turn, the political factions and people of
Kosovo should understand that in the future Kosovo
will be a free, democratic and multi-ethnic society and
a country in which minority rights are protected by
law. Kosovo belongs to all the people of Kosovo. They
are all an integral part in the new society and are equal
in their rights and obligations.
We commend the positive fact that the
Government of Kosovo has taken the appropriate
measures for the reconstruction of destroyed buildings
and the return of displaced people. We also particularly
commend the proposal for the creation of a ministry for
communities and integration. All these initiatives stem
not only from the commitment of the representatives
and institutions of Kosovo to accomplishing the
standards set forth by the international community, but
also from their growing maturity and responsibility
regarding the dynamic realities in Kosovo and
throughout the region.
It is important that the climate of understanding
and the process of integration being created continue.
Members of minorities must participate in the
parliamentary elections and not boycott them. They
should not be instrumental in nationalist and divisive
scenarios. Kosovo needs its minorities to participate in
the construction of the country; it needs them to
participate in governing the country; and it needs them
to create, together, the future while forgetting the past.

S/PV.5017

Albania reconfirms its support for the
implementation of the “standards before status” policy.
The achievement of the standards selected by the
international community is essential for the new
Kosovo society; their objectives are necessary
conditions for defining final status. We think that a
useful step towards stability would be for the
international community, while undertaking a
discussion of standards, to take into consideration the
final status of Kosovo, in the belief that the
implementation of a “status with standards” policy will
concretely advance the political process in Kosovo and
further normalize the situation in the region.
We believe in a European future for Kosovo as
the most appropriate and realistic solution.
Implementation of this idea could be achieved through
the expansion of the economic presence of the
European Union (EU) in Kosovo, and with Kosovo’s
inclusion in the EU integration processes.
One of the primary conditions of the standards
policy is revitalization of the dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade. Albania supports this dialogue between
the two countries on both the political and the technical
levels. In this course of action, it is also important that
the internal dialogue between the two communities in
Kosovo be expanded.
For its part, Albania is committed to furthering
the dialogue with Serbia and Montenegro on areas of
mutual interest and in the framework of Balkan and
European integration. This will serve to strengthen
relations between the two countries and to create a
better and more constructive climate between
Albanians and Serbs in the region, in the interest of
stability and regional integration.
We commend the current progress made by the
Government of Kosovo in collaborating with UNMIK,
the EU, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID). We also
commend the effort to reform and strengthen local
government in Kosovo as an important element in
reducing ethnic tensions in the long run.
We believe that greater autonomy for local
government — an autonomy that does not distort the
vertical line of power and that does not harm the
central Government of the territory of Kosovo — is an
important element of the “standards before status”
policy and will strengthen and improve the economic,

social and cultural situation. It will help bring the
citizens of all communities closer together in the
decision-making process, further local development
and create greater space for local initiatives.
It is important that all the political and
institutional factors in Kosovo and the representatives
of the Serb and other communities cooperate to achieve
understanding, reach common solutions for the
successful reform of the self-government process, and
to go even further.
In conclusion, let me extend our best wishes to
the newly appointed Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen, wish
him every success in his important mission and assure
him of our Government’s support.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the
floor to Mr. Annabi to respond to comments and
questions raised.
Mr. Annabi: There were no specific questions, so
I will be very brief. I wish to make just two points.
First, I would like to thank Security Council members
and others who have expressed their appreciation for
the work done, under difficult circumstances, by the
outgoing Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Harri Holkeri. I also wish to thank them
for the good wishes addressed to the new Special
Representative, Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen. He will be
meeting in the next few days in Geneva with the senior
staff of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) before proceeding to
Pristina to take up his assignment.
Secondly, I wish to advise members of the
Council that UNMIK is currently facing a very serious
financial situation. There are very significant delays in
the payment of assessed contributions to UNMIK. The
Secretariat has suggested, as a means of trying to
mitigate the effects of the situation, that we retain the
surpluses from peacekeeping operations that have been
completed. But as members are aware, that was not
accepted by the General Assembly, and as a result there
is very little or no flexibility for current missions that
are short of cash.
I would therefore like to take this opportunity to
stress the seriousness of the situation, which may lead
UNMIK, as early as next month, to curtail some of its
activities, and to urge all those concerned to promptly

27

S/PV.5017

pay their outstanding contributions in full and without
further delay.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Annabi for the additional information he provided.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

28
