S/PV.7447

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7447th meeting

Friday, 22 May 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Murmokaitė . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lithuania)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Fernández-Arias Minuesa
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Small arms
Report of the Secretary-General on small arms and light weapons (S/2015/289)

15-14986 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1514986*

S/PV.7447

Small arms

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Small arms
Report of the Secretary-General on small arms
and light weapons (S/2015/289)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Albania, Australia, Austria,
Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta,
Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway,
Palau, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago and Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/333, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Albania, Australia, Austria, Barbados,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Georgia, Greece,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, Malta, Morocco, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal,
the Republic of Moldova, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Samoa, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and
Tobago, Ukraine, the United States of America and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2015/289, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on small arms and light
weapons.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Lithuania.

2/9

22/05/2015

The draft resolution before colleagues today is the
product of months of work by our Permanent Mission,
which culminated in week-long intensive negotiations
among the 15 members of the Security Council, as
well as multiple bilateral exchanges. I thank all those
who helped and guided us along the way, and the
Council members for their cooperation in producing
this far-reaching text. We appreciate the comments and
criticisms received, which we view as an important part
of the broader debate on small arms and light weapons.
Critical thinking and good-faith engagement are in
order to be able to advance in our common efforts aimed
at reducing and limiting the horrendous human cost of
the uncontrolled illegal spread of small arms and light
weapons around the world. We value the strong support
for the draft resolution that many delegations expressed
during the open debate last week (see S/PV.7442), and
we appreciate having so many co-sponsors to the draft
resolution.
As we submit the draft resolution to the vote, we bear
in mind the passionate call from Karamoko Diakité, an
arms control activist from West Africa, not to let down
the victims of armed conflicts and to adopt the draft
resolution. He spoke from the depth of his personal
experience and spoke of the personal experiences and
suffering of countless others for whom the impact of
illicit arms flows on their faiths and hopes, as well as
the faiths and hopes of their kin, is not just a matter
of wording, but of the very real harm, the crippling
injuries and the deaths that they have suffered, which
will continue to haunt them as long as they live.
The draft resolution is not ideal, but the world
we live in is not ideal either. In the real world, we
work painstakingly to achieve the desired results,
with perseverance, patience, laborious efforts and
compromise, one step at a time, bit by bit, piece by
piece, block by block. For all our posturing, the illicit
transfer of arms will continue, as arms trade is one
of the most lucrative businesses in the world; but we
can, and we must, do all within our power to limit the
damaging, even mortal effect of such illicit flows on
civilian populations.
We have the responsibility to protect as best we can.
That is what we sought to do, to build on the excellent
Australian resolution adopted in 2013 (resolution 2117
(2013)) by adding new operational impact-oriented
elements. Those much-needed bits and pieces were the
foundation on which the small arms and light weapons
discourse and action can, and, I hope, will continue to

15-14986

22/05/2015

Small arms

be built in the Council. Let me go through some of the
new elements in the text before the Council.
The draft resolution contains important new
language on the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), that
landmark instrument we have so painstakingly and
passionately negotiated over an extensive period of
time. Had we taken an all-or-nothing approach, we
would not have the ATT today, and the world would be
worse off because of that.
The draft resolution has a very strong focus on the
human costs of the illicit spread of small arms and light
weapons and on the need to protect the victims, women,
children and other vulnerable groups. It also speaks
clearly on the critical role of women in tackling the
problem of small arms and light weapons. It requests
more specific reporting by the Secretary-General on
the impact on specific vulnerable groups, including
children, with recommendations for action to be taken
to counter the impact of the illicit spread of small arms.
The draft resolution includes extensive new
provisions on assistance to affected countries and
calls on new entities to identify capacities that
could contribute to countering the illicit transfer,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms
and light weapons. It encourages the United Nations
system to act in a more coherent fashion in helping those
States, including through assisting weapons collection,
enhancing physical security and stockpile management
practices; safe and effective management, storage,
marking, record-keeping and tracing of stockpiles of
small arms and light weapons; as well as the collection
and destruction of surplus seized, unmarked or illicitly
held weapons and ammunition; and the development
of national export and import control systems. It
emphasizes the need to strengthen border security,
judicial institutions and law enforcement capacity,
and calls for examining and facilitating the transfer
of technologies that would improve the tracing and
detection of illicit transfers in small arms and light
weapons, as well as for greater transparency in small
arms transfers.
As Boko Haram, Da’esh and their likes burn, kill,
enslave and rape with the help of small arms, the draft
resolution contains concrete language on the threat of
terrorist groups and calls on the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee, its monitoring team, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate to engage on the threat of weapons in the
hands of terrorists and to develop plans of assistance to

S/PV.7447

countries in need. All of these and other new elements
could have a tangible impact on tackling the illicit
small arms problem, and if implemented, could make
a difference to countless people trapped in conflicts.
Let me be very clear: contrary to some allegations,
none of these elements in the draft impinge upon or
violate State sovereignty. My own country has fought
hard and long for sovereignty and would do everything
to protect it again and again, and we know very well
that all of us around this table and at the United Nations
feel strongly about sovereignty as well. The real threat
to national sovereignty and all the core rules and norms
that govern nations and human lives comes from the
action by terrorists, illegal armed groups, militant
mercenaries, transborder organized crime, traffickers
and smugglers of all stripes, who slaughter, burn, rape
and destroy without borders — and definitely not from
the language of this draft resolution, which is aimed
at seeking greater coherence within the United Nations
system in order to better help countries to counter the
problem of illicit arms. The draft text clearly stipulates
that all measures would be implemented only as
appropriate, within existing mandates and as requested
by affected countries.
Every minute, as we speak, a life is lost because
of the illicit trade or misuse of small arms and light
weapons. Besides causing deaths and injuries, such
illicit flows facilitate the commission of hideous human
rights abuses and atrocities and indirectly impede
development and growth. The all-too-free access to
small arms strikes at the core of the human rights of
women and girls. Every day, whether in war-ravaged
villages or in displacement and refugee camps, women
in conflict situations are faced with impossible choices
that none of us would ever want to make — to let their
children starve or to venture out in the streets, camps
or fields in search of whatever meager edibles they can
find and other necessities, all of this at the risk of being
caught in the crossfire, hit by a stray bullet, beaten,
robbed or raped at gunpoint.
For many women and girls, even attending to their
basic bodily needs on the edge of a camp can be literally
a matter of life and death. As members prepare to vote,
I ask that they think of the mothers who would live in
continuous fear that rebels, terrorists or militant gangs
will attack their homes and steal, rape or kidnap their
children, or sell into slavery their daughters. Think of
the displaced, of religious minorities running for their
lives, of the elderly and the disabled who simply cannot

15-149863/9

S/PV.7447

Small arms

22/05/2015

run. Think of the children as young as six or eight,
barely able to hold a gun, scared, brainwashed and
forced to maim, torture and kill in order to live.

Chad and Nigeria. The African group also associates
itself with the contents of the present resolution and
vote.

We have heard the heartrending testimonies of
former child soldiers in the Council. We cannot be so
callous as to ignore them. Think of the humanitarian
workers and doctors who risk and lose their own lives in
order to help those in need. Think of the journalists who
brave the worst crises to keep us informed. Think of the
peacekeepers being attacked and shot as they perform
a much-needed protection mission. Think of all those
human beings — fellow human beings — about to be
killed, abused, injured, reduced to slavery, treated like
animals in captivity by warlords, terrorists and militant
gangs.

Let me begin by acknowledging the efforts
deployed by the Lithuanian presidency and by you,
Madam President, with a view to reaching consensus on
this critical resolution. We note the advancements the
resolution provides by focusing on the human cost of
small arms. This morning, you, Madam, emphatically
referred to that focus, particularly with regard to
civilians, women and children; on the devastating
impact on development, education and health; and on
conflict prevention and avoiding relapse into conflict.
We also note the advancement in positioning the United
Nations to better support arms embargoes and other
international obligations, such as Security Council
support for the Arms Trade Treaty.

This draft resolution has been drafted not to resolve
all the underlying disputes on the arms trade, but to
make a difference to those desperately in need, to
enable specific and concrete actions aimed at limiting
the damage and reducing the human costs caused by
the illicit spread of small arms and light weapons. The
victims cannot defend themselves, but we can. The
choice to take the side of the victims is ours to make,
and I hope we all do.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on
the draft resolution before it. I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Chile, France, Jordan, Lithuania, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Angola, Chad, China, Nigeria, Russian Federation,
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
The President: There were nine votes in favour,
none against and six abstentions. The draft resolution
has been adopted as resolution 2220 (2015).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Allow me to make
this statement on behalf of the three African States
members of the Security Council, namely, Angola,
4/9

Although, in our view, this resolution should,
above all, contribute to bringing about a lasting
solution to the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons — namely, to theatres of instability and
conflict, including a halt to the supply of those weapons
to non-State actors — unfortunately, our proposals and
concerns regarding the issue of proliferation and access
to small arms and light weapons to non-State actors
were not sufficiently considered in the resolution.
Together with other members of the Council, we made
considerable efforts to address this daunting challenge
to the African continent, namely, the indiscriminate
supply and illicit transfer of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition, which are fuelling the
spread of several conflicts in Africa and the world.
Eleven years ago, by adopting resolution 1540
(2004), the Council clearly defined the concept of
non-State actors in a particular context. Currently,
our main concern relates to non-State actors to whom
small arms and light weapons are supplied to fuel
conflicts, destabilize countries and promote policies
of regime-change, with the tragic consequences we
are witnessing today where despicable crimes against
humanity are committed.
As a country that has gone through a very painful
experience, it would be politically unacceptable not
to seize the opportunity that the discussion of this
resolution provides to address the problem of the
supply of weapons to non-State actors. Our position of
non-support of the resolution is based on the assumption
that the illicit supply of weapons to non-State actors
amounts to a threat to international peace and security,
15-14986

22/05/2015

Small arms

which the Council must consistently address. Al-Qaida,
Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab; militias in Libya, Syria
and Iraq; insurgents in Mali, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South
Sudan and other countries; and the non-State actors to
whom large amounts of weapons have been supplied,
which are out of control, are the main promoters of
terrorism, instability and armed conflict in many parts
of the world.
In the search for a compromise during the
negotiation of the resolution, we accepted a definition
mentioning non-State actors as terrorists, armed groups
and criminal networks. Additionally, we proposed to
explicitly mention in the resolution the exemption of
armed private contractors and others similarly engaged
in carrying out security missions. Unfortunately, all
these efforts were to no avail.
Finally, Madam President, we remain engaged with
you and other members of the Council with regard to
the adoption of a resolution that would deal with the
problem of the spread of small arms and light weapons,
and would not leave such an important question
unresolved for the future.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Chad
endorses the statement made by the representative of
Angola on behalf of the African Group, including the
African members of the Security Council.
Chad notes with regret that a resolution as
important as the one just voted upon by nine members
of the Security Council (resolution 2220 (2015)),
whose aim, we were told, is to help the most affected
regions by the destabilizing impact of small arms and
light weapons, more specifically Africa, was adopted
without involving the representatives of the continent
in th Council. For the African countries in general, and
Chad in particular, the major challenge to be taken up
in combating the use, that is to say, the abusive and
illegal use of small arms and light weapons, remains
the issue of the illicit transfer of these arms to non-State
actors, including, inter alia, armed groups, terrorists
and criminal networks.
The concept of non-State actors has been defined
by the Security Council through resolution 1540 (2004)
in the context of the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. Ironically, when it comes to the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and their
illicit transfer to non-State actors, the reference to these
concepts gives rise to great opposition from certain

S/PV.7447

prominent members of the Council. Non-State actors,
illegally supplied with arms and munitions, provoke
conflicts and destabilize States, commit egregious
crimes and human rights violations, sow destruction
and plunge civilian populations into desolation, thereby
jeopardizing any prospects of development for the
States concerned. Therefore, for us in Chad, the refusal
to include a provision in this resolution that would
make it illegal to transfer small arms and light weapons
to non-State actors is tantamount to a refusal to prevent
crises and conflicts and tantamount to encouraging
destabilizing efforts against fragile States.
Throughout the discussions on the draft text leading
up to today’s vote, the African delegations showed great
flexibility by submitting various proposed amendments
with a view to having a balanced consensual text that
would accommodate all the concerns of all members of
the Council. Unfortunately, these valid concerns, such
as expressed by us, did not attract even the slightest
attention from those who rejected them with some
degree of condescension. We are deeply disappointed
and shocked.
Nothing is more frustrating than when it comes
to issues as important as those concerning Africa, the
African members of the Council are marginalized and
the only reason given is that their concerns have no
impact on the adoption of the resolution. This historical
injustice must be remedied through a reform of the
Security Council, such that Africa can take its rightful
place in the Council, alongside other continents, and
that it can make its voice heard. Given the categorical
refusal to take our concerns on board and in the absence
of any possibility of dialogue on subjects as sensitive as
these, Chad had no choice but to abstain in the voting
on this resolution.
Either way, convinced of the justice of our cause
and the relevance of our arguments ,we insist on the
importance of and need to find a solution to the illicit
transfer to small arms and light weapons to non-State
actors. We will continue our efforts until we can make
our voices heard.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): With regard to resolution
2220 (2015), which the Council has just adopted,
Malaysia places high hopes on the Council being
able to reach consensus on this important issue. The
statement that you made before the voting, Madam
President, clearly amplified why this resolution is
needed. However, we also recognize that Council
members will have to redouble their efforts to further

15-149865/9

S/PV.7447

Small arms

refine an approach that can take the parameters of
this technical issue into consideration. Malaysia was
pleased to participate in our constructive discussions,
and we would like to congratulate Lithuania and you
personally, Madam President, for your leadership in
our collective endeavour.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Lithuanian delegation for preparing
today’s resolution 2220 (2015), on the illicit trade and
destabilizing accumulation of small arms and light
weapons, and to commend your and your colleagues’
unflagging efforts, Madam President, to arrive at a
text that is both ambitious and pragmatic. We welcome
the text’s adoption and the fact that it obtained the
sponsorship of more than 50 Member States, proof of
the international community’s support for this vital
cause.
France voted in favour of the resolution for several
reasons. It reflects an important initiative, first
introduced in the Security Council two years ago by
Australia, on the threat posed by the trafficking and
spread of small arms. For the first time the Council
considered this scourge through a cross-cutting
approach, leading to our adoption of resolution 2117
(2013), which has been a reference text on the subject
ever since.
The new resolution’s provisions put civilians and
their protection at its core, because, of course, it is
civilian populations, particularly women and children,
who are the first victims of the proliferation of such
weapons. They are responsible for nearly half a million
deaths a year and remain by far the world’s deadliest.
The resolution also highlights the role of the United
Nations in implementing the Arms Trade Treaty,
which marks a historic step forward and will help to
strengthen international peace and security. The ability
of the United Nations to act could not be allowed to fall
behind. The resolution also addresses the flow of small
arms that benefits armed groups, criminal networks
and terrorist groups that take advantage of the lack of
regulation in the area to continue their barbaric and
destabilizing activities all over the world, particularly
in Africa.
Lastly, today’s resolution is designed to integrate
the fight against the illicit trade in small arms into
every aspect of United Nations action, for which we
had to mobilize not only the sanctions committees
and the expert groups responsible for monitoring
embargoes but also, when necessary and appropriate,
6/9

22/05/2015

our peacekeeping and special political missions. Of
course, the United Nations architecture for combating
terrorism also has a role to play. We hope the issue of
small-arms trafficking will be systematically taken
into account in the analyses of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Monitoring
Team of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities.
Madam President, during the negotiations you
took the time to hear the views of every member of the
Council, and I would once again like to pay tribute to
you and your team for all your efforts. We would of
course have preferred the text to be more ambitious in
some respects, such as on the protection of civilians,
and in recognizing the achievements of the Arms Trade
Treaty. But a resolution is of necessity the result of
compromise, and today’s is ultimately a demanding one
that we are convinced will advance the Organization’s
ability to fight the deadly scourge of the illicit trade in
small arms.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of today’s important
resolution 2220 (2015). We thank Lithuania for the
leadership and tenacity it has shown on the issue, with
efforts that build innovatively on resolution 2117 (2013),
which was the Council’s first on small arms and light
weapons.
Today marks a substantial step forward in the
saving of lives from the scourge of small arms and
light weapons, and four elements of today’s resolution
deserve particular attention. The first is its review of
the work of the United Nations departments and entities
that address the issue of small arms and light weapons.
Second is the concrete proposals it makes for increasing
those bodies’ effectiveness in future. Third is the
important recognition in the text of the disproportionate
impact that such weapons have on women and children,
and fourth is its further acknowledgement of the positive
impact of the Arms Trade Treaty. On that point, the
United Kingdom maintains that the Treaty is the most
effective international tool for creating a responsible
and secure international trade in these weapons, and
we once again urge all States to support and accede to
the Treaty.
Finally, we regret the fact that several Council
members found themselves unable to support today’s
resolution. For decades, global policy on conventional
weapons has focused on the obligations and responsible
15-14986

22/05/2015

Small arms

behaviour of exporting and importing States. That is the
best way to moderate illicit transfers and proliferation.
Contrary to some arguments, we do not think that illdefined and practically unenforceable new statements
by the Council on the subject of non-State actors
can in any way improve the situation on the ground.
Despite those disagreements, however, we urge all
Member States to focus on the overall value of today’s
resolution, which offers tangible actions for addressing
the scourge of small arms and light weapons across all
regions of the world, particularly in Africa.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
voted in favour of today’s resolution 2220 (2015) in an
expression of my country’s ongoing commitment to
disarmament in every form and to the fight against the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. We believe
the work of the Security Council can be enriched
through an ongoing dialogue on the impact of illicit
transfers of such weapons on international security and
on the foundation provided by the Arms Trade Treaty of
2013. The resolution we have just adopted marks a step
forward from the previous Security Council resolution
on the subject, resolution 2117 (2013). The text also
contains substantive language on women and peace and
security in line with resolution 1325 (2000) and other
related resolutions, and with article 7, paragraph 4, of
the Arms Trade Treaty, supported by Chile.
We regret the fact that the resolution does not include
a reference to the impact produced by illicit transfers
in arms and ammunition to non-State actors and
unauthorized groups. That issue should be addressed,
given the negative effects of the cross-border actions of
many non-State actors, which have major repercussions
for civilian populations and for international peace and
security.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation shares the growing
concern about the problem of the illegal trade in
small arms and light weapons. We believe that
combating it requires a coordinated effort on the part
of the international community while at the same time
maintaining the central role of the United Nations.
However, the Russian Federation abstained in the
voting on today’s resolution on small arms and light
weapons (resolution 2220 (2015)), and we would like to
explain our reasons.
We firmly believe that strengthening national
controls in this area would enable us to significantly

S/PV.7447

reduce the risk of the uncontrolled proliferation of such
weapons. That was why during the work on the text of
the resolution we proposed adding a number of concrete
measures, including a ban on deliveries of small arms
and light weapons to unauthorized entities in recipient
States, the strict regulation of brokering activities and
a ban on the unauthorized re-export of arms and on the
production of pirated weapons manufactured without
licences or under expired licences. Our amendments
were not included.
The resolution includes a number of questionable
provisions relating to the expansion of the power of
specialized committees and missions of the United
Nations concerning issues of control over transfers
of small arms and light weapons. In our view, the
primary responsibility for carrying out those functions
within national territorial frontiers should lie with the
Government concerned.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
has supported today’s resolution 2220 (2015) in both its
concept and its details since Lithuania first proposed it.
We see the resolution as important because of the gains
it makes in an area too little discussed by the Security
Council. We thank Lithuania for taking forward the
initiative initially taken by Australia in resolution 2117
(2013).
As the President has enumerated, the resolution
operationalizes small arms in many facets of the
Council’s work and encourages wider adherence to the
Arms Trade Treaty, one of the most important arms
control treaties adopted in recent years. The resolution
will also ensure that small arms have more than a
temporary place on the Security Council agenda.
Sadly, over the last week the issue of small arms
and light weapons itself has become secondary to a
highly politicized debate. We have some sympathy for
the position of the three African States that wanted
an explicit reference to transfers to non-State actors.
New Zealand does not support the illicit transfer of
arms to non-State criminal and armed groups. We
could have accepted any of the formulations under
discussion. We believe that a solution could have been
found if delegations on both sides of the debate had
focused on the words on the page and had taken a less
positional approach to the negotiations. We are pleased
nonetheless that the resolution has been adopted with
the sponsorship of a wide range of Members of the
Organization.

15-149867/9

S/PV.7447

Small arms

Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela abstained in the
voting on resolution 2220 (2015) despite the efforts
made by Lithuania in leading the negotiations.
Venezuela participated actively and constructively
in the process. We believe that the resolution has some
positive but weak elements with respect to establishing
clear objectives for lifting arms embargoes and
providing for international cooperation, including in
the areas of technology transfer, the management and
control of stockpiles, marking and tracing, and the
collection and destruction of stockpiles. However, we
regret that we did not take into account the position of
many countries in the discussion on the urgent need to
prohibit the transfer of small arms and light weapons to
non-State actors, whose definition is clearly established
to achieve the purposes set forth in resolution 1540
(2004), as well as the prohibition of the unauthorized
re-export or the sale of these weapons without a licence
or with an expired licence.
The seriousness of the problem of the illicit
trafficking in weapons is reflected in the alarming
statistics presented by certain sources, which estimate
that at least 875 million of these weapons are available,
many of them in the hands of private individuals
and non-State actors. It is believed that between
7 and 8 million such weapons are produced each year.
Furthermore, legal international sales of such weapons
account for at least $8.5 billion annually. In addition,
according to the World Bank, the illicit sale of such
arms could account for an additional 20 percent of that
figure.
Therefore, the resolution that the Council has
approved has limited effectiveness because it fails to
provide for measures to prevent hundreds of thousands
of small arms and light weapons, including heavy
machine guns, grenade launchers, ground-to-air
missiles and portable air-defence systems, inter alia,
continue to stoke conflicts in Africa and the Middle
East.
Finally, in future, we would like to see greater
openness on the part of those Member States that
have opposed measures designed to prevent the illicit
transfer of small and light weapons to non-State actors,
because this continues to propagate violence in many
regions throughout the world.

8/9

22/05/2015

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons exacerbates
regional armed conflicts, worsens regional tension,
fosters terrorism and transnational organized crime
and causes bodily harm and death to innocent civilians.
Tackling the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
is of great significance for maintaining regional peace
and stability and promoting the normal socioeconomic
development of the countries concerned.
The Chinese Government has always been
firmly opposed to the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons. The Security Council should play an
active role in further strengthening the efforts of the
international community in combating the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons. In the current situation,
more than ever, the international community needs a
Security Council resolution that can comprehensively
and effectively combat the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons.
The Chinese delegation took part in consultations
on resolution 2220 (2015) in a positive and constructive
spirit. During the consultations, some members, in
particular the three African members, proposed some
important, legitimate and highly valid amendments.
The consultations should have further heeded the
views of all sides and sought to solve differences so as
to reach a text that could enjoy the unanimous support
of the whole Council. It is regrettable that the relevant
amendments have not been fully reflected in the text. In
the light of the situation, China abstained in the voting
on resolution 2220 (2015).
Mr. Fernández-Arias Minuesa (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): Spain supported and co-sponsored resolution
2220 (2015) and thanks the delegation of Lithuania
for presenting it and for its tireless work leading to
the adoption of a timely and positive text. The text
is a good complement to resolution 2117 (2013) and
keeps the issue on the Security Council’s agenda. We
view positively the references to the control of arms
transfers to terrorist groups and criminal networks,
to the protection of civilians and to issues of women
and peace and security. We also see as very timely
references to the Arms Trade Treaty, which is and has
been the most important step taken in disarmament in
recent years.
The resolution incorporates practical measures
aimed at improving the control of the illicit arms
trafficking, management, stockpiling and proper

15-14986

22/05/2015

Small arms

destruction of stockpiles. We have see the image of the
soldier laying down his rifle contained in the tapestry
hanging in this Chamber as symbolic of the Security
Council’s work in the fight to free the world from the
threat of weapons, specifically small arms and light
weapons. We have taken a step in that direction today.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): We
adopt resolution 2220 (2015) today, almost two years
after the Security Council adopted the first-ever
Security Council resolution on small arms and light
weapons (resolution 2117 (2013). It is a pioneering
text, and we should all support it. The new elements
of the resolution will help mitigate the misuse of these
weapons and ultimately advance international peace
and security. It will not change the world, but it will
help shape our collective approach to the issue, and
over time this will make a difference.
The resolution will improve the work of the United
Nations to protect refugees, internally displaced
persons, and women, children and vulnerable groups
from the misuse of small arms and light weapons. It
will enhance the international community’s monitoring
of and compliance with arms embargoes in relation
to these weapons. It will improve how disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes take into
account the effects of small arms and light weapons and
it broadens the focus of the United Nations in making
recommendations to address the impact of these
weapons, specifically on children in armed conflict.
The resolution encourages the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team to provide
recommendations for actions to enhance the response
to threats from terrorist access to small arms and light
weapons. It encourages the United Nations CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate to provide
plans to facilitate assistance and strengthen Member
States’ capacities to respond to the illicit trafficking in
and the misuse of these weapons, and it makes clear the
importance of the Arms Trade Treaty, among other key
international instruments.
Yet despite all of the new, positive and helpful
provisions in the text, it is troubling that some Council
members were unable to support it and risked derailing

S/PV.7447

it for an ulterior political objective. The resolution
recognizes
“the importance of preventing the illicit transfers
and sales of weapons and ammunition, including
small arms and light weapons, to armed groups and
criminal networks that target civilians and civilian
objects” (resolution 2220 (2015), para. 20).
It also emphasizes that
“the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons can aid terrorism and illegal armed groups
and facilitate increasing levels of transnational
organized crime” (ibid., eighteenth preambular
para.).
Furthermore, in the resolution, the Council
reaffirms
“its decision that States shall eliminate the supply of
weapons, including small arms and light weapons,
to terrorists” (ibid., para. 19).
Despite the clear language and several significant
compromises, a few Council members demanded that
certain terms be used that have absolutely no precedent
in the Council’s prior resolutions on small arms and
light weapons. We are disappointed that a few Council
members would be willing to throw out a resolution that
they almost entirely agree with and that they know will
make a positive contribution in their own countries in
order to cling to one specific term for political purposes,
a term that is ill-defined and which no delegation in
our negotiations had been able to identify any specific
entity that they would wish covered that is not already
covered by the language in the text.
A good measure of the global support that
the resolution enjoys can be found in the fact that
56 Member States that co-sponsored it. In that context,
we are pleased that the resolution was adopted.
The United States supports it and looks forward to
cooperating with all Member States to implement it.
The President: There are no more speakers on the
list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

15-149869/9
