S/2003/653

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 June 2003
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to Central Africa,
7 to 16 June 2003
I. Introduction
1.
In his letter dated 21 May 2003 (S/2003/558), the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General that the members of the Council had
decided to send a mission to Central Africa from 7 to 16 June 2003, which would be
led by Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sablière. Following consultations among the
members of the Council, it was agreed that the composition of the mission should be
as follows:
France (Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sablière, Head of Mission)
Angola (Ambassador Ismael Abraão Gaspar Martins)
Bulgaria (Ambassador Stefan Tafrov)
Cameroon (Ambassador Martin Chungong Ayafor)
Chile (Ambassador Cristian Maquieira)
China (Ambassador Zhang Yishan)
Germany (Minister Michael Freiherr von Ungern-Sternberg)
Guinea (Minister Counsellor Boubacar Diallo)
Mexico (Minister María Angélica Arce de Jeannet)
Pakistan (Ambassador Masood Khalid)
Russian Federation (Ambassador Alexander Konuzin)
Spain (Ambassador Ana María Menéndez)
Syrian Arab Republic (Ambassador Fayssal Mekdad)
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (Ambassador Adam
Thomson)
United States of America (Ambassador John D. Negroponte)
2.

The terms of reference of the mission are annexed to document S/2003/558.

3.
The Security Council mission left New York on 7 June and returned on 16
June. During that period, the mission visited Pretoria, Luanda, Kinshasa, Bunia,
03-39553 (E)

180603

*0339553*

S/2003/653

Bujumbura, Kigali, Dar-es-Salaam and Entebbe. The mission met with the President
of South Africa, Thabo Mbeki; the President of Angola, José Eduardo dos Santos;
the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Joseph Kabila; the President
of Burundi, Domitien Ndayizeye; the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame; the
President of the United Republic of Tanzania, Benjamin Mkapa; and the President of
Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. The mission also met in Pretoria with Deputy
President Jacob Zuma of South Africa; in Kinshasa with the Commission nationale
de suivi, the International Committee to Support the Transition, and two of the four
Vice-Presidents designate of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Members of the
mission also met with representatives of the Rassemblement congolais pour la
démocratie (RCD) (Goma) and the Movement for the Liberation of the Congo. The
mission met in Bunia with the Commander of the Interim Emergency Multinational
Force (IEMF) and the Ituri interim administration; in Bujumbura with senior
members of the Government of Burundi; the Implementation Monitoring
Committee; the Chief of the African Union mission and the Commander of the
African Union Force. Some members of the mission met with local representatives
of international NGOs and representatives of Burundian women’s organizations. In
Pretoria, the mission met with the Chairman and two members of the Expert Panel
on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In Kinshasa, Bujumbura and Kigali, the mission
was briefed by the United Nations Observer Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), the United Nations Office in Burundi and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region. In Kinshasa,
the mission participated in a ceremony at MONUC headquarters to commemorate
MONUC peacekeepers who had lost their lives. The mission also met, while in
Kinshasa, with the Special Representative of the European Union for the Great
Lakes Region, Aldo Ajello. The mission was accompanied from Luanda onwards by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Amos Namanga Ngongi, and from Bujumbura by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Burundi, Berhanu Dinka.

II. Democratic Republic of the Congo
Political transition
4.
One of the primary objectives of this, the fourth mission of the Security
Council to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and neighbouring countries, was
to encourage the Congolese parties to put into practice, with the least possible
further delay, the global and all inclusive accord on the establishment of a
transitional government for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The mission
recalled that the Security Council was committed to the creation of a strong, healthy,
viable Congolese State. While the Security Council mission noted the progress made
so far, members also manifested their disappointment at the slow pace of
implementation. In the view of the Security Council mission, the time for war had
passed and the time had come to carry out the political agreements the parties had
already signed. The leadership of President Kabila himself should be fully engaged
in order to prevail upon all parties to put the national ahead of the factional interest.
The mission pointed out that the international community, which looked forward to
contributing to the reconstruction of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, would
be better able to increase its support when a transitional Government was in place.

2

S/2003/653

The mission noted that the date announced in its presence by the Commission
nationale de suivi for the establishment of the transitional Government was 16 June,
the date of its return to New York, and that the transitional Government was to be
fully in place by 30 June, the anniversary of the independence of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Accordingly, the mission registered its expectation with all
the parties concerned that a functioning transitional Congolese Government would
be set up by 30 June, with a unified national army capable of the defence of its
national borders and population, and a developing economy in control of the
country’s natural resources.
5.
The mission believes that, on the basis of agreements already reached, most of
the work required to establish a transitional Government in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, with a unified national army, has already been completed. However,
the remaining steps to be taken may well prove among the most difficult.
6.
The mission expects the Congolese parties to establish a functioning
transitional Government by 30 June 2003, in accordance with undertakings provided
to the mission during its visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Persistent fighting and outbreaks of violence in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo
7.
The mission also made clear its deep concern at the persistent fighting that
continued to afflict Bunia and North and South Kivu, in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. This fighting was not only inconsistent with the quest for a
political solution, it also posed the risk that political agreements might be
undermined and their credibility called into question. All parties should therefore
cease all hostile military activity. The mission, in its meetings and contacts, called
for all parties in North Kivu to withdraw their forces to the positions previously
agreed. Furthermore, the gross and widespread violations of human rights that have
accompanied the fighting in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including murder, rape and the destruction of property, the large-scale displacement
of civilians from their homes, the use of child soldiers, the illegal exploitation of
natural resources and even the reported incidence of cannibalism, were cause for
extreme dismay and should be stopped forthwith. It was also noted that these
problems were exacerbated by influence from neighbouring countries.
8.
Among the proposals mentioned in this context included a possible agreement
on a declaration of good neighbourliness, which might subsequently be formalized
as a treaty. The organization of the eventual international conference on the Great
Lakes Region should be seen in this context. The mission expected that the Security
Council would be kept informed of developments in respect of this important
conference.
9.
The mission took note of the preparatory steps taken in connection with the
international conference on the Great Lakes Region. The mission felt that, if
properly conceived, the international conference could help to address and resolve
the long-term peace and security issues, following the necessary progress of the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi. The region’s
ownership of the process would be important to ensure its success.

3

S/2003/653

Situation at Bunia
10. The mission spent 12 June visiting Bunia and consulting there with
representatives of the Ituri Pacification Commission and its organs, as well as the
humanitarian community. The mission was struck by the depopulation of some parts
of the city, as well as the highly visible presence of child soldiers it observed in the
streets as it passed. The mission is aware that it is the Union des patriotes congolais
(UPC) that holds and surrounds the town of Bunia and currently controls the access
routes.
11. The Council Mission received briefings from the commander of the Interim
Emergency Multinational Force. The mission of IEMF was to ensure the security of
the sites where it was deployed, to control access to the town, to prevent movements
of armed personnel in and towards the town, to project its presence, particularly
through foot patrols, and to establish a rapid reaction reserve for any eventuality.
The mission took note of the high level of cooperation between IEMF and the
MONUC force. All the mission’s various interlocutors throughout the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region as a whole expressed support for IEMF. The
head of mission paid a tribute to the courage and dedication of the Uruguayan
contingent of MONUC.
12. The mission also heard Pétronille Vaweka, President of the Special Interim
Assembly, and Emmanuel Leku Apuobo, principal coordinator of the Interim
Executive Organ of Ituri. The mission was impressed by the dignity and sense of
commitment conveyed by these two representatives of the interim administration,
which currently represents the sole source of legitimate authority in the Ituri region.
They requested international contributions to reconstruction projects to help
consolidate the restoration of peace. The mission, noting the actions already taken
that had culminated in the deployment of MONUC and of IEMF, expressed the view
that the problems of Ituri could best be resolved in the context of the broader
political agreement to be reached in Kinshasa among the Congolese parties, so that
Iturian issues, institutions and actors could be integrated into the national
transitional political process. The mission welcomed MONUC’s intention to
facilitate this. In this context, the mission heard proposals from some of its
interlocutors for the creation of a criminal tribunal for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
13. The mission reflected deeply on steps that might be taken to improve security
for the people of Ituri in the short and medium terms. They devoted particular
attention to the questions of what was likely to happen when the current mandate of
IEMF expired on 1 September 2003, and what mandate and means would have to be
provided to any successor force in order to safeguard the gains that had been made
and prevent a relapse into violence, both in the city of Bunia and in Ituri as a whole.
In this respect, some of the mission’s interlocutors pointed out that if MONUC was
to take over from IEMF as from 2 September, it should be given, at least for a
limited period of time, the same mandate and means as IEMF. Otherwise, MONUC
would not enjoy the necessary credibility in the eyes of the local militias. What was
required was a mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
with sufficient strength to carry it out. Some interlocutors proposed a mission of as
many as 3,000 troops for the whole Ituri region. These interlocutors noted that, if
this were not done, the various militias around Bunia would seize the opportunity of
the departure of the Interim Emergency Multinational Force to resume their

4

S/2003/653

depredations in the presence of a force they judged less capable. Furthermore, the
mission’s interlocutors pointed out that while IEMF would, during the period of its
deployment, provide Bunia with stability, the rest of Ituri would remain vulnerable
to the activities of the various militias. The mission therefore called on those of its
interlocutors in the region with influence on the armed groups and militias to exert
pressure in favour of a cessation of hostilities and the restoration of calm. Mission
members were careful not to make any commitments regarding the size or nature of
MONUC’s future mandate, pointing out that this would be the subject of Council
discussion upon return to New York.
14. The mission noted further that the return of stability in Bunia could not depend
purely on a military approach. While it had been necessary to deploy IEMF as a
matter of urgency to achieve the objectives set forth in resolution 1484 (2003), the
deployment of military forces alone would not suffice to permit a return to stability
in the medium term. A political settlement was urgently required. The parties to the
conflict in Ituri must understand that it was in their interest to find a solution to their
disputes within the context of the Ituri Pacification Commission (IPC), the only
legitimate framework that included all the actors in Ituri. The return of calm to
Bunia, which the deployment of IEMF made possible, should thus allow MONUC to
resume and develop its indispensable political role in reinvigorating the IPC process
and integrating it with the national political transition process; the mission cautioned
against any attempt to disrupt that political process. The Congolese parties had to
work within it, but the States of the region, which support or supported the armed
groups or the militias operating in Ituri, also had responsibilities in the matter. The
States of the region should take all necessary measures to end the supply of arms to
militias and armed groups, and countries should use their positive influence to
prevail upon the militias and armed groups to abandon the military option and
participate in the political process. Some members mentioned the possibility that the
Security Council might have to consider whether MONUC should have two separate
mandates — on the one hand a variable mandate for Ituri and Bunia, and on the
other a mandate for the rest of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Security
Council may wish to discuss this further.
15. While in Bunia, the mission also met representatives of humanitarian and
women’s organizations and was briefed in detail on the plight of the civilian
population, particularly those displaced from their homes, the blockage of
humanitarian access owing to insecurity, and the gross and widespread violations of
human rights against the civilian population, particularly women, children and
minorities.
16. The mission found Bunia, for the moment, calm but tense. How long that
relative calm can last, with the International Emergency Multinational Force still
now in the process of deploying, is not known. What is clear is that the suffering
population of Bunia deserves as much assistance as the international community can
provide, whether to meet the immediate security need or through eventual
reconstruction and development programmes, which would assist in the sustainment
of stability in the long term.
17. For its part, the mission sees a clear need for the demilitarization of Bunia; for
the securing of the city by an IEMF/MONUC capable of maintaining order in
support of the Ituri interim administration; for control of the access roads to prevent
the return of armed groups to the city, thus permitting the administration to continue

5

S/2003/653

its work; for the provision of support and protection to the interim institutions
established with the help of MONUC, which represent the beginnings of a
democratic administration; and for the expansion, albeit gradual, into Ituri as a
whole of the authority of the interim administration in secure conditions. Wider
secure humanitarian access, the safe return home of those who have been displaced,
the energetic follow-up of allegations of serious crimes and human rights violations,
and the widening of humanitarian access to populations at risk are also required.
18. The mission was also made aware of persistent allegations of the continued
supply of arms to the belligerents by outside parties, including foreign parties, and
was presented with proposals on possible measures to verify and cut off that supply.
In particular, the mission discussed with its interlocutors the possibility of imposing
an arms embargo on Ituri, as recommended by the Secretary-General in his report of
27 May 2003. Many of the mission’s interlocutors expressed support for this
approach, and some stressed that in order to be effective an embargo should be
enforced and monitored.
Military situation in North Kivu
19. The mission was informed while in Kinshasa that RCD (Goma) forces had
taken the town of Kanyabayonga, in North Kivu, just as the mission was seeking to
convince the Congolese parties in Kinshasa to devote themselves to the political
transition process. The offensive launched by RCD (Goma) in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo thus represents not only a violation of the
agreements but also a threat to the pursuit of the political process, and the mission
vigorously condemns it. Members of the mission who met with RCD (Goma)
representatives in Kinshasa demanded that it cease hostilities forthwith and
withdraw its forces to the positions earlier agreed. The mission also expressed its
full support for the efforts of Special Representative Ngongi to meet with
representatives of RCD (Goma), the Government and RCD (K/ML) to conclude an
agreement on mutual disengagement and local confidence-building measures.
20. The military offensives conducted by RCD (Goma) in North and South Kivu
are particularly damaging to MONUC’s voluntary disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and resettlement or repatriation operations, many of which have been
disrupted by military activity. Members of the mission drew the particular attention
of RCD (Goma) representatives, and subsequently of the Rwandan Government, to
their views on these disruptions, which seemed to go far beyond coincidence. While
the deployment of the MONUC task force based at Kindu will help improve the
situation considerably, the creation of a climate of security and confidence in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, without which voluntary disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or repatriation cannot succeed, is
primarily the responsibility of the parties concerned, especially the de facto local
authorities that control the areas in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
where disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or repatriation is
to be carried out. It is they who will be held accountable for any failure to proceed
rapidly with disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or
repatriation. MONUC discussed with the mission measures it might take to give
voluntary disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or
repatriation the best chance of success.

6

S/2003/653

The end of impunity
21. The mission stressed to all its interlocutors that impunity would no longer be
tolerated, and that those responsible for crimes should expect to be held accountable
for them. This responsibility was considered to extend to the leaders of armed
factions guilty of serious crimes.
22. The mission deplores the impunity that characterizes much of the fighting and
the accompanying human rights abuses and humanitarian crises in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The murder and mass rape of unarmed civilians,
the destruction and looting of property, the expulsion of families from their homes
and the use of child soldiers are very grave crimes and those responsible should be
held accountable. The mission is aware of well documented cases, and has appealed
for more specific information and eyewitness testimony, that it intends to follow up.
Impunity can no longer be tolerated. The mission made its position clear to the
leaders of all Congolese parties and neighbouring countries during its visit. The
mission considers leaders responsible for the acts of their followers, particularly
when the parties concerned are the de facto local authorities and where the mission
is aware of no evidence of any action taken by those authorities to prevent or punish
the crimes in question.
Recommendations
23. The recommendations made by the mission to the Security Council are
informed not only by its visit to the countries of the region but also by the second
special report of the Secretary-General of 27 May 2003 (S/2003/566). As noted
above, however, the mission chose to concentrate its attention on the following
important questions requiring urgent attention: the installation of the transitional
Government and the creation of a unified national army; the situation in Bunia, the
situation in North Kivu; the need for the countries of the region to exert a positive
influence on the situation; and the end of impunity. The mission will therefore
confine its specific recommendations to those matters.
24. The mission recommends that the Security Council be prepared to pledge its
full support to the transitional Government to be established in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo by 30 June 2003; that the Council be prepared to call on
bilateral and multilateral donors to render all possible assistance in the
reconstruction of the country, including in the development of a capable unified
armed forces and police service, and to promote its further development by all
possible means and on an urgent basis.
25. The mission further judges that the installation of the Congolese transitional
Government and the successful conclusion of a ceasefire in Burundi could clear the
way for the possible convening of an international conference on the Great Lakes
Region, whose objective should be carefully defined and well prepared.
26. The mission is deeply concerned, not only by the present situation in Bunia but
also by the possibility of further fighting, humanitarian catastrophe and human
rights violations after the current emergency measures expire on 1 September. The
present calm is fragile. The severe logistical constraints on any international force,
combined with the widespread tendency to lawlessness and violence, against a
background of reports of the supply of arms from outside sources, must be taken
carefully into account when the Security Council decides on measures aimed at

7

S/2003/653

consolidating and restoring the peace of Bunia and taking forward the Ituri political
process, particularly taking into account the eventual withdrawal of the International
Emergency Multinational Force.
27. The mission recommends to the Security Council that it increase pressure on
the parties, both in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and throughout the
region, to ensure that the necessary guarantees are provided to MONUC to permit its
verification activities. A number of troubling allegations have been made which
have seriously damaged confidence, without which the peace process will remain
uncertain. Supporting MONUC’s efforts in investigating these various allegations
should be the priority of all the parties to the conflict.
28. The international community has made some progress in establishing and
strengthening mechanisms to enforce international criminal justice. Both in Ituri and
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as a whole, impunity is rampant and
should no longer be tolerated. The mission recommends that consideration be given
to what practical steps can be taken to end impunity in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi.
29. The mission was presented with indications that the illegal exploitation of
natural resources, the spoils of which served both to enrich some of the individuals
concerned and to fuel the continuation of the conflict, was still being perpetrated.
The mission recommends that the Security Council be prepared to consider carefully
and act on the recommendations to be made by the Expert Panel in its forthcoming
report.
30. The mission will continue to reflect on the impressions it formed during its
visit to Bunia, in the light of the success of IEMF and of subsequent developments,
in order to define what could be the most effective role for MONUC in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo peace process, including the possibility of a
more robust mandate, taking into account the departure of IEMF.
31. The Security Council will continue to follow closely the roles and activities of
the States of the region in the light of the responsibilities borne by those States to
assist the Congolese parties and the international community by using their positive
influence to find peaceful solutions to the conflict both in Ituri and in the wider
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

III. Burundi
32. The Security Council mission visited Bujumbura from 12 to 14 June. The
objective of the mission was to demonstrate the support of the Council for the
second phase of the political transition, at a time when the peace process was facing
particular challenges. The mission decided to concentrate on a limited number of
issues which require urgent attention: the cessation of hostilities, through a political
process and in the framework of the Arusha Agreement of 28 August 2000; support
for the African mission; the mobilization of economic and financial assistance to the
country; and the fight against impunity.
33. The mission held consultations in Burundi with President Ndayizeye, VicePresident Kadege, and the President of the Senate, Mr. Bararunyeretse, Special
Representative Dinka, the Implementation Monitoring Committee, the African
Union and the African Mission in Burundi. Contacts were also established with the

8

S/2003/653

Front pour la défense de la démocratie (FDD) (Pierre Nkurunziza) and the Forces
nationales de libération (FNL) (Agathon Rwasa). The mission also consulted with
the Facilitator of the Burundi Peace process, Vice-President Jacob Zuma of South
Africa, as well as with Presidents Mkapa and Museveni.
Transitional institutions
34. The mission expressed its support for the Burundian parties in their
implementation of the second phase of the transition, which began when the
Presidency of the Republic was handed over to Mr. Ndayizeye on 30 April. The
mission recalled that the Security Council had welcomed the peaceful transfer of
power. All the mission’s interlocutors in Burundi expressed their satisfaction at the
transfer of power. The mission stressed that the transitional institutions should
continue to undertake the reforms as provided for in the Arusha Agreement,
particularly in the security sector, the judiciary and the organization of the elections.
Security situation and ceasefire negotiations
35. All the interlocutors of the mission, both national and international, stressed
that the continuation of fighting was the most serious obstacle to the full
implementation of the Arusha peace process. They urged the mission to exert strong
pressure on both parties to cease hostilities: on FNL to enter into serious ceasefire
negotiations and on FDD to implement the ceasefire agreement it had signed. Some
insisted that countries that had an influence on FNL and FDD should put pressure on
the movements, noting that a summit of the regional initiative was going to be
organized soon. Others stressed that the full implementation of the ceasefire
agreements would positively influence the movements to join the process.
36. The mission expressed concern at the very slow pace of ceasefire negotiations
between the Government and FDD and FNL. The mission called on the rebel groups
to cease hostilities immediately and join the Arusha process. The mission
emphasized that the solution of the conflict was to be found in the political process
provided by the Arusha Agreement. The mission reminded the rebel groups that
there were no alternative processes and that joining the Arusha process was in their
own interest. In parallel, the Army would have to exercise restraint. The mission
encouraged the Government to continue to display flexibility in order to make room
for the rebel groups in the institutions created by the Arusha Agreement. The
Government and the rebels would have to work out a reasonable accommodation.
Both parties reiterated their commitments to the peace and ensured the mission that
they would do their utmost to resolve outstanding issues.
37. The mission encouraged the transitional Government to put in place measures
to enable some FDD combatants in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to be
repatriated voluntarily to Burundi. The mission believes that such a repatriation
exercise would constitute a positive confidence-building measure towards
Burundian combatants still outside the country. On a more general note, the mission
suggested to the transitional Government that it initiate preparation for the
repatriation of Burundian refugees and the return to their homes of internally
displaced persons.

9

S/2003/653

African mission
38. The Political Head and the Force Commander of the African Mission gave a
detailed briefing on the status of deployment of the African Mission in Burundi
(AMIB). They indicated that the preparation of the cantonment sites was seriously
hampered by the failure of the parties to provide the location and troop strength to
the Joint Ceasefire Commission (JCC). They also urged the mission to appeal to
FDD to send its representatives to JCC. Support for AMIB and JCC was also
strongly requested by the transitional authorities. The mission reiterated the
Council’s continued support for AMIB on three levels: political support from the
Council, financial support from the donor community and technical support from the
United Nations Secretariat. However, these efforts must be pursued and expanded.
Combating impunity
39. The mission discussed with the transitional Government and the armed
movements the issue of combating impunity, and accountability for past and
continuing human rights violations. The mission stressed that those responsible for
violations of international humanitarian law would be prosecuted for any crimes
they committed. The transitional Government indicated that several steps had
recently been taken in that regard. It asked the mission to respond positively to the
request of the transitional Government for the establishment of an international
judiciary commission of inquiry, as provided for in the Arusha Agreement, to help
Burundi put an end to impunity. The transitional Government stressed the
importance of such a commission as an indispensable tool to address the question of
impunity and thus to facilitate genuine national reconciliation.
Humanitarian and economic situation
40. The humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate alarmingly. Some members
of the mission met with representatives of Burundian women’s organizations and,
separately, with humanitarian and human rights international organizations, and
were briefed in detail on the prevailing situation as well as on the increasing
difficulties they faced in carrying out their activities. The Burundian authorities
appealed to the mission to urge the donor community to accelerate the disbursement
of the pledges made in Paris and Geneva conferences and to provide budgetary and
balance of payments support. The mission acknowledges that there should be some
dividends to peace and indicates that it will follow closely the results of the donor
conference to be organized in September by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) aimed at clearing Burundi’s arrears.
Conclusion and recommendations
41. The Burundi peace process is at a critical juncture. Every effort should be
made to ensure its success. The mission considers that the outcome of the peace
process is primarily the responsibility of the Burundian parties. Nevertheless, the
mission believes that the international community should make every effort to assist
the Burundians in this regard.
42. The mission recommends that the Security Council call on the international
financial community to assist AMIB with adequate financial and logistical
assistance and on the Secretary-General to provide appropriate expertise.

10

S/2003/653

43. The mission sees a clear need for providing adequate budgetary and economic
support to the transitional Government. There is a risk that all the gains achieved so
far could collapse if such assistance is not provided immediately. The mission
recommends that the Council urge donor countries to fulfil the commitments they
made at the Paris and Geneva conferences. The mission, which welcomes the
convening in September 2003 of a donor round table organized by UNDP to help
clear Burundi’s arrears, will recommend to the Council to continue to follow up
closely this point with the international financial community.
44. The Security Council mission notes that urgent attention should be paid to
putting an end to impunity in Burundi. The mission recommends that the Security
Council assist Burundi in this regard and that it consider carefully the Government’s
request for the establishment of the international judicial commission of inquiry as
provided for in the Arusha Agreement.
45. The mission feels that strong support should be provided to the efforts made by
heads of State in the subregion to promote a settlement between FDD and the
transitional Government, consistent with the Arusha Agreement peace process.
***
46. The mission wishes to express its appreciation to the heads of States who met
with the mission to share their views. This mission is also very grateful to Special
Representatives Ngongi and Dinka for the sound advice and impeccable
arrangements made for the mission’s visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Burundi. The mission also wishes to thank the United Nations Development
Programme and other United Nations agencies for the faultless logistical support
made on its behalf in Johannesburg, Pretoria, Luanda, Bujumbura, Kigali, Dar-esSalaam and Entebbe, as well as the Secretariat staff who accompanied it for their
unfailing support.

11
