United Nations

A/RES/65/92

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 January 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 104

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 8 December 2010
[on the report of the First Committee (A/65/417)]

65/92. Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological)
and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to the complete and effective
prohibition of bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons and to their destruction,
Noting with satisfaction that there are one hundred and sixty-three States
parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction, 1 including all the permanent members of the Security Council,
0F

Bearing in mind its call upon all States parties to the Convention to participate
in the implementation of the recommendations of the Review Conferences of the
Parties to the Convention, including the exchange of information and data agreed to
in the Final Declaration of the Third Review Conference, 2 and to provide such
information and data in conformity with standardized procedure to the SecretaryGeneral on an annual basis and no later than 15 April,
1F

Welcoming the reaffirmation made in the Final Declaration of the Fourth
Review Conference that under all circumstances the use of bacteriological
(biological) and toxin weapons and their development, production and stockpiling
are effectively prohibited under article I of the Convention, 3
2F

Recalling the decision reached at the Sixth Review Conference to hold four
annual meetings of the States parties of one week’s duration each year commencing
in 2007, prior to the Seventh Review Conference, which is to be held no later than
the end of 2011, and to hold a one-week meeting of experts to prepare for each
meeting of the States parties, 4
3F

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1015, No. 14860.
See BWC/CONF.III/23, part II.
3
See BWC/CONF.IV/9, part II.
4
See BWC/CONF.VI/6, part III.
2

10-51806

*1051806*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/92

1.
Calls upon all signatory States that have not yet ratified the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction1 to do so
without delay, and calls upon those States that have not signed the Convention to
become parties thereto at an early date, thus contributing to the achievement of
universal adherence to the Convention;
0H

Welcomes the information and data provided to date, and reiterates its
2.
call upon all States parties to the Convention to participate in the exchange of
information and data agreed to in the Final Declaration of the Third Review
Conference of the Parties to the Convention;2
1H

3.
Also welcomes the successful holding of meetings as part of the 2007–
2010 intersessional process, and in this context also welcomes the discussion aimed
at the promotion of common understanding and effective action on topics agreed at
the Sixth Review Conference;4
2H

4.
Notes with satisfaction that the Sixth Review Conference agreed on
several measures to update the mechanism for the transmission of information
within the framework of the confidence-building measures;4
3H

5.
Recalls the decisions reached at the Sixth Review Conference,4 and calls
upon States parties to the Convention to participate in their implementation;
4H

6.
Urges States parties to continue to work closely with the Implementation
Support Unit of the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat in fulfilling its
mandate, in accordance with the decision of the Sixth Review Conference;4
5H

7.
Notes the proposal to hold the meeting of the Preparatory Committee for
the Seventh Review Conference in April 2011 and to hold the Seventh Review
Conference in Geneva in December 2011;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to render the necessary
8.
assistance to the depositary Governments and to provide such services as may be
required for the implementation of the decisions and recommendations of the
Review Conferences, including all assistance to the annual meetings of the States
parties and the meetings of experts, and to render the necessary assistance and to
provide such services as may be required for the Seventh Review Conference and
the preparations for it;
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the
9.
item entitled “Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction”.
60th plenary meeting
8 December 2010

2
