V.

dorsed the conclusions of the Committee for Programme
and Co-ordination at its twenty-sixth session, concerning
the United Nations special responsibility for carrying out
research on global and sectoral issues, and their interrelationship, in order to assist Member States and the deliberations of the competent intergovernmental bodies,
Believing in the usefulness of integrating economic and
social components in the formulation of policies and programmes at the national and international levels for the
benefit of social and economic progress and human wellbeing,
Stressing that the eradication of hunger and malnutrition and the solution of other economic and social problems on the basis of industrial, agricultura! and rural development are among the objectives of the Third United
Nations Development Decade,
Recalling the United Nations Programme of Action for
African Economic Recovery and Development 19861990, adopted b the General Assembly at its thirteenth
special session, 3
Reaffirming that each State has the sovereign and inalienable right to choose its economic and social system in
accordance with the will of its people and without outside
interference,
l. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
a unified approach to development analysis and planning,
in particular the observations and conclusions contained
therein; 31
2. Considers that an integrated approach to development analysis and planning, which takes into account differing economic, social and political features of national
economies, is one of the tools for the attainment of sustained social, economic and human development;
3. Invites States to support the efforts of developing
countries, if they so request, to strengthen their management capacity to apply a unified approach to development
analysis and comprehensive macro-economic strategies
and planning, especially with regard to integrating food
and agricultural production in all sectors and supporting
industrialization, economic and social infrastructure and
human resources development;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take into account
a unified approach to development analysis and planning
when preparing economic and social studies, ongoing research, projections and reports, including the World Economic Survey and the Report on the World Social
Situation, as well as the appraisal of the implementation of
the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to
make available to States the experience gained in the use of
a unified approach to development analysis and planning,
taking into account the fact that new ideas relating to the
promotion of social and economic development are
emerging.

6

98th plenary meeting
5 December 1986

30 Resolution S-13/2, annex.
11 A/41/323-E/1986/77 and Corr.1

139

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

and Add.1

41/175.

University for Peace

The General Assembly,
Reca/ling its resolutions 33/109 of 18 December 1978,
34/111 of 14 December 1979 and 35/55 of 5 December
1980,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolutions
1985/2 of 24 May 1985 and 1986/6 of 21 May 1986,
Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/6.
98th plenary meeting
5 December 1986

41/180.

Net transfer ofresources from developing to developed countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/56 of 22 July 1986,
Profoundly concerned at the net transfer of resources
from developing to developed countries, which is taking
place at alarming levels and accelerating rates and which
is adversely affecting the development efforts of developing countries and the living conditions of their people,
l. Reaffirms the urgent need to take appropriate and
effecti ve meas u res in the fields of money, finan ce, debt, resource flows, trade and development, in order to halt and
reverse the net transfer of resources from developing to developed countries;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the report called for in Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/56, also to take duly into account the interrelationship between the issues of money, finance, debt, resource
flows, trade and development.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/181.

Assistance to the Palestinian people

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 40/170 of 17 December 1985,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/49 of 22 July 1986,
Recalling further the Programme of Action for the
Achievement of Palestinian Rights, adopted by the lnternational Conference on the Question of Palestine, 32
Noting that the programme of economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people requested in General Assembly resolution 38/145 of 19 December 1983 has not
been prepared,
Noting the increasing need to provide economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people,
1. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
assistance to the Palestinian people; 33
2. Welcomes the decision of the Secretary-General to
send a mission to prepare the programme of economic and
social assistance to the Palestinian people requested in
General Assembly resolution 38/145;

32 Report of the International Conference on the Question of Palestine,
Geneva. 29 August-7 September 1983 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.83.1.21), chap. I, sect. B.
13 A/41/,l<l and C'orr.1 and Add 1 and 2.

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

140

3. Notes the meeting on assistance to the Palestinian
people held at Geneva on 2 July 1986 in response to General Assembly resolution 40/170;
4. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General for
convening the meeting on assistance to the Palestinian
people;
5. Regards such a meeting as a valuable opportunity to
assess progress in economic and social assistance to the
Palestinian people and to explore ways and means of enhancing such assistance;
6. Urges the international community, the United
Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to disburse their aid or any
other forro of assistance to the occupied Palestinian territories only for the benefit of the Palestinian people and in
a manner that will not serve to prolong the Israeli occupation;
1. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To convene in 1987 a meeting ofthe relevant programmes, organizations, agencies, funds and bodies of the
United Nations system to consider economic and social
assistance to the Palestinian people;
(b) To invite the Palestine Liberation Organization,
the Arab host countries and relevant intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations to participate in the
meeting;
8. Requests the international community, the United
Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to sustain and increase their
assistance to the Palestinian people in co-operation with
the Palestine Liberation Organization;
9. A/so requests that United Nations assistance to the
Palestinians in the Arab host countries should be rendered
in co-operation with the Palestine Liberation Organization and with the consent of the Arab host Government
concerned;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
100th p/enary meeting
8 December 1986
41/182.

lndigenous entrepreneurs in economic development

The General Assemb/y,
Reaffirming the right of each country, in accordance
with its chosen economic and social system and priorities,
to determine its objectives, to endeavour to fulfil its development plans, to strengthen the public and prívate sectors
of its economy and to promote the development of its human resources,
Recognizing the responsibility of the international community, in particular of the developed countries, to promote and endeavour to provide an equitable international
economic environment, supportive of the development of
developing countries, in the light of the goals and objectives of the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade, 34
Recognizing a/so the role and responsibility of each Government to promote development and provide an environment conducive to it.

Reaffirming its resolution 34/137 of 14 December 1979
on the role of the public sector in promoting the economic
development of developing countries, as well as Economic
and Social Council resolutions 1985/10 of28 May l 985 on
public administration and finance for development and
1986/73 of 23 July 1986 on the development of human resources,
Noting that indigenous entrepreneurs can play a crucial
and positive role in mobilizing resources and promoting
economic growth and socio-economic development,
Aware that many countries are actively seeking to encourage, strengthen and improve the effectiveness of indigenous entrepreneurs in expanding and modernizing
productive capacities, particularly by increasing productivity and technological capabilities, and in contributing
generally to the development process,
Bearing in mind that the promotion and development of
indigenous entrepreneurs requires a dynamic capital formation process in developing countries, which is also related to financia) and technical resources and to broader
market opportunities available to these countries,
Recognizing that people are the mainspring and inspiration of social and economic progress,
l. Invites the Secretary-General and relevant organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system,
such as the regional commissions, the United Nations Development Programme, the lnternational Labour Organisation, the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/
GATT, the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization and the World Bank, as well as regional development banks, within their existing mandates, programmes and priorities:
(a) To continue to support, through, inter afia, technical co-operation projects, the efforts ofStates in encouraging indigenous entrepreneurs in the prívate, public and/or
other sectors in accordance with national laws, priorities
and regulations;
(b) To facilitate the practica) exchange of information
and experience among all countries on the role of indigenous entrepreneurs in economic development;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to study measures
at the national and international levels to promote the
contribution of indigenous entrepreneurs in both prívate
and public sectors to the economic development of developing countries, drawing upon the work already in progress in the United Nations system and bearing in mind
the need to avoid duplication of effort and cost, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-third
session through the Economic and Social Council.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/183.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/218 of 19 December 1979 on
the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development,
Affirming resolution 6 (VIII) of 6 June 1986 of the lntergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for
Development 3'\ and decision 86/38 of 27 June 1986 of the
JS Official

34 Resolution

35/56. annt'\.

United Nations Financing System for Science
and Technology for Development

Records of" thl! General A.,semblv. Forty-Jir.st Ses.,ion,
•

Supp/em('I/( No. 3' (A/41 /37), sed. 11.A
