S/PV.9088

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9088th meeting

Monday, 11 July 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Aguiar Barboza. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Gupta
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-41759 (E)
*2241759*

S/PV.9088

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, and Ms. Joyce Msuya, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Grundberg.
Mr. Grundberg: Allow me to start by extending
my warmest wishes to Yemenis and Muslims around
the world on the occasion of Eid Al-Adha — a time
to celebrate and reflect on the values of selflessness
and compassion, principles that should guide us as we
work towards a more peaceful and prosperous future
for Yemen.
With a deadline for the truce extension a mere
three weeks away, I want to take this opportunity,
first, to highlight what has been achieved in the three
and a half months of the truce; secondly, discuss some
of the obstacles we have faced in its implementation
and how we are working to overcome them and;
thirdly, outline a way forward that includes extending,
consolidating and expanding the truce so as to increase
the benefits to the people of Yemen and move towards
a political settlement.
To date, the truce has been holding for over three
months. It has resulted in a significant two-thirds
reduction in civilian casualties, as compared to the
three months before the truce began. Due to the sharp
decline in hostilities, conflict-related civilian casualties
are now mostly due to landmines and unexploded
ordnance, which continue to pose a threat to civilians,
including children, as they return to areas where
hostilities have decreased.
2/19

11/07/2022

We continue to receive reports from both sides
about alleged incidents inside Yemen, including
direct and indirect fire, drone attacks, reconnaissance
overflights and the establishment of new fortifications
and trenches. The parties are also allegedly sending
reinforcements to the main front lines, including in
Ma’rib, Al-Hudaydah and Taiz. As the Council is aware,
my Office is supporting the parties in establishing
channels of communication in order to help them
manage such incidents in a peaceful manner.
I am pleased to report that last week my
Office convened the third meeting of the Military
Coordination Committee, comprised of representatives
of the parties, in addition to the coalition’s joint forces
command. During the meeting, the sides discussed the
formation of the joint coordination room that will be
tasked with the escalating incidents at the operational
level and appointed a working group that commenced
detailed, technical discussions to consolidate proposals
in that regard.
The renewal of the truce on 2 June has allowed the
continued flow of fuel into Al-Hudaydah port. Since
the truce renewal, seven fuel ships, carrying nearly
200,000 metric tons of various fuel products, have
been cleared to enter Al-Hudaydah port. High fuel
prices have chipped away at the benefit for Yemeni
citizens. But there is no doubt that, without the imports
facilitated by the truce, the situation would be far worse.
The flow of fuel imports has helped avoid disruptions
to essential public services that depend partly on
fuel — such as clean water, health care, electricity and
transportation — and has made a valuable difference to
the daily lives and well-being of Yemenis. The United
Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism for
Yemen (UNVIM) has played a pivotal role in facilitating
the smooth import of fuel ships into Al-Hudaydah, as
mandated by the Council. I am deeply concerned that a
shortage of funds could result in the closure of UNVIM
in September.
Efforts to enhance the freedom of movement for men
and women inside Yemen, as well as into and outside of
Yemen, must continue. Since the start of the truce, 15
commercial round-trip flights have transported almost
7,000 passengers between Sana’a and Amman. We
continue to work closely with the Egyptian authorities
to facilitate regular flights to and from Cairo. I greatly
appreciate the continued engagement of both countries.
While much has been accomplished in facilitating
flights to and from Sana’a airport, we are working to
22-41759

11/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

ensure that a regular schedule of flights can fully meet
the promise of the truce and the expectations on the
Yemeni people.
Let me now turn to Taiz and the issue of the
freedom of movement inside the country. It was my
sincere belief that, by this time in the truce, the parties
would have reached an agreement to open roads in Taiz
and other governorates. It is regrettable for all of us, but
mostly for the men and women of Taiz, that many of the
roads there remain closed for the seventh year in a row.
Opening roads is not only about easing humanitarian
suffering and removing restrictions, but it is also about
beginning to normalize the conditions of everyday life
for Yemenis, including education, work, health services
and the overall economy.
Since my previous briefing (see S/PV.9063), I have
continued to engage the parties, including in Amman
and during my recent visits to Riyadh and Muscat,
on viable proposals to immediately open roads in
Taiz and other governorates. I also continue to draw
on the expertise of local mediators and civil society
representatives. Following discussions with the parties,
my Office shared an updated proposal on the phased
opening of roads. Ansar Allah has since communicated
that it does not accept the latest proposal. Still, my
efforts to reach a negotiated solution will continue.
I would like to take this opportunity to revisit the
terms of the truce in which the parties committed to
meet in order to agree on road openings. In the days
preceding Eid Al-Adha, we saw different sides announce
unilateral actions to open roads. While unilateral
action could be a step in the right direction, agreement
from both sides is important because road openings
require coordination and ongoing communication to
ensure that roads are opened safely and sustainably for
civilian passage.
The United Nations-facilitated process provides a
platform to come to a sustainable negotiated agreement
on road openings. I therefore encourage the parties to
engage constructively with United Nations efforts to
reach an agreement on road openings so that all Yemenis
can begin to feel the tangible benefits of the truce in
their everyday lives. An agreement on road openings in
Taiz and other governorates would be momentous, and
its benefits would reverberate across Yemen.
In recent weeks, we have seen worrisome escalatory
rhetoric by the parties questioning the benefits of the
truce — a dangerous move from which I have asked

S/PV.9088

both sides to refrain. Let us be clear: the alternative
to the truce is a return to hostilities and likely an
intensified phase of conflict, with all of its predictable
consequences for Yemeni civilians and regional
security. I have already outlined the many tangible
benefits of the truce for Yemeni men and women. The
relative calm that it has afforded has also allowed for
the resumption of some public works and encouraged
international investment.
In the light of the increasing fuel prices and the
global economic situation, even more needs to be
done to ensure that electricity and consumer goods
are available and affordable for civilians across the
country. The Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Ms. Joyce Msuya, will speak in more detail
about the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
That brings me to the way forward. Three and a
half months into the truce, we still find ourselves
immersed in the details of the truce’s implementation.
That is important, but it has meant that we have not been
able to invest as much in the task of consolidating and
expanding the truce in order to deliver more benefits
to the population and set Yemen on the path towards a
durable political settlement.
In my discussions with the parties, it has been
made clear that the aim is to achieve a wider array
of economic and security priorities and not lose the
opportunity for peace that the truce provides. Many of
those priorities that the parties raised have also been
highlighted by the diverse groups of Yemeni men and
women that my Office has been consulting since March
to inform a multi-track process.
In the coming weeks, I will continue to explore
with the parties the possibility of a longer extension and
an expanded truce agreement. That would provide time
and the opportunity to start serious discussions on the
economy and security tracks in order to start addressing
priority issues, such as revenues and the payment of
salaries, and begin the process of moving towards
a ceasefire. I asked the parties to engage with me on
those issues with a sense of urgency and flexibility.
The participation of a broad array of Yemeni
stakeholders, including women, young people and
civil society, remains a priority of mine to ensure that
the political settlement is sustainable and meets the
legitimate aspirations and demands of Yemeni men
and women.

22-417593/19

S/PV.9088

The situation in the Middle East

I would like to reiterate my gratitude for the
continued support of the Council, as well as the Sultanate
of Oman, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the broader
international community. The concern and support
of Council members for the full implementation and
extension of the truce, as well as for the way forward,
will be vital in the weeks to come. The truce represents
the best opportunity for peace in Yemen that we have
had in years, and we should encourage and support the
parties to make the most of that opportunity for the
benefit of Yemen as a whole.
The President: I thank Mr. Grundberg for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Msuya.

11/07/2022

supply chains working. Given the acute emergency,
quick action is needed to address those challenges.
In April, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
announced a $3 billion economic support package
for Yemen. We are encouraged by recent discussions
between those donors and Yemen on the way forward
for that package. Once disbursed, it has the potential to
stabilize the economic freefall that is fuelling a rise in
hunger and other needs. That is urgently needed.
We are also encouraged by recent positive exchanges
between the Governments of Yemen and India on
facilitating wheat exports from India. Commercial
wheat imports from India have emerged as a key supply
line for Yemen in the wake of the Ukraine war.

Ms. Msuya: Yemen’s humanitarian catastrophe
is about to get much worse. The truce represents a
landmark step forward, and we hope that a solution can
be found quickly to reopen the roads around Taiz, as the
Special Envoy just outlined. But the truce alone will not
be enough to stop what we fear is coming.

Beyond those efforts, we also reiterate our call to
strengthen Yemen’s economy more broadly, including
through the United Nations economic framework.
Addressing the economic drivers of Yemen’s crisis
could quickly and dramatically decrease humanitarian
needs across sectors.

Humanitarian needs across the country, including
the risk of famine in some areas, could rise sharply
in the coming weeks and months. The international
community must act quickly and decisively to stop that.

My second point is that aid work is becoming more
difficult and more dangerous, as we also warned last
month. Unfortunately, providing life-saving assistance
remains challenging. Intimidation and incitement
against aid agencies have continued across Yemen. That
is being fuelled by misinformation, which is amplified
through social media and messaging apps and in some
public forums.

In our briefing a few weeks ago (see S/PV.9063),
we warned about the rising needs due to economic
problems, a worsening environment for aid workers
and a collapse in humanitarian funding. Let us review
where those issues stand.
First, with regard to the economy and rising needs,
last month we called for action to protect Yemen’s
economy from domestic challenges and the impact of
the war in Ukraine. That remains urgent. The exchange
rate, which is a key factor in how much food people
can afford to eat, is still collapsing. It is now trading
at approximately 1,120 rial to the dollar in Aden. Most
of the currency’s gains since the truce have now been
wiped out, meaning that many more families are going
hungry again.

In Houthi-held areas, staff movements have also
become more difficult in recent weeks due to the
bureaucratic impediments facing Yemeni aid workers
who travel abroad for professional reasons. The Houthi
authorities are also increasingly enforcing restrictions
that curb women’s full participation in humanitarian
action, both as aid workers and as aid recipients.
Moreover, eight months after repeatedly promising their
quick release, security officials in Sana’a continue to
detain two United Nations staff members — a violation
of United Nations privileges and immunities.

The Ukraine war is also threatening the supply
chains that bring in Yemen’s food, nearly 90 per cent
of which must be imported. Last year, just under half of
all wheat came from Russia and Ukraine. When those
supplies were cut off in February, Yemeni importers
moved quickly to find other sources. But rising global
prices, diminished access to capital and other challenges
are making it much harder for importers to keep those

Meanwhile, the insecurity we warned about in
Government-held areas has also persisted. Since our
previous briefing, there have been five more carjackings
of aid agency vehicles, or more than one a week. That
brings the total to 18 carjackings since the beginning
of the year. Nor has there been any progress in the
efforts to free the five United Nations staff members
who were kidnapped five months ago in Abyan. We call

4/19

22-41759

11/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9088

for the immediate release of all kidnapped aid workers
in Yemen. We are also working with all stakeholders
to address those issues, and we especially want to
recognize the positive engagement we have had with
the Government with regard to security concerns.
We welcome support from Member States, including
through direct engagement with the relevant parties
where feasible.

September, making already-battered supply chains
for food, fuel and other essential goods even more
uncertain. It needs $3.5 million to cover operations from
September until the end of the year. The Mechanism is
a key partner in the Security Council’s commitment to
facilitating commercial imports to Yemen. It has also
been essential to the successful resumption of fuel
imports through Al-Hudaydah under the current truce.

But the biggest problem that we have right now
is funding, which is my third point. The Yemen
humanitarian response plan has so far received just over
$1.1 billion, or 27 per cent of what it needs, the sharpest
year-on-year drop in any United Nations-coordinated
plan in the world. We know that budgets are tight, and
we deeply appreciate everyone’s contributions, but
we also have a responsibility to say clearly that the
aid agencies are dangerously underresourced for what
we fear is coming. Hunger is worse than ever, and yet
several weeks ago the World Food Programme was
forced to cut rations for millions of people because of
funding gaps. That was the second major food cut in just
six months. Similar cuts are sadly costing lives across
every sector. Raisa, a 32-year-old pregnant woman
from Amran, sought care at a health centre supported
by the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) when
she went into labour in May. However, UNFPA has had
to slash its humanitarian operations by 25 per cent this
year, so when Raisa arrived at the clinic, she found the
doors locked. She died before she could reach a working
hospital. Raisa is just one human example of the vast
hardships that the cuts are creating. We urge donors to
increase support for the humanitarian response plan as
much and as quickly as possible.

Discussions are under way on many of the concerns
I have just outlined. Several weeks ago, senior donor
and agency officials met in Brussels to take stock of the
challenges facing the Yemen response. The participants
called for better access, more demining, better
programme quality, closer monitoring of famine risks,
more development support and stronger advocacy,
among other key objectives. We could not agree more.
We too hope that the political and financial resources
will be available to deliver what we all agree is urgently
needed. Aid agencies have also just completed an
independent evaluation of the humanitarian response
in Yemen from 2015 to 2021. The evaluation confirms
that the response helped save lives and prevent the total
collapse of basic services, but it also identifies serious
shortcomings, including programme quality, data
problems and others. We are already working to address
many of the issues and are eager to collaborate with all
our Yemeni and international partners in doing so. That
will be a major focus during the coming months.

Beyond the response plan, funds for other urgent
priorities are also lacking. The United Nations plan
to resolve the threat posed by the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, for example, is still struggling to make up the
immediate $20 million shortfall. Given the imminent
danger the tanker poses, the fundraising challenges
have come as a surprise. That immediate $20 million
is needed to secure the oil now, a key step in a larger
plan to replace the ageing tanker. The cost of the full
plan, which is about $144 million, should be weighed
against the billions it could cost when the FSO SAFER
eventually leaks or explodes.
The United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism for Yemen, created in 2016 to facilitate
commercial imports to Yemen, is also running out
of money. In its current state, it will shut down in

Lastly, I want to end on a hopeful note. The truce
offers a rare opportunity to end the crisis in Yemen
for good. Efforts to address and ultimately reduce the
humanitarian needs should be part and parcel of seizing
this opportunity. We should have been there for Raisa.
Let us not fail anyone again.
The President: I thank Ms. Msuya for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to start by thanking the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General and the Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for their briefings. I am grateful
to them and the United Nations in general for their
continued efforts to secure long-term and lasting peace
in Yemen.

22-417595/19

S/PV.9088

The situation in the Middle East

We welcome the positive impact on the lives
of the Yemeni people of the continued reduction in
violence resulting from the truce and the progress on
the confidence-building measures. We welcome the
multitrack process that the Special Envoy has outlined
and Ms. Msuya’s proposals for economic recovery.
The truce and the confidence-building measures are
important first steps, but as we have discussed before,
securing sustainable peace will require ambition and
progress on a wide range of issues, including the
economic and military tracks and the unblocking of
roads across Yemen. We also welcome the news that the
Military Coordination Committee intends to establish
monthly meetings to address the key events of concern.
I would like to highlight three concerns in particular.
First, the United Kingdom remains concerned about
the humanitarian and wider social and economic impact
of the continued road closures around Taiz. We echo
the Special Envoy’s calls for all sides to coordinate in
reaching an agreement as soon as possible on opening
the main roads and reaping the benefits of that.
Secondly, with regard to demining, we have
welcomed the reduction in reported civilian casualties
since the truce began. But as the Special Envoy said,
landmines and unexploded ordnance are claiming
an increasing number of civilian lives, including of
children. Increasing humanitarian access would enable
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement to protect some of the most vulnerable
Yemenis. We therefore continue to call on all parties to
support demining efforts across Yemen.
Thirdly, with regard to food insecurity, the global
growth in commodity prices that both the Special Envoy
and Assistant Secretary-General referred to means
increased food insecurity, hunger and even famine
in Yemen. And food prices have hit record highs. We
therefore echo Ms. Msuya’s call to all donors to ensure
that funding is made immediately available for speedy
disbursement in order to reduce the suffering.
The United Kingdom also remains concerned about
the threat posed by the FSO SAFER oil tanker and the
shortfall in funding for the United Nations emergency
operation. Inaction will come at a high price. The
United Kingdom has pledged $5 million towards the
United Nations plan, and we urge others to commit
funding to bridge the remaining $20 million gap so that
the emergency operation can begin to address the risk
of profound humanitarian and environmental damage.
6/19

11/07/2022

In conclusion, we urge the parties to continue to
show courageous leadership to build on the positive
momentum to ensure progress and prioritize the peace
and stability of Yemen. As the Special Envoy said, this
is the best opportunity for peace in years.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Grundberg and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya for their briefings.
I also welcome the Permanent Representative of
Yemen to today’s meeting.
The truce in Yemen has continued to hold for some
time, while the security and humanitarian situations
have continued to improve. The Government of Yemen,
the Houthis and the coalition forces reaffirmed their
commitment to the truce at the third meeting of the
Military Coordination Committee, held in Amman.
China welcomes those developments. China appreciates
the extraordinary efforts of Special Envoy Grundberg
in that regard and hopes that the parties to the conflict
in Yemen will continue to cooperate with him in his
efforts to safeguard and implement the truce agreement.
Opening the roads in Taiz as soon as possible
is a matter of urgency. To that end, Special Envoy
Grundberg has proposed several options, on the
basis of which the parties concerned should intensify
consultations, meet each other halfway and strive to
expeditiously reach a common understanding in order
to alleviate the humanitarian plight of the hundreds of
thousands of people in Taiz.
The truce in Yemen will expire on 2 August.
Extending it is the shared aspiration of the Yemeni
people and the international community. It is in the
interests of all parties in Yemen. China hopes that
they will strengthen their political will, stay the course
towards a political settlement, actively push for an
extension of the truce and work together to seek a
lasting solution to the situation in Yemen.
Yemen is experiencing its worst food crisis in recent
years. More than 19 million people face famine, and the
humanitarian situation is extremely dire. Furthermore,
only 27 per cent of the Yemen humanitarian response
plan has been funded. The United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism and multiple aid projects of
the United Nations system will soon be suspended or
scaled down due to insufficient funding.
China welcomes the tireless efforts of the
United Nations and relevant agencies to improve
22-41759

11/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

the humanitarian situation in Yemen and calls
on the international community to continue its
investment in Yemen, honour its commitment to
provide assistance and increase its funding to ensure
the simultaneous improvement of the humanitarian
and security situations. All parties in Yemen should
actively cooperate in humanitarian operations and
facilitate humanitarian access. A few days ago, Saudi
Arabia announced an investment of $400 million for
development projects in Yemen, which I believe will
help the Presidential Leadership Council to start its
economic recovery efforts.
An open, demilitarized port of Al-Hudaydah is
crucial to improving the humanitarian situation in
Yemen. The mandate of the United Nations Mission
to Support the Hodeidah Agreement will expire on
15 July. China supports the Mission in continuing its
active role in maintaining the civilian status of the port
of Al-Hudaydah and conducting mine action activities.
The Mission is an important mechanism of the United
Nations in Yemen and should play a corresponding role
in the light of the changes in the situation on the ground.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Grundberg and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya. We are grateful for their commitment
and that of their teams to improving the lives of the
Yemeni people.
We welcome the fact that the truce in Yemen
continues to hold. It has significantly reduced violence
and improved the freedom of movement. It has created
momentum towards peace. However, we must sustain
and build on that progress as the Special Envoy noted.
Doing so requires compromise by all parties.
Our message today is clear. The Security Council
must urge the parties to the conflict to continue to choose
peace over violence and to fully implement the terms
of the truce. We recognize the considerable leadership
and flexibility demonstrated by the Government of the
Republic of Yemen in facilitating flights from Sana’a
and fuel imports to northern Yemen.
Unfortunately, as we have heard, we have not
seen the same action from the Houthis with regard
to Taiz — a city that has been under siege-like
conditions for seven years. We join others in calling
on the Houthis to demonstrate their commitment to the
United Nations-led peace process and reciprocate those
gestures by meaningfully improving access to Taiz.
Doing so would alleviate human suffering and allow

S/PV.9088

tens of thousands of civilians to access basic goods and
see their loved ones.
Immediate action to unblock the roads to Taiz is
essential for maintaining the current truce. It will
also help pave the way for a more comprehensive and
durable agreement that can do more to bring resources,
stability and opportunity to people across Yemen. Such
an agreement can more durably halt fighting and begin
to bring Yemenis together to decide on a brighter future
for their country.
In addition to action on Taiz, all parties must be
prepared to engage fully and meaningfully in United
Nations-led political talks. Only a Yemeni-Yemeni
political settlement can provide durable peace in
Yemen. Such a political process must be inclusive
and consider the voices of women, civil society and
members of marginalized groups and their calls for
justice and accountability.
The United States fully supports Special Envoy
Grundberg’s efforts. We thank Saudi Arabia for its
leadership in endorsing and implementing the terms
of the truce, and we remain grateful for Oman’s
important role. We also recognize the constructive role
that Jordan and Egypt have played by opening their
airports to flights from Sana’a. Those regional and
international efforts towards peace are significant and
should continue.
We demand that the Houthis unconditionally and
immediately release the current and former United
States and United Nations locally employed Yemeni
staff they have imprisoned in Sana’a. It is long past
time that the Houthis end such outrageous behaviour.
Similarly, we remind all parties of their obligations
under international humanitarian law, and we call on
them to respect the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all in Yemen.
We welcome the news that the Government of the
Republic of Yemen and Saudi Arabia are accelerating
the implementation of development projects and the
disbursement of economic and electricity support.
That support will bolster the important work of
the Presidential Leadership Council to improve
basic services and economic stability. We call on
others in the international community and regional
partners to support the efforts of the Presidential
Leadership Council.

22-417597/19

S/PV.9088

The situation in the Middle East

We agree with others who have spoken before
me — donors must take action now to avert an
economic, humanitarian and environmental disaster in
the Red Sea. Only an additional $20 million is needed
to prevent a catastrophic spill from the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, which would cost the region and beyond tens of
billions in clean-up costs and lost revenue. This is our
best opportunity for action, as the risk of a spill will
increase greatly this fall.
Donors, including private sector actors, need
to step forward now and fund the United Nations
emergency project. We also urge immediate financial
support to help the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism (UNVIM) for Yemen to close
the funding gap of $3.5 million this year, which is
urgently needed to facilitate the unimpeded free flow
of commercial goods into Yemen. The United States
contributed $1 million earlier this year to keep UNVIM
operational, and we call on other donors to contribute.
Today we also express our support for the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission to support
the Hudaydah Agreement.
In conclusion, recent months have witnessed some
of the most significant progress towards peace in Yemen
in years. But forging a lasting peace will require all
the parties to take concrete action to demonstrate their
commitment to this goal. The international community
must be ready to support these efforts, while also
holding all parties accountable for their actions.
Mr. Gupta (India): I thank the Special Envoy Hans
Grundberg and Assistant Secretary General Joyce
Msuya for their briefings.
The renewal of the nationwide truce has helped to
considerably reduce hostilities at the front lines. It is the
responsibility of the relevant parties to ensure that the
truce is upheld and converted into a durable and longlasting ceasefire. The truce has also helped shift the
focus away from the military arena and brought much
needed attention to the political and economic aspects
of the conflict. We appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations Special Envoy to engage with the parties in
the implementation and consolidation of all measures
agreed as part of the truce agreement and move towards
a political dialogue.
The full and meaningful implementation of all
elements of the truce is critical for sustaining the truce.
While progress has been achieved in the delivery of
fuel at Al-Hudaydah port and in the opening of the
8/19

11/07/2022

Sana’a airport, the opening of roads in Taiz remains
deadlocked. Yemenis have suffered for far too long
from the impact of road closures. Immediate progress
in the opening of arterial roads to these governorates is
an urgent humanitarian imperative. We call on Ansar
Allah to negotiate in good faith to urgently reach an
agreement on this issue.
The truce is also an opportunity to step up
humanitarian aid to Yemen’s needy population. Instead,
we are witnessing a scaling down of aid operations
owing to critical funding gaps whose impact is further
exacerbated by global inflation in commodity prices.
The low level of funding, unless reversed quickly,
could lead to further cuts to humanitarian aid in
Yemen, including food aid. This would leave millions
of Yemenis, especially children, without adequate food
and nutrition.
In order to mitigate the supply changes in the
global commodity markets and their adverse impact on
food security, and in keeping with our long-standing
commitment to the global South, India has been
providing financial assistance and supplying food
grains to countries in need. We have exported more
than 250,000 tons of wheat to Yemen in the last three
months. In this regard, I would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Msuya for acknowledging this
contribution of ours in her briefing today.
It is also important to ensure the civilian nature
of the ports in the Al-Hudaydah governorate from the
food-security perspective, as these ports remain the
main gateway for the flow of food and other essential
commodities into Yemen. In this regard, India supports
a more effective mandate for the United Nations
Mission to support the Hudaydah Agreement, which
will enable the Mission to undertake monitoring
missions to these ports and report on their possible use
for military purposes.
A sustainable solution to the humanitarian crisis
lies in concrete economic measures that benefit the
people of Yemen. We have underscored the need to
address the disruption in key segments of Yemen’s
economy and its fragmentation. We recognize the
efforts of the Presidential Leadership Council to address
these challenges. The international community must
support the Government of Yemen to help it overcome
these challenges.
We are also concerned by the increasing number of
attacks reportedly attributed to Al-Qaida in the Arabian
22-41759

11/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Peninsula (AQAP). The AQAP is actively exploiting the
conflict in Yemen, notwithstanding the truce and the
changed military dynamics, and poses a significant
threat to peace and stability in the country, across the
region and beyond. The Council must not lose focus on
this specific threat.
The only sustainable solution to the conflict is a
peacefully negotiated, Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned
political settlement that prioritizes the well-being of
all Yemenis and meets their legitimate aspirations.
We encourage all parties to work actively with the
United Nations Special Envoy in his efforts to find a
sustainable political solution.
The nationwide truce and other recent developments
in Yemen have raised the hopes of the people of Yemen
that the conflict, which has devastated their lives during
the last seven years, could possibly end soon. We need
to ensure that the Council does not let them down this
time around.
Ms. Bongo (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Joyce Msuya for their inspiring briefings.
I welcome the presence among us of the Permanent
Representative of Yemen.
The truce, which was extended on 2 June for a
further two months, is a good step towards the ceasefire
desired by the international community and waited for
by the Yemeni civilian population. It is indeed important
to recall that peace in Yemen lies in the search for a
political settlement through an inclusive and sustainable
dialogue in which all the scattered fragments of this
country would constructively participate.
With regard to freedom of movement in the country,
we urge the parties to work towards an agreement on
the opening of roads, especially in Taiz province.
We deplore the continuing violence that undermines
the truce and the security situation on the ground. Since
2 April, many civilians and soldiers have been killed
and wounded as a result of missile and drone attacks,
improvised explosive devices and the deployment of
armed forces. These continued violations of the truce
threaten the peace process in Yemen. We urge all
parties to cease hostilities, exercise maximum restraint
and implement all aspects of the United Nationsbrokered truce.

S/PV.9088

We remain concerned about the devastation caused
by landmines and other explosive remnants of war on
civilian populations, particularly children, during the
truce period. The multiple impacts of landmines cause
lasting injuries, as well as severe psychological trauma.
Attacks and attempted kidnappings of humanitarian
workers working for the well-being of the population in
different parts of the country are also a cause for concern
for my delegation. We call for respect for international
humanitarian law and the release of all United Nations
and other humanitarian workers abducted in Yemen.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen remains
alarming. A combination of security, economic and
social factors, including currency depreciation,
commodity-price inflation, lack of services and jobs,
water scarcity and declining aid are contributing to
food insecurity in the country. Millions of women and
children are in need of nutritional assistance to combat
the severe hunger and malnutrition that is growing in
Yemen. While the correlation between armed conflict
and food insecurity is well established, the former
being an aggravating factor of the latter, hunger is also
a source of security destabilization. In this context, a
resolute involvement of the international community is
essential to putting an end to this spiral.
With regard to the condition of Yemeni women,
who are increasingly discriminated against, we
condemn the restrictions to which they are subjected.
Similarly, female humanitarian workers must be able
to travel without a male escort, especially as such a
measure considerably hinders the distribution of aid in
the country.
On the issue of the oil tanker FSO SAFER, we note
that the emergency transfer operation and the removal
of the oil from the vessel has still not begun, owing to
insufficient funding. We call for greater mobilization
of the international community in order to avoid a
large-scale environmental and humanitarian disaster.
Finally, we reiterate our support for Special Envoy
Hans Grundberg and Assistant Secretary-General
Joyce Msuya in their tireless efforts to maintain
dialogue between the parties and provide humanitarian
assistance to the civilian population in Yemen.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, Hans Grundberg and Assistant
Secretary-General Joyce Msuya for their briefings on

22-417599/19

S/PV.9088

The situation in the Middle East

the developments in the political and humanitarian
situation in Yemen.
We have to note that the political situation in the
country is now in a period of stagnation. The pace of
the Yemeni settlement, as we have recently witnessed,
is slowing down. It has been a month since the June
extension of the truce between the Presidential
Leadership Council and the Ansar Allah movement,
but there has been no significant progress since then.
Previous experience has clearly shown that, in principle,
the parties are capable of reaching an agreement. We
hope that they will overcome their differences and
strengthen their mutual trust in each other.
Unfortunately, the issue regarding the opening
of transport links with the city of Taiz is still at an
impasse. In that regard, we would like to note that
the lack of flexibility on the part of the parties may
result in another round of mutual accusations. On
the other hand, any additional concessions, however
small, would demonstrate their desire for a long-term
political settlement.
However, it is encouraging that the inter-Yemeni
dialogue is continuing and that the parties have refrained
from engaging in hostilities. There has not yet been
sliding into a new confrontation. However, the balance
is extremely fragile. One wrong move could undo all
the progress made and roll the country back to the chaos
of war. We welcome the ongoing work of the Military
Coordination Committee in Amman on upholding
the terms of the ceasefire, with the participation of
representatives of all parties to the conflict.
We support the efforts of Mr. Grundberg, who,
even in the current circumstances, has not abandoned
attempts to help the parties to reach an agreement and
find the beginnings of a positive spirit. We call on
all parties to actively engage in the Special Envoy’s
mediation efforts. As we have repeatedly said,
Mr. Grundberg can count on our help.
We continue to provide the maximum possible
assistance to the United Nations mediation in Yemen,
including through contacts with all political forces in
the country and the parties concerned. We actively
encourage them to be constructive and willing to
compromise in addressing their differences. We
reiterate that, in order to achieve those goals, there is
no alternative other than a comprehensive, inclusive
intra-Yemeni dialogue.
10/19

11/07/2022

The extremely difficult socioeconomic situation
in Yemen remains a matter of particular concern. The
deteriorating situation in the country has been described
as the greatest humanitarian catastrophe. We reiterate
the urgent need to remove all restrictions on the delivery
of essential goods to Yemen. Food, medicines and other
items needed by the Yemenis should be available to
them on a non-discriminatory basis.
The mandate of the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement expires this month.
We support its technical extension. We consider the
work of the Mission to be extremely important in the
context of international efforts for a settlement in
Yemen. At the same time, the current highly sensitive
situation is hardly conducive to a readjustment of the
Mission’s tasks. A calmer time can be found for that.
In conclusion, we would like to note that the
situation in Yemen directly affects the region of the
Middle East, the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea. In
the interests of regional de-escalation, we call on the
international community to engage constructively
in the interests of promoting peace and stability
throughout the Middle East region, including on the
basis of resolution 598 (1987). The Russian concept of
collective security in the Persian Gulf, which advocates
an inclusive and collective approach to resolving
problems, remains relevant.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Hans Grundberg for his briefing
and for his efforts to reach a political solution to the
Yemeni crisis. I also thank Ms. Joyce Msuya for her
thorough briefing.
We would like, at the outset, to welcome the
continuation of the truce and the agreement to
consolidate it over Eid Al-Adha Al-Mubarak. We hope
to build on that progress to make the truce a permanent
and comprehensive ceasefire.
At this stage, it is also essential to focus on moving
forward with consultations on the security and economic
dossiers to maintain calm and build confidence while
simultaneously removing all obstacles hindering the
launch of comprehensive consultations on a political
solution to end the Yemeni crisis.
Despite the continuation of the truce, we condemn
the continued collective punishment imposed on Taiz,
which has been besieged for over seven years as the
Houthis continue to block the main roads leading to the
22-41759

11/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

city. That has forced civilians and cargo trucks to take
longer and more dangerous paths.
We had hoped that the Special Envoy’s briefing
would include positive news for the more than 4 million
residents of that besieged city. We deplore the Houthis’
rejection of United Nations proposals so far despite
several rounds of consultations in Amman, as well as
the visit of the Special Envoy to Sana’a and Muscat to
meet with the negotiators of the Houthi militias. The
Houthi intransigence is a cause for real concern, as it
undermines the prospects for sustainable peace and
pushes us back to square one. We therefore demand that
the Houthi militias immediately lift restrictions on the
movement in Taiz, while demonstrating flexibility in
all United Nations-led consultations.
We look forward to the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement. We hope that the legitimate concerns
of the Yemeni Government regarding the provisions
of the resolution and the numerous reports of the
militarization of ports are taken into account. In that
context, we stress that the Houthis must stop their
escalation, including launching drones and missiles
at civilian areas. The Houthi militias must realize that
there is no military solution to the Yemeni crisis and
that only a peaceful solution is the way forward.
Furthermore, there is a need to prioritize measures
regarding the protection of civilians, including by
stopping all violations of the truce while clearing
Yemeni land of mines and their remnants. According to
United Nations reports, mines unfortunately continue
to cause a large number of those killed and injured since
the beginning of the truce. In this vein, we commend
the King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre
through MASAM project for removing nearly 350,000
explosive remnants of the war so far. Such important
humanitarian efforts help save countless lives at a
time when the Houthi militias are ignoring the safety
of the population and causing damage and destruction
throughout Yemen. We also stress the urgent need to
address the situation of the FSO SAFER oil tanker to
avoid a serious environmental catastrophe.
In the light of the challenges facing Yemen,
we welcome the announcement by the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia of a financial package for development
projects valued at $400 million, which is in addition
to the $200 million to support electricity plants. That
announcement falls under more than $3 billion support

S/PV.9088

from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates, including $2 billion as a Saudi-Emirati
deposit in the Central Bank of Yemen in Aden.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for the
efforts aimed at alleviating the suffering of the brotherly
Yemeni people and to establish security, peace and
stability in Yemen.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Special Envoy
Hans Grundberg and Assistant Secretary-General
Joyce Msuya for their briefings. I also welcome
the participation of the representative of Yemen in
this meeting.
Kenya acknowledges the efforts made by the Special
Envoy to engage with the parties concerned, including
the latest proposal for the opening of the roads in Taiz.
Our concern is that failure to reach an agreement
could undermine the fragile truce and jeopardize any
prospects for its renewal, as well as the opening of the
roads in Taiz and other governorates. We therefore
strongly urge the Houthis to engage constructively and
demonstrate flexibility for the sake of the millions of
affected Yemenis.
Kenya welcomes the continued engagement with
the parties’ focal points in the Military Coordination
Committee. We underscore the need for the parties
to utilize that dialogue to uphold their commitment
to the current truce, including through a continued
cessation of all offensive operations inside and outside
of Yemen, as well as freezing current military positions
on the ground.
The rising use of explosive devices in the wake of
increased movement into formerly militarized zones is
deeply worrisome. The victims of those indiscriminate
weapons include the most vulnerable, such as women and
children. The mine-coordination role of United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement with the
parties and United Nations agencies in Al-Hudaydah in
order to address this challenge remains essential.
Despite some progress on the political track, we
have yet to see tangible improvements on the economic,
humanitarian and security fronts. Indeed, the situation,
as highlighted by Assistant Secretary-General Msuya
this morning, is deeply concerning, all the more so as
the World Food Programme is reducing food assistance
programmes during this period of increased hardship.
It is clear that urgent humanitarian assistance is
critical in the immediate term. But there is also need

22-4175911/19

S/PV.9088

The situation in the Middle East

for more pragmatic approaches to humanitarian action
programmes for sustainability and resilience. To that
end, consideration should be given to intensifying
efforts to, first, support the promotion of agricultural
production, agrolivelihoods and food security
in order to reduce dependence on food imports;
secondly, support the transition from humanitarian to
development assistance in order to mitigate the effects of
humanitarian funding shortfalls; and, thirdly, increase
peacebuilding efforts to achieve sustainable peace that
will foster an environment conducive for Yemenis to
engage in legitimate enterprises and contribute to
national development.
As Yemen is heavily dependent on imports, the
work of the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism for Yemen in facilitating the unimpeded
flow of commercial items and vessels sailing into
Al-Hudaydah and Saleef ports is crucial to supporting
the implementation of resolution 2216 (2015). It
is unfortunate that the Mission is facing funding
challenges. We therefore call on the international
community to generously contribute to the Mission.
On the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we commend the
contributions made to date, as well as the tireless
efforts of the United Nations in rallying donors, and
we encourage more generous donations to make the
emergency operation possible while the window of
opportunity exists.
In conclusion, Kenya reaffirms its commitment
to supporting the ongoing United Nations efforts to
facilitate Yemeni-led and -owned comprehensive and
lasting peace and stability.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and
Assistant Secretary-General Joyce Msuya for their
briefings. I also welcome the representative of Yemen
to this Security Council meeting.
I would like to begin by acknowledging the efforts
led by the Special Envoy and the commitment made
during the third meeting of the Military Coordination
Committee, held in Amman, to maintain the truce in
Yemen and to take confidence-building measures and
reduce incidents at the operational level.
Of concern, however, are the limited developments
regarding the lifting of the blockade in Taiz, one of
the main elements of the truce. We regret the Houthi
rejection of the updated proposal presented by the
12/19

11/07/2022

Special Envoy. We urge the parties to work with him
and to make the necessary concessions in the interest
of the welfare of the Yemeni people. We also call on
the parties to refrain from using inflammatory rhetoric
in their statements, which can only result in the
deterioration of the negotiations.
We note with great concern that, since our most
recent meeting (see S/PV.9063) on this issue, there has
been no significant progress on funding for operations
to avert an environmental, economic and humanitarian
catastrophe resulting from the FSO SAFER oil tanker
situation. Equally worrisome is the lack of funding
for the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism for Yemen. The Mechanism ensures
compliance with the arms embargo established by the
Council and guarantees the flow of goods for a country
that imports 90 per cent of its food and in which
17.4 million people are in a situation of food insecurity.
Despite the relief provided by the truce, the
humanitarian situation in the country continues to
deteriorate. It is alarming that only 26 per cent of the
humanitarian response plan has been funded, which is
forcing agencies to reduce their operations. In addition,
the rising cost of basic products and the depreciation
of the rial have exacerbated the deterioration of
socioeconomic conditions in the country. We
recognize the efforts under way to improve economic
governance. In that framework, we stress that women’s
socioeconomic empowerment is critical to reaching
those goals. The country will be unable to progress if
half of its labour force is left behind — it is that simple.
Meanwhile, access restrictions for, and smear
campaigns against, the humanitarian community
continue, resulting in escalating violence for its
personnel. We therefore urge the parties to ensure
the full, safe and unimpeded access of humanitarian
personnel to people in need, in accordance with
obligations under international humanitarian law, as
well as to reaffirm its condemnation of any action
taken to intimidate the humanitarian community.
Mexico also calls for the immediate release of detained
humanitarian personnel.
In conclusion, I reiterate Mexico’s support for a
12-month renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Grundberg and Ms. Msuya for their briefings.
22-41759

11/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The truce has now lasted for almost three months
and is generally respected by the parties. It is essential
that it be renewed next month and that we achieve a
sustainable nationwide ceasefire.
The progress made by the Special Envoy since the
beginning of the truce is commendable. I am referring
in particular to access to Al-Hudaydah port and Sana’a
airport. We also note the goodwill of the Yemeni
Government. France calls on the parties to respond
positively to the Special Envoy’s balanced proposal on
Taiz. The Houthis must lift the blockade and reopen
the main road to the city. The parties must make the
necessary compromises because the suffering of the
people of Taiz has gone on for too long.
Despite the truce, the humanitarian situation
remains very worrisome. International humanitarian
law and human rights must be respected by all, and
full humanitarian access must be guaranteed. It is
essential that United Nations personnel be allowed to
travel in safety. We reiterate our call for the immediate
and unconditional release of all those detained by the
Houthis. With regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker,
we call on States and the private sector to contribute
financially to the appeal launched by the United
Nations. There is no time to lose if we want to avoid
a disaster.
The renewal of the truce is a precious opportunity
to move forward on the security, political and
economic tracks of the strategic framework proposed
by the United Nations. Beyond the discussions about
Taiz, it is essential that Yemenis engage in dialogue
on the future of their country. It is time to bring this
protracted conflict to an end. The relevant international
parameters, including in resolutions adopted by the
Council, are well known.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to thank Special
Envoy Grundberg and Assistant Secretary-General
Msuya for their briefings and updates.
Let me start by welcoming the parties’ continued
commitment to the current truce, as well as the third
meeting of the Military Coordination Committee. At
such a fragile moment, it will be crucial to maintain the
efforts to build trust. All the achievements made so far
should be utilised to create further results for the Yemeni
people, including on the question of reopening roads in
and around the city of Taiz. We thank Mr. Grundberg
for his update on those matters.

S/PV.9088

The Yemeni people and civil society have made
their needs clear. We urge both sides to show flexibility
and to turn their commitments into concrete action. We
support all the Special Envoy’s efforts on the multi-track
process and commend his continued dialogue with
the parties, as well as with diverse groups of Yemeni
people, leaders and experts, including women. It will
also be important to take advantage of the humanitarian
gains from the truce to facilitate progress towards a
comprehensive political settlement.
Today I want to focus on Yemen’s most vulnerable
people, its children. We have seen that the truce has had
an immense positive impact on the everyday lives of
civilians, with child casualties dropping significantly,
creating a sense of hope for the future. However, we
must not be complacent. We remain worried about the
continuing humanitarian crisis, especially its impact
on children. The World Food Programme reports that
more than 2 million Yemeni children under the age of
five require treatment for acute malnutrition, with more
than half a million at risk of dying without treatment.
Food insecurity continues to drive negative coping
strategies that fuel conflict in Yemen, such as the
recruitment of children into armed conflict and other
forms of child labour. The action plan signed between
Ansar Allah and the United Nations to end and prevent
the recruitment or use of children in armed conflict, the
killing or maiming of children and attacks on schools
and hospitals was indeed an encouraging step. It must
be implemented immediately. We also underline the
importance of identifying and releasing children from
within military ranks.
Children are also particularly vulnerable to mines
and explosive remnants of war. Further efforts towards all
aspects of mine action operations are needed. Dedicated
attention to the unique needs of Yemeni children is an
imperative if we are to reach sustainable solutions to
the conflict. Norway therefore calls on all the parties to
swiftly and fully implement the recommendations and
conclusions of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.
Finally, Norway is increasingly alarmed by the
reports of security incidents such as those described
by Assistant Secretary-General Msuya. We are worried
about the increasing attacks and harmful rhetoric aimed
at humanitarian organizations and non-governmental
organization workers. Safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian aid is crucial. We also condemn the killing
of the journalist Saber Al-Haidari in June. Such attacks

22-4175913/19

S/PV.9088

The situation in the Middle East

are unacceptable and prohibited under international
humanitarian law. A safe, inclusive political space must
be part of Yemen’s future.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): My delegation is grateful
to Special Envoy Grundberg and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya for their briefings. I also welcome the
representative of Yemen to today’s meeting.
We are pleased to see that the renewed two-month
truce is still holding, despite reports of violations by
some of the parties. We acknowledge the considerable
efforts of the Special Envoy and the entire United
Nations team, as well as all the other stakeholders
involved in the negotiations process, in achieving such a
feat. We note that since the truce began there has been a
lull in military activities by the warring factions inside
Yemen and across its borders, leading to a decline in
civilian casualties — an indication that the restoration
of peace and security in the country in the foreseeable
future is possible and could be within the parties’ grasp.
We therefore call on the parties to seize this moment,
not only to fully commit to the terms of the truce and
to refraining from actions that have the potential to
undermine the marginal progress being made, but to
build on it to achieve an inclusive, comprehensive and
durable solution that will enable the people of Yemen to
chart their own political destiny.
We welcome the pledge by the military
representatives of the Government of Yemen, Ansar
Allah and the Joint Forces Command of the Coalition
to build trust and fully commit to the terms of the
truce, made at the third meeting of the Military
Coordination Committee held in Amman last week
under the auspices of the Office of the Special Envoy.
The Committee’s discussions on setting up a joint
coordination room tasked with de-escalating incidents
at the operational level are also a welcome development.
Such confidence-building measures by the parties are
essential and should be encouraged in order to create an
opportunity for the peaceful resolution of differences
between the factions and thereby help consolidate
the truce.
However, it is regrettable that the right of civilians in
Taiz and other governorates to move freely in a safe and
secure manner is still being curtailed by the continued
blockage of roads. That unfortunate development has
brought immense suffering and hardship to the people
of Taiz and the governorates in question. It is incumbent
on the parties to follow through with their commitment
14/19

11/07/2022

under the terms of the truce to meeting under the
auspices of the United Nations, without further delay,
in order to agree on modalities for the reopening of all
roads to help ease the people’s suffering. In that regard,
we welcome the Special Envoy’s proposal for a phased
reopening of the roads and encourage the parties to
consider it seriously.
Even though the three-month-old ceasefire has
led to a significant reduction in civilian casualties, the
humanitarian situation in Yemen remains severe, as
we heard this morning. According to the World Food
Programme (WFP), approximately 13 million needy
people require emergency food assistance. Sadly,
owing to funding gaps and rising global food prices,
the WFP is being compelled to scale back its support
for 5 million of those people to less than 50 per cent of
their daily requirement, and to around 25 per cent of the
daily requirements for the other 8 million. In addition,
resilience and livelihood activities, as well as school
feeding and nutrition programmes for approximately
4 million, are to cease, leaving assistance available for
only 1.8 million people. We call on all donors to help
bridge the WFP’s funding shortfall to enable it to offer
the assistance the people of Yemen need.
Furthermore, the high risk of a catastrophic oil
spillage from the FSO SAFER in the Red Sea and the
likelihood of a major humanitarian and ecological
disaster resulting from the potential spillage remains
a matter of grave concern to us. We acknowledge the
ongoing international efforts that have mobilized more
than $64 million for the first phase of the operation’s
estimated cost of approximately $80 million. We call
on the international community to support the United
Nations fundraising campaign, which aims to fill
the $20 million gap in order to avert a major global
environmental disaster.
In view of the important role in the peace process
in Yemen played by the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement, we look forward to
the renewal of its mandate, which will expire at the end
of this week.
In conclusion, we call on all the conflicting parties
in Yemen to honour their obligations under the terms
of the truce in order to help consolidate it and take
advantage of the opportunity offered by the ceasefire
to work towards a comprehensive and durable political
solution for the benefit of the Yemeni people.
22-41759

11/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. Moran (Ireland): I thank our briefers,
Special Envoy Grundberg and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya.
The benefits of the United Nations-mediated truce
are being felt across Yemen and the region in the
cessation of cross-border attacks and air strikes, the
significant increase in fuel imports, the resumption
of flights in and out of Sana’a and, as the Special
Envoy said, the very welcome reduction in civilian
casualties over the past three months. Now is the time
to push forward and for all actors to strengthen their
commitment to the truce. The convening of the third
meeting of the Military Coordination Committee in
Amman last week was a reason for optimism. The
parties sitting together is undoubtedly the best way to
build much-needed confidence.
The flexibility and constructive approach shown
by the Government of Yemen on key issues has been
very welcome. It is past time for the Houthis to step up
and prove to the people of Yemen that they are serious
about long-term peace by engaging with the United
Nations and its current proposals to find agreement
on reopening roads in Taiz and other governorates. In
addition to dramatically alleviating the suffering of
Taiz residents, that would be a meaningful step towards
translating the truce into a durable ceasefire and an
inclusive Yemeni-led, Yemeni-owned and United
Nations-supported political settlement.
Although the truce has led to significantly
decreased levels of violence, the security situation
remains concerning. We are alarmed by the recent
spate of attacks carried out in Aden and the insecurity
in the south more broadly. We call on all parties to fully
respect their commitments under the truce and avoid
escalatory rhetoric. We utterly condemn the killing
of journalist Saber Al-Haidari on 15 June, after an
improvised explosive device was planted in his car.
We express our deepest condolences to his family and
loved ones. That follows the tragic killing of pregnant
journalist Rasha Abdullah Al-Harazi in Aden in
November 2021.
As we said at our Arria Formula meeting on the
protection of journalists in May, we need journalists to
shine a light on the truth, including in Yemen. They
are integral to sustainable peace and must be protected.
We call for an investigation into those brutal attacks
and for those responsible to be held accountable. The
concerning rise in physical and online attacks against

S/PV.9088

international non-governmental organizations and
United Nations agencies is also very worrisome and
hinders crucial humanitarian work. We reiterate that
those attacks must cease immediately.
We recognize that instability in Yemen is also
linked to the precarious economic situation and dire
living conditions faced by many Yemenis, with the
humanitarian crisis continuing to deteriorate even with
the respite offered by the truce. In total, an estimated
19 million people are expected to face food insecurity
in the next six months.
Against that backdrop, a critically underfunded
humanitarian response plan and the additional cuts
to food aid announced recently by the World Food
Programme are deeply troubling and will impact
millions of Yemenis. As we heard from Assistant
Secretary-General
Msuya
today,
considerable
international assistance is required more than ever to
save lives in Yemen.
In conclusion, only a political solution will end the
conflict and durably resolve the humanitarian crisis.
We call once again on the parties to show a genuine
commitment to ending Yemenis’ suffering. During this
time of Eid Al-Adha, we ask the parties not to let this
precious opportunity for peace pass them by. Lastly, we
look forward to the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
later this week and express our appreciation to the
Mission and to Major General Beary for his leadership.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg and Ms. Msuya for their updates, information
and respective efforts in addressing the multiple issues
in Yemen.
We welcome the fact that truce is holding. We
hope that, during the remaining time of its extension,
the parties will continue to seek and find common
ground to address and possibly resolve all the pending
issues. The truce is also delivering. War casualties have
drastically decreased, and the daily life of the Yemeni
people has changed. We reiterate our call on the parties
to fully embrace all the efforts of United Nations
regional actors and the international community as a
whole to ensure its extension.
Everyone knows by now what the seven years of
violence have done to the country, and we hope that
everyone notices what a few months of truce have
brought and what such prospects promise for the future.

22-4175915/19

S/PV.9088

The situation in the Middle East

A clear choice of compromise and peace over war
defines the future of the country.
The parties must build on the progress achieved and
fully implement the truce in letter and spirit and lead the
country towards a nationwide ceasefire and permanent
peace. The guns must be completely silenced; talks
should replace them and lead to sustainable peace. The
people of Yemen are supported on this path by the unity
of the United Nations and the Security Council, which
encourage them to seize the critical momentum.
Albania commends the Government in Yemen
for opening Sana’a airport and continuing to ease
restrictions on the many Yemenis who travel to Jordan
and Egypt. We have called on the Houthis to do the
same thing with regard to reopening the roads to Taiz.
We regret that has not happened. An agreement on road
openings as part of the truce, as rightly highlighted by
the Special Envoy, remains critical.
Building confidence remains crucial for the future
of a political settlement. And if the Houthis believe in
peace, they must concretely and genuinely do more.
Resolving the outstanding issues will not be easy, but
nothing can be done successfully without genuine
engagement to pave the way towards meaningful
Yemeni-Yemeni talks. We reiterate our call for an
inclusive process in which the voices of women and
young people are fully heard.
We welcome the convening of the third meeting of
the Military Coordination Committee and the parties’
commitment to build more trust and reinforce the truce,
hopefully beyond the Eid Al-Adha celebrations. We
welcome in particular their engagement in freezing their
current military positions on the ground, moderating
their rhetoric in public statements and media and
adopting a focus on protecting civilian children, women
and men, as well as civilian infrastructure. But as we
heard, we must be and must remain vigilant.
We commend Saudi Arabia and Oman for
their consistent engagement with Yemen and their
endorsement of the truce, as well as the commitments
for massive economic and financial support from
Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates. That must
be accompanied with sound, credible and inclusive
reforms and policies.
Despite the progress made, as we heard, the dire
humanitarian situation has not improved. We have
expressed in the past the concern that Yemen was
16/19

11/07/2022

becoming a forgotten conflict. The truce could and
should help reverse that trend. As we heard from
Ms. Msuya, the shortage of funds and the acute impact
of the war in Ukraine stand in the way.
Let us not forget: if we do not feed the hungry,
we fuel the conflict. Non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and humanitarian workers need to be able to
carry out their mission freely and securely in providing
help to all those in need. Any attack against them is
indeed an attack against all Yemenis who are exposed
to famine-like conditions and food shortages.
Albania firmly condemns the continued
incarceration of the local staff members currently or
formerly employed by the United States Embassy and
the United Nations. We call on the Houthis to release all
those detained immediately. We also call for the release
of United Nations and NGO staff members and other
civilians who have been abducted by armed groups or
forcibly disappeared.
Let me conclude by reiterating Albania’s full
support for the successful mandate renewal of the
United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement later this week, as well as for the work
of the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism for Yemen in facilitating the unimpeded
flow of commercial items through the verification and
inspection of commercial vessels sailing to Yemeni
ports. Change is on the way for Yemenis. Everything
must be done to make it lasting, and the Special Envoy
has our full support in his efforts.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.
I would first like to thank Mr. Grundberg and
Ms. Msuya for their informative briefings, and to
welcome our Yemeni colleague to today’s meeting.
We have now entered the third month of the
nationwide truce initiated in April and renewed in June.
Its first month coincided with the Yemeni people’s
first relatively peaceful Ramadan in more than seven
years, and on Friday they were able to celebrate Eid
Al-Adha without fear of becoming victims in military
confrontations. It is the longest respite that ordinary
Yemenis have had from the fighting since 2014, and
the past few months have given them hope that the
conflict will not rage on indefinitely and that a return
to normality is possible. However, the truce will not
hold if it is not fully implemented. We have seen
22-41759

11/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

progress with regard to most of its provisions, including
increased fuel imports and civilian flights in the north.
As we have repeatedly heard today, reopening the roads
in Taiz and elsewhere is now the missing link in the
agreement announced in April. We urge the Houthis to
reconsider and to commit fully to the Special Envoy’s
two-phase plan for reopening roads to civilian traffic.
This is no time for brinkmanship or delaying tactics.
On the eve of Eid Al-Adha, the parties renewed their
commitment to the truce, which was a very positive
signal, but it must be followed by action. The truce is
the first building block in constructing a permanent
ceasefire and a sustainable peace, and reopening the
roads is an essential step towards that ultimate goal.
We have once again heard from the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs that the
humanitarian response in Yemen is facing extremely
serious challenges. The truce has brought about a
sharp decrease in civilian casualties, but we are still
very far from meeting the basic needs of Yemenis. As
Assistant Secretary-General Msuya just said, we are
short of more than 50 per cent of the funds needed for
humanitarian aid to Yemen. It is urgent that we work
as an international community to close the funding
gap. If we do not, we will continue to meet again in
the Council, month after month, only to hear that the
World Food Programme, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UNICEF
and other agencies have reduced or closed down yet
another programme, while the needs of Yemenis have
continued to increase. The Yemen crisis must not be
forgotten or sidelined.
Humanitarian aid alone is not sustainable, and
the Yemeni economy must be given the conditions to
recover. That includes regular fuel imports, the increased
mobility of people and goods, foreign financial aid and,
especially, respect for the military truce. Throughout
the conflict, Yemen has seen a vicious cycle of violence,
economic crisis and humanitarian disaster combined.
Peace and stability will not return unless each of those
factors is addressed in turn.
Finally, as we prepare to renew the mandate of
the United Nations Mission to support the Hodeidah
Agreement on Wednesday, it is also appropriate to
recognize the valuable work done by the Mission in
stabilizing Yemen’s vital Red Sea coast in spite of
significant challenges. Al-Hudaydah is a lifeline for
millions of Yemenis and has a major role to play in
the country’s economic recovery. We want to take this

S/PV.9088

opportunity to reiterate our call to the Houthis to allow
the Mission full freedom of movement.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, and to thank Albania
for presiding over it last month. I am also grateful to
Mr. Grundberg and Ms. Msuya for their briefings.
The long-suffering Yemeni people have continued
to endure the considerable, indeed almost immeasurable
humanitarian and economic consequences as the
Houthi militias have continued their war and their
escalation of violence, which has resulted in a dreadful
humanitarian crisis at an enormous economic cost.
Millions of Yemenis have been displaced, forced
to leave their homes after seeing their livelihoods
seriously impacted. With the aim of ending the conflict
and easing the people’s suffering, the Presidential
Leadership Council and the Yemeni Government have
committed to supporting every possible regional and
international effort to bring about comprehensive and
lasting peace, based on the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its implementation mechanism, the
outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).
We continue to fully support Special Envoy
Grundberg’s efforts. We have also accepted the extension
of the truce, which represents the Yemeni people’s
hope for a comprehensive ceasefire and a resumption
of negotiations on a political settlement of the conflict
that would prevent further bloodshed, despite the daily
violations of the truce perpetrated by the Iran-backed
Houthi militias on all fronts. They are creating new
military sites, mobilizing and repositioning forces,
transferring equipment, smuggling weapons and
continuing to shell civilian residential areas in Taiz,
Ma’rib, Al-Hudaydah and elsewhere. As I speak, Houthi

22-4175917/19

S/PV.9088

The situation in the Middle East

militias are bombing Martyrs’ Square in the city of
Taiz, where Eid Al-Adha celebrations are taking place.
And while the Yemeni Government has demonstrated
flexibility and acted positively regarding all the
humanitarian efforts, while making many concessions
to ease people’s suffering — such as reopening Sana’a
airport and resuming commercial flights and regular
fuel imports through the port of Al-Hudaydah — those
efforts have been exploited by the Houthi militias for
military and political gains. During the truce their
earnings from those gains have reached more than
90 billion Yemeni rials, which they are using to finance
their war on the Yemeni people and to enrich their own
leaders rather than paying the salaries of civil servants
in the areas they control in line with the agreement
with the Office of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral and the Stockholm Agreement.
The Yemeni Government reiterates the importance
of implementing all provisions of the truce, including
lifting the siege on Taiz and reopening the main roads
to that city prior to discussing any other issues. I would
like to point out that it took more than six weeks for
the Houthi militias to appoint their negotiating team for
the talks on Taiz, after which they refused to engage
in discussions on reopening the main roads, although
they have insisted on opening secondary roads. As the
Special Envoy mentioned today, they then rejected his
proposals even after he visited Sana’a in an attempt to
convince them. Their behaviour shows that they are
not serious and that they are determined to prolong the
negotiations, circumvent the truce and blackmail the
international community. What we are seeing now is
once again a prolongation of the situation that has existed
since the Stockholm Agreement was signed in 2018.
We reiterate our call to the international community
and the Security Council to act swiftly to pressure the
Houthi militias to take advantage of the prospects for
peace and meet their obligations under the truce. We
call for an unconditional reopening of the roads to Taiz
to ease its residents’ humanitarian suffering, which
would demonstrate that the militias are serious about
accepting a political settlement. Peace requires genuine
partnership, good faith and serious work, which have
been lacking on the part of the Houthis so far.
We also reiterate the importance of resolving the
humanitarian issue of captives and detainees, which is
on the list of the priorities and concerns of the United
Nations, the Special Envoy and the Council. The
efforts to ensure their release and remove the obstacles
18/19

11/07/2022

created by the Houthi militias with regard to the issue
must continue.
The economy is a main priority for the Presidential
Leadership Council. The Government is therefore
committed to supporting economic and developmental
stability and promoting humanitarian and relief
work to establish development by adopting plans and
programmes that can achieve economic recovery,
support reconstruction and promote resilience. In that
context, the Yemeni Government values the generous
assistance given and the humanitarian approaches
taken by our brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates, in particularly through
the allocation of $3.3 billion in support to the Yemeni
Central Bank and other programmes and projects in the
humanitarian and development areas, including the Saudi
Programme for the Development and Reconstruction
of Yemen. These efforts are welcomed by the Yemeni
people and the Yemeni political leadership because of
the tangible contribution they make in various areas
of development and delivery of services. The Yemeni
Government also commends the efforts made by the
United Nations and other international partners aimed
at alleviating humanitarian suffering in Yemen. We
have demonstrated all kinds of support for these efforts
and sought to address those obstacles that hinder such
efforts. Nonetheless, the main challenge in the area of
humanitarian work is access to those in need.
Many countries are experiencing food insecurity
and a spike in prices. However, insufficient financing,
in particular for the humanitarian response plan, is
depriving millions of needy people of basic necessities.
Humanitarian organizations in areas controlled by the
Houthi militias are encountering obstruction and acts of
diverting aid from those in need. The Panel of Experts,
in its report to the sanctions committee established
pursuant to 2140 (2014), stated that the Houthi militias
are also preventing Yemeni families from getting
humanitarian aid if their children do not join the Houthi
ranks and fight on their side.
Indeed, the Houthi militias continue to recruit
thousands of children. They use them in their war
despite the fact that a truce is in place and efforts
are being made to reach a political settlement and a
ceasefire. Scenes from the so-called summer camps of
those militias show their leaders luring children below
the age of 15 and training and brainwashing them with
extremist ideas and slogans of death, violence and hate.
That confirms that the Houthi militias are preparing
22-41759

11/07/2022

The situation in the Middle East

for a new round of escalation. They are using children
as fuel while the international community and the
United Nations are silent vis-à-vis the broadest childrecruitment operation in the history of humankind.
They ignore the dangers of such a crime against present
and future generations of Yemeni children, their
inherent right to life and the security and stability of
the region and the world.
The Houthis signed an action plan with the United
Nations. However, they are striving not to implement
it. Rather, they continue to deceive the international
community while the Houthis continue to recruit
thousands of children and push them into their
absurd war.
While I address the Security Council today, the
FSO SAFER oil tanker situation is continuing to
deteriorate. This is an imminent and unprecedented
economic, environmental and humanitarian disaster in
Yemen. It will affect the neighbouring countries, reach

S/PV.9088

the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean and undermine
international maritime routes. Reports note that the
Houthi militias are placing naval mines in large areas
of the Red Sea, including near the oil tanker. This poses
a serious threat to maritime security in the Red Sea,
as well as to United Nations efforts to manage the oil
tanker situation. We urge the Security Council and
the international community to exert pressure on the
Houthis to ensure that they are committed to the plan.
We reiterate our call to complete the financing of the
plan so that the effects of the imminent disaster can
be avoided.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I will now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

22-4175919/19
