S/PV.8577

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8577th meeting

Wednesday, 17 July 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda
Letter dated 27 June 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Peru to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/539)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-22066 (E)
*1922066*

S/PV.8577

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

violence and fuelled by the victimization of young
people, especially young women.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Implementation of the youth, peace and
security agenda
Letter dated 27 June 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2019/539)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, the
Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth; Ms. Wevyn
Muganda, Programme Coordinator of HAKI Africa;
and Ms. Sofia Ramyar, Executive Director of Afghans
for Progressive Thinking.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/539, which contains the text
of a letter dated 27 June 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Wickramanayake.
Ms. Wickramanayake: Since my last briefing to
the Security Council in April 2018 (see S/PV.8241), I
have had the opportunity to travel to many parts of the
world and meet young people from all walks of life.
From the refugee camps in Jordan, to schools of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in Gaza in the Gaza Strip,
to municipalities in Kosovo, to youth councils in
Denmark, I have seen and heard one thing — young
people care about peace.
However, young women and men still suffer from
stereotypes, myths and policy panics that diminish
their agency and prevent them from realizing their full
potential for peace. Unfortunately, contrary to reality,
the narrative is still dominated by a focus on the small
minority of young people attracted to extremism and
2/22

17/07/2019

The overarching consequence of these negative
stereotypes is that they contribute to the marginalization
and stigmatization of youth by framing young people as
a problem to be solved and a threat to be contained.
This detrimentally skews youth, peace and security
programmatic responses towards hard security
approaches and away from prevention — ignoring the
fact that most young people, in fact, are not involved
in violence.
That is all the more reason why we need to keep
going back and referencing resolutions 2250 (2015)
and 2419 (2018), so that in this increasingly globalized
world shaped by pervasive concerns about terrorism,
organized crime and extremist violence, we can make
sure that perspectives on youth are not distorted by
contagious stereotypes that associate young people
with violence.
Allow me to thank the Government of Peru for
its leadership in convening this important Security
Council briefing on youth, peace and security.
I am pleased to be joined by two young women
peacebuilders — Ms. Wevyn Muganda from Kenya
and Ms. Sofia Ramyar from Afghanistan — as we take
stock of the progress made in the youth, peace and
security agenda.
Today, there are 1.8 billion people in the world — the
largest generation of young people ever. Some 90 per
cent of them live in developing countries, where they
make up a large proportion of the population. With a
global median age of 29.7 years, it is estimated that
408 million young people today live in contexts affected
by armed conflict.
Moreover, around the world, today’s young
generation faces enormous challenges. One in five
young people is not in employment, education or
training; every year millions of girls become mothers
while they are still children themselves; and mental
health issues among young people are on the rise.
Without action to address inequality, intolerance and
the climate emergency that faces us all, this generation
of young people could face devastating repercussions.
It must be clear therefore that we need to engage young
people not only as beneficiaries, but as equal partners in
our efforts, especially in our efforts to prevent conflict
and build peace.
19-22066

17/07/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Since the release of The Missing Peace: Independent
Progress Study on Youth, Peace and Security last
September, the agenda has entered a new phase,
increasingly shifting the focus towards implementation
at multiple levels while also expanding stakeholder
support. Let me focus on a few key issues.
First, young people are reclaiming the narrative
on youth, peace and security. Despite myths,
misconceptions, fake news, stereotypes and claims that
presume them to be and portray them as troublemakers,
young people are resisting, protesting, organizing
and implementing youth-led peacebuilding initiatives
in their communities and countries to bring back
democratic values, good governance and transparency
in institutions in the places they live. They are not
waiting to be invited to join decision-making tables;
they are bringing alternative, innovative solutions to
solve those global problems.
However, in the past months, I have noticed with
grave concern incidents of young peacebuilders and
young human rights defenders being subjected to threats,
intimidation, violence, arbitrary arrest and retaliation
by State and non-State actors. I would like to recall
and remind us all with great emphasis that protection
is an integral part of resolution 2250 (2015). I call on
Governments and all parties to uphold and protect the
fundamental rights of young people, including their
freedom of expression both online and offline.
Secondly, the youth, peace and security agenda is
being recognized and institutionalized within the United
Nations as core to the United Nations priorities on youth.
The United Nations Youth Strategy, Youth 2030, which
was launched by the Secretary-General in September
2018, identifies peace and resilience-building as one of
its five core priorities for the United Nations system’s
work with and for young people.
With this first ever United Nations Youth Strategy,
we have set out on a new path and will support young
people in all their diversity in accessing education,
decent work, social protection and health care, while
we will stand with young people when they oppose
injustice and will work with them to prevent conflict
and build peace. In doing so, the United Nations system
will promote an enabling environment that recognizes
young people’s important and positive contributions
to peace and security, while creating safe spaces and
expanding opportunities for young people.

S/PV. 8577

To support the implementation of the peace and
resilience-building priority of the United Nations Youth
Strategy, a joint United Nations action plan is being
developed under the leadership of the joint United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)/Peacebuilding
Support Office (PBSO) secretariat on youth, peace and
security, bringing together other United Nations system
partners. This joint action plan focuses specifically
on strengthening policy support, implementation,
monitoring and review at the local, national and
regional levels. PBSO, UNFPA and the United Nations
Development Programme are furthermore developing
a joint global programme to support field and
regional-level implementation of the youth, peace and
security agenda in the five geographic regions.
Furthermore, we are seeing a surge in programming
and funding in United Nations entities. For instance,
$37 million have been allocated by the Peacebuilding
Fund since 2016 through its Youth Promotion Initiative,
a special fund dedicated to supporting projects fostering
youth inclusion and participation. Nonetheless, we
continue to fall far short of meeting the needs of youth
organizations and networks on the ground, which often
operate on minimal financial and other resources.
Thirdly, the United Nations peace and security
pillar is increasingly engaged in implementing
resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) with special
political missions and peace operations involved in
numerous activities. For instance, the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia organized dialogues
with youth representatives from different political
parties in various regions, focusing on discussing the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
As a result, there are new inter-party youth pacts to
reject violence in the context of the upcoming local
elections. I commend the Mission for establishing a
network of youth focal points across its field offices
to support the implementation of the Mission’s youth
engagement strategy.
To promote peaceful coexistence and support
youth participation in peacebuilding and stability in
Iraq, the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
engages youth across the country on issues relating
to tribal conflicts, unemployment, State control of
arms and youth inclusion in decision-making and
political processes.

19-220663/22

S/PV.8577

Maintenance of international peace and security

Across the African continent, from West Africa
and the Sahel to Somalia, United Nations missions
are stepping up their efforts to engage young people
and youth organizations in consultative processes and
dialogues aimed at preventing conflict and advancing
peace, while supporting efforts to build the capacities
of youth organizations and networks to participate in
decision-making processes.
The United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, through its Prevention
Academy project, is building linkages with youth
throughout Central Asia as a means of creating a culture
of prevention among young people.
Inspired by the impressive work done by the youth
focal points in our missions in Colombia, Kosovo and
Somalia, I encourage all United Nations political and
peacekeeping missions to appoint and allocate youth
focal points to effectively implement youth, peace and
security agendas within their respective mandates.
Fourthly, since the adoption of resolution 2419
(2018), the importance of young people’s participation
in peace processes has garnered increased international
attention. As a first step in that process, the first
International Symposium on Youth Participation in
Peace Processes was held in March in Helsinki and
co-hosted by the Governments of Finland, Qatar and
Colombia. The Symposium analysed how young
people have influenced peace processes and mediation
efforts using diverse and innovative approaches. From
participating in peace negotiations as delegates of the
parties of conflict to monitoring ceasefire agreements
to addressing local-level disputes, from drafting and
shaping peace deals to using technology and social
media to reach broader constituencies, young people
have shaped peace processes in countries such as
Colombia, South Sudan and the Philippines.
I am therefore pleased to use this opportunity to
officially announce the launch of a key outcome of
the Symposium: the global policy paper entitled We
Are Here: An integrated approach to youth-inclusive
peace processes, which includes a foreword by the
Secretary-General. The paper evaluates young people’s
participation and inclusion in peace processes that have
taken place over the past 20 years from young people’s
own points of view. It highlights that their roles in
peace processes often build relationships between the
formal and informal realms of peace negotiations,
making mediation efforts that otherwise take place
4/22

17/07/2019

behind closed doors more open, inclusive and, thereby,
sustainable.
However, there are still massive gaps in
meaningfully including young people in peace
processes at all levels and documenting young people’s
roles in peace negotiations and mediation efforts. The
symposium concluded with a set of recommendations
to address those gaps and will serve as a useful tool
to all stakeholders, especially mediators on the ground.
It is encouraging to note that, at the country level,
youth groups are already testing and validating some
of those recommendations. In Cameroon, under the
leadership of young peacebuilders, over 600 young
mediators are being trained to step up and support
community level negotiations. Last weekend, 30 young
Libyans representing minorities from Amazigh, Tabu
and Tuareg communities, including young people with
disabilities from all regions of the country, gathered to
discuss topics pertaining to peace, people, prosperity,
planet and partnerships. I hope that this is the beginning
of a process that will continue to inspire their leaders
with regard to concrete actions to bring lasting peace.
I am also pleased to note that the State of Qatar has
already committed to hosting a second symposium in
2020 in Doha, focusing especially on young women’s
participation in peace processes. I hope that this will be
a good opportunity to further explore the interlinkages
between resolutions 2250 (2015) and 1325 (2000).
Lastly, the report of the Secretary-General on
youth, peace and security will be presented to the
Security Council by May 2020.
The successful implementation of resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) requires further support,
including political will and ownership from Member
States, funding for programming, institutional support
for capacity-building and prioritization. Achieving
lasting peace is not an elitist cause that Governments,
politicians, the United Nations and other institutions
can or should undertake alone. Sustainable peace cannot
be achieved at the cost of social inclusion. Our efforts
to build and sustain peace need to be democratized to
include the communities most affected. Young people
are our best chance for succeeding at that.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Wickramanayake for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Muganda.
19-22066

17/07/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ms. Muganda: My name is Wevyn Muganda. I am a
25-year-old activist working at HAKI Africa, a national
human rights organization based in Mombasa, Kenya.
It is an honour to brief the Security Council today, and
I commend the presidency and other Member States
for prioritizing youth, peace and security and inviting
young briefers to this meeting.
Young people are agents of change. The revolutions
of today are led by young men and women like me, who
have put themselves at the front lines to ensure that
we live in a more peaceful, just and inclusive society.
We acknowledge the urgent need to take charge of
our future. That is why resolutions 2250 (2015) and
2419 (2018) on youth, peace and security, if fully
implemented, have the power to transform the lives of
young people and societies.
HAKI Africa has engaged thousands of young
people on human rights and peacebuilding efforts. That
has been achieved through human rights education;
youth-led social activities with justice actors and
youth reintegration in communities; and support to
the formulation and implementation of legislative
and policy frameworks, such as the Mombasa County
Action Plan for Preventing and Countering Violent
Extremism, in partnership with communities, including
young people, the national Government and the county
Government of Mombasa.
There can be no peace without justice, which is
why in the quest for transitional justice, we partnered
with the Office of the Director of Public Prosecution,
in Kenya, to conduct public enquiries into the cases of
the extrajudicial killings of 136 people on the coast of
Kenya, which took place from 2012 to date, with most
victims being young people.
The seminal progress study on youth, peace and
security, The Missing Peace: Independent Progress
Study on Youth, Peace and Security, presented in
this Chamber last year (see S/PV.8241), rightly
identifies injustices and the lack of human rights as
key contributors to the violence of exclusion. So often,
young people are seen as just victims or perpetrators,
rather than as citizens and key partners for peace.
Our biggest challenge lies not just in rehabilitating
young people, but also in partnering with the majority
of young people, who, as we all know, are not interested
in violence. That should be done by fostering a
conducive environment that allows for their meaningful
participation in decision-making. It also means

S/PV. 8577

supporting young people to become the difference and
to make a difference as peacebuilders themselves and
through their organizations, movements and networks.
I spend my Sunday afternoons with young people
in our chill spots. In Mombasa, we call them maskanis,
in reference to the informal spaces where young people
gather during their free time. Research has shown that
the police have been accused of going to those spaces
to harass, illegally arrest and, in some instances, solicit
bribes from young people. Those are also spaces that
extremist groups can use to recruit some young people.
But, more importantly, it is also in those spaces that
HAKI Africa has identified the most powerful young
influencers and activists. We have invited many young
women and men to participate in trainings on human
rights, peacebuilding and leadership, and they have
become peacebuilders who are leading local initiatives,
for example, on community policing. To reach the most
vulnerable and marginalized, we must go to the places
where young people are, spend time there and move
away from town halls and formal workshops.
I love the Internet. The Internet is where I socialize,
learn and get entertained. It is also where I publish youthfriendly articles on human rights, social cohesion and
active citizenship. That includes presenting alternative
narratives to violent extremism through my blog
Beyond the Lines and accessible pieces on national and
local instruments, such as Kenya’s strategy to counter
violent extremism. To date, the blog has reached over
110,000 young people and has helped build an online
community of peacebuilders and active citizens.
KauliZetu Mtaani is a Swahili phrase that means
“our opinions in the hood”. It is also a personal initiative
that I started this year to amplify the excluded voices of
young people by filming the debates and conversations
in maskanis on social issues and sharing them online.
I believe that every voice should be heard. Every
voice counts.
My experience is one of many young human
rights defenders and peacebuilders working locally.
As part of the ‘16x16’ initiative of the United Nations
Development Programme Youth Global Programme, I
have joined a group of impressive young activists from
around the world who lead organizations, movements
and networks that contribute to advancing Sustainable
Development Goal 16 on peaceful, just and inclusive
societies. We have received incredible support and
have had opportunities to engage meaningfully with a

19-220665/22

S/PV.8577

Maintenance of international peace and security

17/07/2019

range of partners, locally and internationally. We need
more initiatives like that, which can truly strengthen
youth agency.

explain what it is like to be a leader in Afghanistan as
a young woman. I will conclude my speech with a few
modest recommendations for the United Nations.

While progress has been made to implement the
youth, peace and security agenda, we still have to
create an enabling environment for peacebuilding and
ensure that young people can truly be in the driver seat
of peace and security. I urge Member States to fully
implement resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). In
my view, the three key steps that should be taken are
the following.

My passion for peace traces back to the tragic
experience I just narrated. War forced my family to
flee to Pakistan and live in a refugee camp, without
papers and away from our homeland, when I was only 4
years old. That war continues until today, and my story
is being recreated every single day in other people’s
lives. Life in refugee camps stirred a desire in me to
work for peaceful coexistence in Afghanistan, where
all citizens can enjoy their basic human rights, access
quality education and contribute positively to society.

First, the participation of young people in
decision-making processes at all levels should be
enhanced, including by listening to the voices of
local actors.
Secondly, the human rights of all individuals
should be protected, with a particular focus on youth,
especially young women and sexual minorities, human
rights defenders and peacebuilders.
Last but not least, greater accountability and
regular reporting in the Security Council on how well
it is doing with and on youth should be ensured.
Resolution 2250 (2015) has secured me and my
young peers a seat in the car. We are deeply excited
about the journey, and that is why we need to be in the
driver’s seat to reach our destination. We want to take
charge, and we want to drive forward. Will the Security
Council lead with us?
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Muganda for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ramyar.
Ms. Ramyar: Many people dream of seeing
helicopters or riding in one; I pray to God I never see
one again. They remind me of the tragic moment in my
life during the civil war when a helicopter dropped a
bomb on our home in Kabul and destroyed its floors in
1995. Traumatized and scared, my siblings and I found
each other safe in the yard after the dust settled, and we
started to look for other members of our family.
I thank you, Mr. President, for your kind invitation
to me to brief the members of the Security Council. It is
such an honour to be here; it is a dream come true. Please
allow me to outline my speech today. I will share why
I have a passion for peace, introduce the large youthled organization that I lead, talk about how resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) support my work and
6/22

I could not wait to return to Kabul, rebuild our home,
enrol at a local school and prepare myself to pursue my
vision. The creation of a democratic Afghanistan in
2001 allowed me to come back to the country and to
work through the challenges of the war for a peaceful
country. I joined Afghans for Progressive Thinking
(APT), which was founded by an Afghan youth in the
belief that youth are not just victims or perpetrators of
violence but an active contributor to peace processes. I
joined the organization and became Executive Director
in 2014.
In a male-dominated Afghan society, my leadership
has not been accepted or respected by most men. That
experience has also stirred a passion in me to also
seek theories and practices to challenge the existing
prejudices among people towards women’s leadership.
The result of our work is that there are now more women
taking leadership positions and are being supported by
men at the same time.
Youth form the majority of the Afghan population,
and they are strategically placed in the society to create
change in their communities and to push for structural
changes at the policy level, particularly at this important
juncture of our society now that we are closer to a peace
agreement than ever before.
I want to affirm that the youth, peace and security
agenda is preparing a generation of young men and
women in Afghanistan that will lead our country
towards peace, development and prosperity.
The organization that I lead — Afghans for
Progressive Thinking — is one concrete example of an
entity that has been encouraged by the United Nations
policy positions to work for peace in Afghanistan. Being
a woman who works to create peace in Afghanistan
19-22066

17/07/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8577

has never been easy but the motivation that I have
received from our partners, particularly the United
Nations partnership with our umbrella organization,
the United Network of Young Peacebuilders, and
the Civil Society Platform for Peacebuilding and
Statebuilding, have given me the energy to pursue my
vision with confidence.

Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, APT pioneered
an initiative to select the first-ever Afghan Youth
Representative to the United Nations last year. This
year, we are working closely with the Embassy of
Germany in Kabul to select the second Afghan Youth
Representative, whom the Council will meet later in the
year. Let me conclude by stressing the following points.

Young Afghan women and men have the potential
to lead our country and create not only a peaceful
Afghanistan but also a stable region, in which our
country’s unique geographical location serves as a
bridge for ideas, ambitions and cooperation. With that
belief and vision, at APT we work to promote critical
thinking and a culture of peace among young Afghans.

First, the United Nations needs to take a longterm approach and develop policies that make youth
an integral part of the decision-making process. The
inclusion of youth in the Afghan Government in the past
few years has been encouraging but it is not sustainable.

Since APT’s inception in 2011, more than 20,000
youth and university students have participated in
our activities, most of whom come from the rural
parts of the country. Also, as a leading organization
in the implementation of resolution 2250 (2015), we
have held many debates and dialogues that support
i ts implementation in Afghanistan since 2015 and
have worked with the Government of Afghanistan
on a practical action plan for the youth, peace and
security agenda.
I would like to take the opportunity to recognize
and appreciate the positive efforts of the Government
of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan to include
young people in decision-making processes, including
efforts to allow them to assume leadership positions.
Ambassador Adela Raz, who is a young Afghan woman
serving as Afghanistan’s Permanent Representative to
the United Nations, is a testament to how far Afghans
have come along. Nonetheless, the notions of exclusion
and hierarchical relationships between men and women
and elders and youth still dominate the societal,
cultural, politica1 and economic landscape across
Afghan society. That needs to change.
On behalf of APT and the Afghan youth, I am
pleased to thank the Security Council for adopting
resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). My colleagues
and I had the honour to partner with the United Network
of Young Peacebuilders on behalf of the Afghan youth
and advocate for resolution 2250 (2015) until it was
adopted in 2015.
Subsequent to our activities to implement
the resolution, along with the Government of the
Netherlands represented in Kabul and with the support
of the Afghan Government and the United Nations

Secondly, young people must be allowed to play
a key role in the peace process in Afghanistan, from
the negotiation stage to the implementation. Since the
youth forms the largest segment of society, we have the
highest stake in the process.
Thirdly, youth must be seen as an equal partner, not
as project implementers or grantees.
Fourthly, the Office of the Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth is uniquely positioned to encourage
national coalition and strategies with regard to
resolution 2250 (2015) and to evaluate the effectiveness
of their implementation. Well-established local youth
organizations will be ideal partners for that activity.
I wish to affirm once again that the young Afghans
whom the Council has met in settings such as today’s are
testament to a new Afghanistan — a partner to the global
community. We desire to move forward, not backwards.
We thank the Security Council for partnering with our
people, particularly the youth, in our vision to create an
inclusive and peaceful Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Ramyar for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for using your presidency today to
highlight this issue and organize this briefing on youth,
peace and security. May I also thank our briefers very
much. It is very valuable and important to hear directly
from representatives not only of civil society but also
of the youth — two groups that are more important to
our work but which we in the United Kingdom want to
see participating meaningfully in decision-making on
issues connected with peace and security.

19-220667/22

S/PV.8577

Maintenance of international peace and security

I was particularly impressed by what I heard from
Ms. Muganda about the work of HAKI Africa, in
particular with regard to taking concrete actions on the
ground towards peacebuilding. I believe that she said
not just in the classroom but real action, and I think that
that is really very important and impressive.
May I also welcome the global policy paper, which
was commissioned by the Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral on Youth. We look forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s upcoming report to build further on
recommendations to implement resolutions 2254 (2015)
and 2419 (2018).
The importance of youth participation in addressing
the world’s most pressing challenges, including
conflict, which is the business of the Council, really
ought to be self-evident. More than half of the world’s
population is now below the age of 30 and, looking
around the Council table, it is fair to say that not all of
us around the table are below the age of 30. These are
therefore voices that must not be ignored and it is only
by taking in the views of the youth, including in the
Council, that we can properly account for the diversity
of perspectives and the long-term vision that we need in
order to defend and promote human rights and develop
sustainable political, economic and social solutions to
such challenges.
One of the things that United Kingdom regularly
highlights in the Chamber is the importance of an
inclusive political process when it comes to conflict
prevention and conflict resolution because we know that
when peace processes are inclusive, they are one third
more likely to be sustainable. Greater sustainability is
crucial to ongoing peace.
I therefore agree very much with what Ms. Ramyar
said — she was referring particularly to the situation
in Afghanistan but I think it is applicable more
widely — about the importance of youth having a role
in peace processes and being heard and listened to.
That is vital to the future of such countries because
their future is represented in youth.
I also thought what she said, if I may, about the
prejudice that she had suffered as a young woman was
really quite revealing. I think that we would say in the
United Kingdom that young women have a key role to
play in that area. In conflict and in post-conflict contacts
we see the engagement of young women as instrumental.
We see it all the time in building coalitions, mediating
8/22

17/07/2019

local ceasefires, repairing community relations and
challenging and changing the status quo.
Mediation is an issue that we have discussed
regularly before, but allow me to say that we are extremely
proud of the fact that we, the United Kingdom, together
with fellow members of the Commonwealth support the
Women Mediators across the Commonwealth initiative.
We were able to support members of that network to
participate in a youth forum in Nairobi this year, which
addressed the lack of young women’s representation
in mediation processes and how we can overcome
such barriers. The Women Mediators across the
Commonwealth now has nine members under the age
of 35, who are supported to resolve conflicts in their
communities, and we are committed to ensuring that
more young mediators are in that network.
When we consider instability in regions across the
world, it is clear that meeting the aspirations of young
people is crucial in defending and promoting human
rights, resolving conflict and sustaining peace. Young
people are an incredible mobilizing force to drive
political change, which is further enabled through the
use of social media and technology, as we have seen
recently in the Sudan, for example.
We must ensure that young people are able to
live to their full potential. In July 2018, the United
Kingdom launched the $75-million second phase of
our Girls’ Education Challenge, which will support
70,000 girls and train 1,000 young women to teach in
remote areas. We are also one of the largest bilateral
donors to Education Cannot Wait, which was launched
at the 2016 World Humanitarian Summit to protect
access to education for children and youth in conflict
zones. We urge others in the international community
to support that initiative. Once again, that is all part
of peacebuilding, conflict prevention and postconflict stability.
Sadly, there are of course instances in which
young people find themselves in situations of great
danger. In November, the United Kingdom will host an
international conference on preventing sexual violence
in conflict, under the theme “Time for Justice: Putting
Survivors First”, and we are ensuring that the voices of
youth survivors will play a crucial role in that meeting.
Let me conclude by thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate, and our briefers for coming
here and for their wise words. I heard the Special Envoy
19-22066

17/07/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

say that the title of her paper is We Are Here. Well, she
is certainly here today in the Council, and she is heard.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I am delivering this statement on behalf
of the three African members of the Security Council:
Côte d’Ivoire, South Africa and Equatorial Guinea.
At the outset, we express our gratitude to the
Peruvian presidency for convening this important
debate on the implementation of resolutions 2250
(2015) and 2419 (2018), on youth, peace and security.
We are also grateful for the informative briefings made
by Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth, Ms. Muganda and Ms. Sofia
Ramyar, who reminded us that most of the world’s
young people want to contribute and are contributing to
achieving lasting peace and development for all.
We welcome the initiatives of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, which, during its membership in
the Security Council in 2015, presided over the adoption
of the historic resolution 2250 (2015), and the important
role played by Peru in promoting the youth, peace and
security agenda, especially with regard to the adoption
of resolution 2419 (2018). Both resolutions demonstrate
the prioritization of young people in the adoption of an
international governance framework and recognize and
legitimize the efforts of young people in peacebuilding
and conflict resolution.
We recall that the first International Symposium
on Youth Participation in Peace Processes, held earlier
this year, highlighted critical issues on how to advance
youth participation in peace processes. In that regard,
we also emphasize the participation of young people in
innovative projects that help them in large measure to
remain actively engaged and far removed from vulnerable
situations, such as those involving exploitation,
radicalization and recruitment by extremist, criminal
and armed groups. One such example involves a pilot
project with the participation of former combatants in
ecotourism initiatives in Colombia. It is imperative that
the Council discuss in depth how national Governments
and interregional bodies can be supported to ensure
the full implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and
2419 (2018) at the national level.
It is estimated that more than 600 million young
people worldwide, of whom a large number live in
Africa, currently live in fragile and conflict-affected
areas. The African continent has the world’s youngest
population, with more than 400 million young people

S/PV. 8577

between the ages of 15 and 35. Putting young people
at the centre of our development commitments and
priorities is critical, as youth networks across the
continent are mobilizing youth groups and ensure their
full and active participation in the work being done to
harness the demographic dividend.
The African Union has developed various
youth development policies and programmes at the
continental level to ensure that the continent benefits
from its demographic dividend. The policies include
the African Youth Charter, the African Youth Decade
2009-2018 Plan of Action and the Malabo Decision on
Youth Empowerment, which are implemented through
various programmes under the African Union Agenda
2063. Through those instruments, the African Union has
emphasized the importance of the inclusion of young
people at all levels to ensure their effective participation
in every effort to promote peace and security.
Our leaders are working hand in hand to prioritize
the well-being of our young people by providing them
with access to and opportunities to receive adequate
education that will afford them with the necessary
knowledge and skills to enter an increasingly globalized
and competitive labour market, minimize barriers
created by unemployment and underemployment and
empower them to become positive agents of change.
The Continental Strategy for Technical and Vocational
Education and Training to Foster Youth Employment
perfectly exemplifies Africa’s firm commitment to
quality education for young people so that they can
contribute to the fight against poverty in that vulnerable
sector of society.
With regard to issues concerning the impact of
conflict and instability among young people, the
United Nations Population Fund has collaborated with
several African countries, including the Niger, Chad,
Cameroon and Nigeria, with a multisectoral approach to
supporting the development of youth initiatives with a
view to reducing the risk of radicalization and ensuring
that young people can contribute to the development
of their countries. Moreover, within the framework of
the Africa-European Union partnership, special focus
is placed on the issue of young people, in particular
through the Africa-Europe Youth Summit. The fourth
edition of the Summit, held from 9 to 11 October 2017,
was endorsed by the Abidjan Declaration, in which
young people from both continents called for the urgent
implementation of resolution 2250 (2015) on the role

19-220669/22

S/PV.8577

Maintenance of international peace and security

of young men and women in promoting peace and
combating violent extremism.
Despite those various steps forward, there is still
an urgent need to empower young people not only in the
African region, but throughout the world so that they
can be more influential and productive actors in their
societies. We commend the efforts of the United Nations
and its agencies to ensure the empowerment of young
people, including the launch of its Youth 2030 initiative,
which provides an ambitious framework for stepping up
our efforts to include and empower young people. For
the benefit of our young people, we encourage leaders
to promote an integrated approach to all development
settings, including ongoing investments in basic
services, such as education, health care, water, the
rule of law, justice, security, human rights, inclusive,
accountable and responsive socioeconomic and political
institutions, and conflict prevention mechanisms.
Governments, development partners and other
influential people are called upon to adopt policies that
promote the development and human rights of young
people and assess the progress being made through the
Sustainable Development Goals concerning adolescents
and young people. Young people should be involved as
full partners in achieving those Goals.
In conclusion, Cote d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea
and South Africa call for greater recognition of the
place of young people in society. In that context, the
three African members of the Security Council support
common efforts to encourage greater participation of
young people in decision-making processes, which
will undoubtedly help to maintain international peace
and security.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): A recent study showed
that in 2016, there were 408 million young people who
lived in settings affected by armed conflict or organized
violence. Based on the statement just made on behalf of
our African colleagues, the number could be as high
as 600 million. We know about conflict-stricken places
in Africa, such as Libya, and others like Syria, but
the stories we heard are all about individual fates. We
heard from the young woman from Afghanistan, who
spoke such individual fates. I thank the presidency for
putting this item on the Council’s agenda.
At the same time, young people who grow up in
conflict settings, are deprived of economic opportunities
and education and suffer under poor governance and
incompetent police and security services are more likely
10/22

17/07/2019

to join extremist groups. A recent study conducted by
the United Nations Development Programme, Journey
to Extremism in Africa, shows that very clearly. It
is therefore the responsibility of the international
community and, in particular, of each individual State
to ensure that young people are educated and provided
with economic opportunities so that they can become,
as our colleague from Equatorial Guinea said, positive
agents of peace.
Let me quote one of the first sentences in the
intervention by the Secretary-General’s Envoy for
Youth. She said, “young people care about peace”.
We heard wonderful statements by Ms. Sofia Ramyar
and Ms. Wevyn Muganda in which they outlined their
activities. I can only encourage them and congratulate
Ms. Ramyar on the courage she shows in Afghanistan,
in a society in which women still do not have the
opportunities they deserve. We are very happy to
hear that, during the most recent peace talks, at least
20 per cent of the participants around the table were
women. Women and young people must have a chance
to participate regularly in peace processes.
The good thing is that there are many examples of
activities in which women participate. Our briefers are
fantastic examples. We all know of Greta Thunberg,
who was able to mobilize 1.6 million people in 125
countries to take a stand and ask world leaders to do
more about climate action. Malala Yousafzai stood
here at the United Nations and inspired us with her
courage and determination. In April, we were briefed
by Nadia Murad (see S/PV.8514), a young woman who
gave a very emotional testimony of the suffering of
Yazidi women in Iraq. She took a stand and fought for
the rights of women and girls. We heard the testimony
of wheelchair-bound Syrian refugee Nujeen Mustapha
(see S/PV.8515), who talked about the fate of young
Syrian refugees.
The voices of young people must be heard and
amplified, and then turned into action. That is a top
priority for Germany. Ms. Sofia Ramyar mentioned
some of the activities Germany conducts in Afghanistan.
In general, we have action plans for the development
activities we regularly include in our policies. There are
several examples. We support a youth cultural centre
in Bamako so that young people are involved in other
activities, instead of becoming extremists. In Lake
Chad, we have a project that supports the survivors of
sexual violence. We support Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
19-22066

17/07/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

and Armed Conflict, in her activities to reintegrate
child soldiers. We support an educational centre for
Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh.
In Germany itself, we try to bring the United Nations
into the classroom. We award a youth peace prize. We
bring youth representatives to the United Nations. We
not only support Afghan youth representatives; we also
bring German youth representatives. I am very pleased
to see two of them here in the Chamber. We have a
so-called youth check, whereby we systematically
consider the effects of legislation on young people and
their future.
I very much thank the Peruvian presidency for
putting this important issue on the Council’s agenda.
We should have regular meetings with youth briefers to
update us on crisis settings. We need youth participation
and engagement. We think that it is a crucial factor for
sustaining peace and security.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
I thank you, Mr President, for convening today’s
important meeting.
I also thank Ms. Wickramanayake, Ms. Muganda
and Ms. Ramyar for their important updates, moving
testimony and concrete recommendations. They have
brought a very useful perspective into the Security
Council and one, as others have said, that we do not
usually hear, so it is welcome. We should be hearing
directly from people like them more often — young
people who are organizing in their communities,
making their voices heard and helping make the world
a safer and more inclusive place. The United States is
pleased that they have a seat at the table today. It is
something that we hope will happen even more often
in the future.
There are many ways that we could talk about
youth, peace and security. It is tragic that for so many
of the conflicts on the Council’s agenda, children and
young adults are often caught in the crosshairs. They
are the most vulnerable victims when schools shut
down, hospitals are targeted and aid is blocked. When
a generation of young people cannot get an education
or start a family because of war, it will take decades
to recover.
One key lesson we must take away from the
discussions on youth and peace and security is that we
must work even harder to stop conflicts before they
begin. We need to listen directly to young people, as

S/PV. 8577

we have today. More often than not, we want nothing
more than for the fighting to stop so that they can have
a chance at a more secure and prosperous future. I want
to focus my remarks today on how we can harness the
power of young people to make positive change.
As diplomats, we spend a great deal of time meeting
and talking to each other behind closed doors. As my
British colleague noted, those discussions rarely involve
people without at least a grey hair or two. However, let
us consider the reality. All around us, we see examples
of young people setting and driving the political
agenda. Young people are not waiting for change to
happen; they are the change that is happening. In so
many parts of the world, they are the ones demanding
an end to the tyranny and speaking up for human rights
and accountability.
Let us take just one example. Earlier this week, the
Council had its second briefing on the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (see S/PV.8573). The advocacy of the 2018
Nobel Peace Prize laureate, Nadia Murad, who was in
her early twenties when she first briefed the Council
(see S/PV.7585), was instrumental in bringing attention
to the plight of Yazidis and helped spur Council action.
Ms. Murad’s courage to come to the Council and give
us a first-hand account of the brutality she encountered
pushed the international community to act. We need
to encourage that kind of leadership and give young
people the tools that they need to succeed.
That is one reason the United States proudly
invests in leadership exchanges and programmes
aimed at partnering with youth around the world. Our
young leader initiatives engage youth in Africa, SouthEast Asia, Latin America, the Caribbean and across
the Atlantic to provide business, civic and leadership
development training. These efforts are aimed at
building partnerships with promising leaders around
the world. The United States also supports programmes
that engage youth as partners to foster social cohesion
and tolerance.
Young people have played a critical role in
countering terrorist narratives at home and abroad.
Terrorist groups like the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) have tried to find vulnerable
people to recruit, however young people around the
world have countered these hateful narratives with
innovative tools, apps and approaches. For example,

19-2206611/22

S/PV.8577

Maintenance of international peace and security

we have partnered with the Peer-To-Peer: Challenging
Extremism programme, where students develop and
implement online campaigns and content to prevent and
counter violent extremism. Such engagement has been
an important part of our whole-of-society effort, in
line with the United Nations Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism in countering ISIS over the past
few years.
This year, we continue to raise awareness,
build partnerships and generate new ideas on youth
engagement and leadership. As part of the Economic
and Social Council Youth Forum held this past
April, the United States hosted an event for global
youth delegates in order to hear directly from them
about ways to further implement resolution 2250
(2015). A number of youth delegates highlighted the
systematic underrepresentation of youth in politics
and policymaking. They shared their feelings of
being excluded from decisions that affect them and
future generations.
We have made progress in establishing young people
as partners for peace, but this is just the beginning and
we all need to do more. We need to continue building
upon resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), which
establish youth and peace and security on the Council’s
agenda. For our part, the United States will continue
to support pathways for young people to get the skills
they need to become active citizens in shaping the
Government and politics of their countries.
As I said at the beginning of my remarks, we
should continue setting an example by inviting briefers
like these young people to brief us in the Council
going forward. We encourage each Council member
to consider the best ways that they can open doors
for the next generation. We cannot afford to ignore
or marginalize 4.5 billion people under the age of 30
around the world. We must all redouble these efforts
to amplify the voices and contributions of young
peacebuilders and youth leaders for a peaceful and
prosperous future.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by expressing my appreciation to the
young participants in this meeting — Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General’s Envoy
on Youth, Ms. Wevyn Muganda and Ms. Sofia
Ramyar — for their briefings. I would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting, one
year after the adoption of resolution 2419 (2018), which
12/22

17/07/2019

reiterated the important and positive contribution of
youth to efforts to promote and achieve international
peace and security, and the important role of youth
in preventing and resolving conflicts, as well as in
peacebuilding efforts.
We strongly believe that the development of
youth in any society is strongly linked to the level of
advancement and welfare of the population. Therefore,
we welcome this meeting to promote the implementation
of the youth, peace and security agenda in accordance
with the two resolutions adopted by the Council on this
topic, including resolution 2250 (2015) submitted by
Jordan in 2015, which was the first of its kind.
I would like to address three aspects in our
discussion today.
First, I will consider the challenges that impede
the implementation of the youth, peace and security
agenda. The proliferation of conflicts around the
world is a major obstacle to the positive contribution
of youth to peace and security. In our region, in the
Arab world, which unfortunately is home to some of
the worst conflicts in the world, many young people
face challenges that prevent them from achieving
their aspirations. Conflicts have dashed their hopes
and their future. Unemployment has increased their
despair and insecurity. Poverty has deprived them of
the right to live in dignity. Terrorism and radicalization
have hijacked their innocence. These challenges are
a serious threat to the future of countries and their
sustainable development. We must address the root
causes of conflicts.
Moreover, young people around the world are
struggling in developing and conflict-affected nations
to enjoy their basic needs, including education,
employment and health care, and to practice their civil
liberties and political participation. Unless those needs
are met, young people will have no means to prosper
or make their full contribution to society. These social,
economic and political needs are necessary to improve
the lives of youth and to eliminate poverty and hunger,
as well as to promote the welfare of and more peaceful,
inclusive societies.
Secondly, I would like to underscore some positive
examples of the agenda’s implementation. It is important
to highlight the progress achieved in this regard in
recent years. Many initiatives have been undertaken
by Member States, the United Nations and civil society
organizations — including, most importantly, young
19-22066

17/07/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

people themselves — to promote implementation of
the youth, peace and security agenda. These initiatives
range from peace missions that involve young people in
building social cohesion and stability in many conflictaffected regions worldwide, including in Colombia, Iraq,
Kosovo and Somalia, to high-level political initiatives,
such as the first International Symposium on Youth
Participation in Peace Processes, in March 2019, which
was co-hosted by Finland, Qatar and Colombia, in
cooperation with the Office of the Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth, as noted by Ms. Wickramanayake
in her briefing. We also welcome efforts undertaken
by the United Nations, including the development of
a joint plan of action on youth, peace and security to
support the implementation of the United Nations
Youth Strategy 2030.
Thirdly, I wish to highlight the measures needed to
guarantee the implementation of the youth, peace and
security agenda. We fully agree that young people are
the pivot of society’s development. They are a critical
element in achieving peace and security. In that regard,
we welcome the recommendations contained in the
policy paper on youth in peace operations commissioned
by the Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth.
We would also like to emphasize the need to implement
the Sustainable Development Goals, a critical element
with a very important link to peace and stability. The
Goals can be achieved only through the development of
youth and support for civil society organizations and
institutions that are interested in their welfare. We also
emphasize the need to invest in young people in order
to build their capacities, in line with the principles and
values that prevent them from falling victim to crime
and extremism, by developing and promoting national,
regional and global peace networks.
In conclusion, I reiterate Kuwait’s readiness to work
closely and constructively with the United Nations and
the international community to support efforts aimed at
promoting the youth, peace and security agenda, within
and beyond the Council, and especially through our
continued cooperation with the Office of the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very important meeting. Allow me,
first of all, to thank all the briefers — Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, Ms. Wevyn Muganda and Ms. Sofia
Ramyar — for their presentations, as well as for sharing
their touching and inspiring experiences.

S/PV. 8577

We concur that youth participation can increase
the legitimacy and sustainability of peace processes.
We therefore join the Secretary-General in saying that
we must transform norms, practices, approaches and
attitudes towards our young people and recognize them
as equals who can contribute to all steps and aspects of
peace processes.
Inclusiveness is indeed key. As future leaders,
it is only logical that young people be given a bigger
role in preventing conflict and encouraging peace
and development. To that end, Governments should
invest more in creating environments where young
people are empowered to take control and ownership
and exert a positive influence. Allow me to elaborate.
First, we need to create conditions conducive to
youth participation, including in addressing the root
causes of conflict. Socioeconomic gaps and a lack of
economic opportunities can drive young people to
disappointment and frustration. Disenchanted youth
are fertile ground for the spread of dangerous narratives
and ideas. In protracted conflicts, those disempowered
young people are easy prey to armed groups, either as
victims or as tools of war. The Council, in that regard,
is well positioned to play an important role.
Peacekeeping efforts, including disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and community
engagement, can help young people gain their second
chance and reintegrate themselves into society. Postreintegration and peacebuilding can create opportunities
to help young people maintain their peaceful ways of
life through education and job opportunities. Moreover,
there is also a need to include youth in all stages of
the peace continuum, as frequently mentioned by the
Secretary-General, from conflict prevention, to conflict
resolution, peacekeeping and, of course, peacebuilding.
To achieve that, partnership is needed, which
brings me to my second point. Resolutions 2250 (2015)
and 2419 (2018) were not meant for the small group of
the Council alone, but for the wider membership of the
United Nations. It is important that we translate those
resolutions into action through partnerships involving
States, regional organizations and the whole United
Nations system. We appreciate the first International
Symposium on Youth Participation in Peace Processes,
held in March, and support the engagement of the
President of the General Assembly in advancing the
agenda of youth, peace and security.

19-2206613/22

S/PV.8577

Maintenance of international peace and security

Allow me to share Indonesia’s experience in
empowering youth to combat radicalization. In 2009, we
enacted a youth law that serves as the legal foundation
for integrating youth empowerment into our national
development plan. It includes education access, basic
health care and youth participation in decision-making
processes and in promoting human rights. To help
combat terrorism and violent extremism, we currently
have approximately 780 youth ambassadors spread out
across 13 provinces.
We brought that initiative to the region when, in
April, we hosted a regional workshop on establishing
youth ambassadors for peace against terrorism and
violent extremism. One hundred young people from
the region were tasked with building networks and
spreading positive messages on social media. We look
forward to the Secretary-General’s report in May, which
could feature our partnerships to combat radicalization
among youth. Indonesia is a country that was built with
the spirit of youth, and that spirit will continue to shape
our future. The first Indonesian President, Mr. Sukarno,
once said, “Give me 1,000 people and I will shake a
mountain, but give me just 10 young people and I will
shake the world”. It is time that we transform our youth
from a demographic dividend into one of peace.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Secretary-General’s Envoy on
Youth, Ms. Wickramanayake, and the other briefers for
their views.
We fully share the opinions that have been presented
today about the need to pay due attention to the topic
of youth in the United Nations system and to resolve
acute problems related to their socialization, which is
what Ms. Wickramanayake is successfully doing. We
must all help her. However, the following question
arises: Are we indeed helping Ms. Wickramanayake by
discussing today’s topic in the Security Council for a
third time? In accordance with its mandate, the Security
Council is supposed to deal with matters related to the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Security Council’s consideration of issues that are not
related to that task can hardly improve the effectiveness
of its activities or have any added value for resolving
pressing issues for young people.
At the same time, we understand and recognize
the importance of including youth-related issues in the
discussions of country-specific topics on the Security
Council agenda, in particular taking into account
14/22

17/07/2019

the specific situations of African States, in which
young people constitute a substantial proportion of
the population. The famous German poet and thinker
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe once said, “The fate of
any nation at any time depends on the opinions of its
young people under the age of 25”. However, discussing
such issues in isolation of their context can only
distract the Council from resolving the urgent problems
it is supposed to address. It seems particularly strange
that a choice has been made to discuss such general
matters against the backdrop of blocking subjects that
are of immediate concern to the Security Council, as
occurs periodically.
It is probable that, following this statement, some
will try to suggest that youth issues are not a priority
for Russia, but that is not the case. We are taking
active measures at the national level to interact with
young people. In 2014, the Government of the Russian
Federation adopted the basis for the State youth policy
to 2025, which is being implemented at the federal,
regional and municipal levels. A key part of the strategy
involves the State creating basic conditions for the full
self-fulfilment and integration of young people into
the social and political spheres and improving their
socioeconomic situation.
We fully support the development of youth civil
society, and we attach great importance to holding
seminars and forums at the national and international
levels, which helps to strengthen the peaceful and
constructive potential of young people. In particular,
in October 2017 we were pleased to host the nineteenth
World Youth Festival in Sochi, which brought together
over 20,000 people from more than 180 countries. We
also advocate peaceful youth organizations and the
development of intercultural and interreligious dialogue
among the youth population. The important role that
young people need to play in modern society, including
through constructive participation in building and
sustaining peace, is also reflected in resolutions 2250
(2015) and 2419 (2018).
The independent study prepared by Mr. Graeme
Simpson (see S/2018/86) gave us additional food
for thought about the role of young people in efforts
to prevent and resolve conflicts, and emphasized the
importance of advancing their positive image. At the
same time, practically speaking and aside from those
conclusions, we believe that there is a need for States
in conflict to pay due attention to fighting poverty,
19-22066

17/07/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

illiteracy and unemployment, which are the fundamental
barriers to young people realizing their potential.
As an example, let us look at the situation in
Palestine, in particular the Gaza Strip, where the
unemployment rate among young people is approaching
50 per cent. Against that backdrop, and given the
stagnation of the Middle East peace process, a breeding
ground is forming for the spread of extremist ideas and
the radicalization of society. If we consider the subject
of young people in the context of the Security Council
agenda, while taking its mandate into account, work
should focus on combating the challenges of extremism
and terrorism.
All ages are undoubtedly exposed to those
phenomena. However, young people, with their nascent
world view and search for self-identification, are more
vulnerable to radical ideology. That factor, alongside
young people’s lack of life experience, education
and other prospects for self-fulfilment in countries
with unfavourable socioeconomic environments or in
conflict situations, is adeptly exploited by extremist
groups to involve young people in unlawful activity.
As part of their attempts to attract young
people, extremists increasingly use information and
communication technologies, which requires us to
bolster our collective efforts in the sphere of international
information security. Regional organizations with the
necessary country-specific expertise play an important
role in countering the radicalization of young people.
We note the fruitful work being done in this area by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization.

S/PV. 8577

address issues of education, employment, sustainable
development and other important subjects. The most
comprehensive road map in the area of youth policy is
the World Programme of Action for Youth, the separate
aspects of which are considered within the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council and
their relevant subsidiary bodies.
We believe that the decision whether or not to raise
a subject in the Security Council is not a reflection of
its relevance to the international community. It is far
more important, however, to strictly uphold the existing
division of labour within the United Nations system,
which benefits both the Security Council and young
people. As was quite rightly pointed out by Mr. Heusgen,
those who are more advanced in age will always find a
way to discuss the problems of young people, and for
that they do not need the Security Council.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Peru for convening and presiding over today’s
meeting. We also thank the Secretary-General’s Envoy
on Youth for her briefing. China listened attentively to
the briefings of youth representatives, Ms. Muganda
and Ms. Ramyar.
Youth play an important role in promoting
socioeconomic development and maintaining world
peace and stability. At present, young people in a number
of countries and regions are being affected by armed
conflict and, as a result, face poverty, unemployment
and other difficulties. At the same time, youth around
the world are taking decisive action and making efforts
to promote global peace and stability.

Special attention should be paid to the phenomenon
of using radicalized young people to achieve domestic
political goals, in particular externally orchestrated
processes that aim to overthrow legitimate authorities
under the guise of democracy and human rights. It
is important that the proclaimed support for young
leaders not result in external players organizing
anti-Government movements in States that they
disfavour. Unfortunately, such situations are far
too frequent.

Resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), adopted
by the Security Council in recent years, mandate the
protection of young people from the harm of armed
conflict and support the role of youth in peace and
security. The international community should make
tangible efforts to implement the relevant resolutions
so as to strengthen the protection of young people in
conflict zones and foster a favourable environment for
the development of youth. In addition, young people in
all countries should be encouraged to continue to play
an active role and shoulder their due responsibilities in
maintaining international peace and stability.

In conclusion, let me once again highlight that we
are by no means seeking to diminish the relevance of
youth issues. We are convinced of the value of in-depth
discussions on youth-related issues in the specialized
forums of the United Nations system designed to

China would like to make the following points.
First, we must step up political efforts to settle regional
hotspot issues. In accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
its own mandate, the Council should work to prevent

19-2206615/22

S/PV.8577

Maintenance of international peace and security

and resolve conflicts through political means and
assist conflict-affected countries in advancing their
respective peace processes, in order to create an
environment of peace and tranquillity in which young
people can live. Pursuant to resolution 2419 (2018),
relevant United Nations agencies and the SecretaryGeneral’s special envoys and special representatives,
including his Envoy on Youth, must engage in closer
exchanges on the needs of youth in armed conflict and
in post-conflict situations.
Secondly, we must prioritize the role of youth in
the prevention and resolution of conflict. It is important
to fully consider youth-related factors in the political
settlement of hotspot issues and ensure the constructive
participation of young people in their own countries’
peace processes, draw on their strengths, extensively
listen to their views and prevent their marginalization.
The United Nations and the wider international
community should strengthen coordination with
the African Union, the League of Arab States, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and other
regional and subregional organizations and provide
greater support to youth-related projects.
Thirdly, we must resolutely counter terror and
extremism, as they can harm young people. The
international community should act upon the relevant
Council resolutions and adopt a unified standard to
resolutely combat all forms of terrorism and violent
extremism. We must take steps to prevent terrorists
and extremist ideologues from eroding the minds of
young people, cut off terrorist and extremist channels
of deception and incitement that target young people,
and crack down on the online recruiting, planning
and fundraising activities carried out by terrorists and
extremists. It is equally important to encourage young
people to become a positive peace-loving group.
Fourthly, we must foster an environment that
enables youth to grow. Extreme poverty and imbalanced
development, inter alia, are deep-rooted causes of
conflict. The United Nations should assist developing
countries in bolstering their sustainable-development
capacity in an effort to advance the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
capitalize on the dividends created by young people.
The United Nations and the international community
should support national Governments in developing
youth policies in line with national conditions, provide
training and employment opportunities for young
people, enable them to build their own businesses and
16/22

17/07/2019

constructively engage in politics, and nurture their
sense of responsibility for social stability.
China supports the ongoing implementation of
Council resolutions on youth, and we look forward
to a comprehensive and balanced report from the
Secretary-General, as called for by the aforementioned
resolutions. In June, the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and the Mongolian Ministry for
Foreign Affairs co-hosted a North-East Asia regional
workshop on youth, peace and security, which was a
useful endeavour in promoting the implementation of
the relevant Council resolutions. China sent delegates
to the workshop to actively participate therein.
Youth are crucial to a nation’s prosperity and
strength, and they are the future and hope of humankind.
We must therefore work together to foster a new type
of international relations that features mutual respect,
fairness, justice and mutually beneficial cooperation.
We must continue to promote the comprehensive
development of youth and support the younger
generation in making important contributions to world
peace and development.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Peru for convening
this meeting. We also thank the Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth and the representatives of civil society
for sharing their perspectives and experiences and
illustrating for us the progress made and challenges
encountered in implementing resolutions 2250 (2015)
and 2419 (2018).
Both of those resolutions as well as the progress
study entitled “The missing peace: independent progress
study on youth and peace and security” (S/2018/86)
serve as a reference point for giving a greater voice to
young people in decision-making and implementing
mechanisms that allow them to meaningfully participate
in peace processes. The International Symposium
on Youth Participation in Peace Processes, held in
Helsinki, served as an excellent platform to learn from
young peacebuilders about areas for improvement in
implementing resolutions on youth, peace and security.
Young people living in conflict zones are exposed
to numerous risks and forms of violence. Safeguarding
their lives and their human rights must therefore be
a priority, including those of young peacebuilders,
human rights defenders and youth organizations, which
tend to face reprisals for their work.
19-22066

17/07/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

With their immeasurable transformative and
innovative potential, young people are allies. They play
a vital role in deterring and resolving conflict. They also
act as peacemakers in their communities and transform
societies by making them more just, inclusive and
peaceful. Guaranteeing the meaningful participation
of young people in building and maintaining peace
and security is essential on the path to achieving
sustainable peace.
It is therefore vital to recognize their role in
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development as an effective tool for preventing and
mitigating conflict, primarily through implementing
Goal 16 — a task on which our Government is working
with the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP). The United Nations Youth Strategy is
undoubtedly an important element of the SecretaryGeneral’s reform. In this regard, the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth and her Office deserve our
highest praise, as does the UNDP, the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the United Nations Population
Fund, which are promoting the issue within their
respective mandates.
We hope that the Security Council ensures that
young people participate in this Chamber alongside us,
briefing us on the maintenance of peace and security
and sharing their perspectives and visions, whether in
open debates or briefings. That has been a practice of
the Dominican Republic.
We wish to seize this opportunity to highlight
other examples of good practices that we believe are
relevant. The United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia has launched a strategy for implementing
resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), with a
focus on the role of young people in efforts aimed at
reintegration and guaranteeing national security. The
Colombian Government has committed to developing
a national action plan for the implementation of the
agenda. Moreover, the African Union has appointed a
Special Envoy on Youth and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo has developed
an in-mission framework strategy on youth, peace
and security.
Those concrete examples of the leading role that
young people play in promoting peace should inspire
our efforts. However, we must continue to take
measures to implement the youth, peace and security
agenda. In that regard, we need to create networks of

S/PV. 8577

young mediators at the regional level to strengthen
their role in mediation and conflict prevention; expand
the profiles and lists of reserve personnel, as well as
prioritize capacity-building and establish an exclusive
budget line to ensure that the United Nations system is
equipped to ensure the implementation of resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), while supporting Member
States in that regard; ensure the preparation of an annual
report of the Secretary-General on the progress made
on and existing challenges regarding those resolutions,
within the framework of an annual open debate; and
create an informal group of experts on youth, peace and
security, in order to systematically and continuously
monitor their implementation.
We hope that the Secretary-General’s reports
to the Security Council, especially those relating to
specific countries, as well as the renewal of mandates
of peacekeeping operations and political missions, will
include references to the implementation of resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). We also join those who
eagerly await the Secretary-General’s first report on
youth, peace and security, as it will most certainly shed
further light on the challenges and gaps that persist in
the implementation of the agenda and provide guidance
on how to address the issue going forward.
In conclusion, let us always remember as States
to work to put youth at the centre of their efforts,
being inclusive and helping them to prevent conflicts
and eliminate obstacles, in order to redress the
historical marginalization and exclusion that they have
experienced in decision-making processes aimed at
achieving peace.
Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Peruvian presidency for taking the initiative
to convene this meeting one year after the adoption
of resolution 2419 (2018), which Peru initiated with
Sweden. I thank the Secretary-General’s Envoy on
Youth, as well as Ms. Muganda and Ms. Ramyar, for
their briefings.
I wish to highlight the obstacles to youth
participation before exploring some ways that the
Security Council could support them in their work for
peace and security.
Young people and youth organizations have not
waited for us to become actors in international peace
and security. All over the world, they contribute to
innovative solutions, invest in new alternative spaces
and fight the status quo, as highlighted in the report of

19-2206617/22

S/PV.8577

Maintenance of international peace and security

the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
on the leading role of young people in preventing and
combating violent extremism. However, this immense
potential cannot be realized if young people are
displaced or forced to leave their countries because of
war, if they are indoctrinated by extremist groups, if
their schools and universities are attacked, if all forms
of freedom of expression are hindered or if they are
excluded from political, economic and social life. We
must allow young people to empower themselves in all
of these areas.
France has therefore made the empowerment of
young people a national priority and a main focus of
its diplomacy. As an example, the MediaSahel project,
led by the French Development Agency, has mobilized
a budget of €8.3 million to enable young people from
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger to counter fake news,
access reliable information and more actively and
calmly participate in public debate in their countries.
We are also supporting youth participation as part
of our presidency of the Group of Seven (G-7). One
month ago, hundreds of decision-makers under the age
of 30 gathered in Paris, under the high patronage of the
President of the Republic, to present recommendations
on fighting inequality. These recommendations will
be forwarded to the G-7 Heads of State, who will meet
from 24 to 26 August in Biarritz. Youth participation
will also be a priority of the forum that France is
co-organizing with Mexico and UN-Women in 2020 to
mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World
Conference on Women, held in Beijing in 1995.
The Council must more consistently support youth
action in building peace and security by strengthening
the operational framework of resolutions 2250 (2015)
and 2419 (2018), which it adopted. Discussions on the
youth, peace and security agenda, such as today’s, are
important. The subject of youth must also be more
consistently included in our deliberations of the countryspecific situations on our agenda. In this regard, we
commend the participation in Security Council meetings
of young briefers, such as Kessy Ekomo-Soignet, of the
Central African Republic (see S/PV.8241), Inas Miloud,
of Libya (see S/PV.8514) and Nujeen Mustafa, a young
Syrian refugee (see S/PV.8556). These briefings should
become more frequent.
It is also essential that country-specific reports
incorporate the aspirations of youth and the
contribution of the United Nations to their being
18/22

17/07/2019

included in the peace process. In this regard, I wish
to commend the youth strategy of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, as well as the efforts
of the UNDP, the United Nations Population Fund
and the Peacebuilding Commission, on developing
a comprehensive programme on youth, peace and
security and supporting youth coalitions and the youth,
peace and security road maps that will begin in 2020.
We look forward to the recommendations the
Secretary-General will make in his report on the
implementation of resolutions 2419 (2018) and 2250
(2015) between now and May 2020. In this regard, I wish
to commend the Secretary-General’s extraordinary
advocacy for youth, as demonstrated by the recent
launch of “Youth 2030: The United Nations Strategy
on Youth”, the organization of the World Conference
of Ministers Responsible for Youth and Youth Forum
Lisbon+21 and the Youth Climate Summit, scheduled for
September, which illustrate the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to make youth a pillar of multilateralism.
In 1957, Albert Camus said in his acceptance
speech for the Nobel Prize in Literature,
“Every generation undoubtedly feels that it is
destined to remake the world. Mine knows, however,
that it will not do so. But perhaps its task is even
greater: to prevent the world from falling apart.”
We will not be able to prevent the world from falling
apart without the full and effective participation of
current and future generations and without recognizing
them as indispensable partners in international peace
and security. To achieve that end, the Council can count
on the full commitment of France.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let me thank
our three young and excellent briefers. I must say that
we are very pleased to have them here in the Chamber
today. It is really important for us to hear from them as
women, young leaders and civil society representatives
about their views and expectations with respect to the
Security Council and about the way forward.
I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, and
your country, Peru, as well as former Security Council
member, Sweden, for their commitment to the youth,
peace and security agenda. Peru and Sweden were
instrumental in the adoption of the previous resolution
on this topic, resolution 2419 (2018).
My delegation cannot agree with the view that the
youth, peace and security agenda should not be a topic
19-22066

17/07/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

for discussion in the Security Council Chamber. There
is nothing in the Charter of the United Nations that
prohibits us from discussing this important topic. Quite
on the contrary, given that young people constitute
almost one third of our world’s entire population, it is
our obligation to discuss it. That is why we also discuss
various other thematic topics, such as the protection
of civilians, sexual violence in conflict and climate
change; it is precisely for that very same reason that
we are meeting again to discuss the role of youth in
conflict prevention and building sustainable peace.
Judging by today’s debate, this view is shared by a
majority of Council members.
As has already been highlighted by a number of
other delegations, inclusiveness in peace processes is
crucial to ensuring sustainable peace. That is why any
peace process — any peacebuilding or peacekeeping
process — will not be fully implemented and sustained
without the full inclusion of young people from the
outset. In this context, the adoption of resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) were ground-breaking
achievements, demonstrating that younger generations
are ready to take centre stage in peace and security
initiatives and become agents of change. I am also
very encouraged by today’s briefers because they have
demonstrated that young people are not only waiting for
us, older people, to do something — they are changing
the world by themselves. They are agents of change.
Having established the legal framework through
those two resolutions, the next key stage is their proper
implementation. Regional organizations and regional
cooperation should play a key role in that regard. I
therefore concur with the statement delivered by the
representative of Equatorial Guinea on behalf of the
African members of the Council, which demonstrated
the African approach to this agenda item. The SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth has already highlighted a
number of different regional initiatives and conferences.
To echo my friends in the Chinese delegation, I should
also like to commend the Government of Mongolia for
having organized, in cooperation with the Department
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the youth, peace
and security workshop on perspectives for dialogue in
North-East Asia, which took place in June.
Let me highlight some issues that are of particular
importance to Poland in the context of this topic. The
first is the situation of young people with disabilities.
As you know, Mr. President, just a few weeks ago, the
Security Council adopted by consensus its first-ever

S/PV. 8577

resolution on people with disabilities in armed conflict
(resolution 2475 (2019)), which is especially important
to us because people with disabilities are particularly
affected by conflicts — they are very often ostracized
or marginalized within their immediate families and
communities and find themselves at a particular risk of
violence and abuse.
The second issue of importance to us is the
situation of young girls. For girls, the situation is
even more alarming. Every day, millions of young
women are exposed to gender-based violence, child,
early and forced marriage, sex trafficking, sexual
harassment, rape and abuse. They are in critical need of
humanitarian assistance and access to medical services.
Young women should be free to live without prejudice
or limited, unequal opportunity. They should be able
to live as true and complete versions of themselves.
Furthermore, we need to remember that men too are
the victims of the patriarchal mindset and oppressive
masculinity. The Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth
referred to these negative stereotypes, which in fact
affect both men and women. That is why we stand
before the great challenge of changing the stereotypes,
norms and roles assigned to each sex. We want to live
in a world where equality between women and men is a
reality, not an aspiration.
Today’s boys and girls, teenagers and young adults
are our future leaders, and they no long want to remain
silent. The best example of that is the young briefers
who are in this Chamber with us today, and I hope that
one day soon they will replace us around this table. They
have enormous power, dedication and a strong voice.
Young people are increasingly aware of their rights
and opportunities. They are able to exchange views
and engage in meaningful discussions through the
Internet and social media. With a growing gap between
aspirations, training and decent job opportunities, the
transition we are living has become more uncertain
than ever.
The frustration of young people and their lack
of trust in authorities, Governments and leaders are
growing. Young people do not want empty promises
and assurances — they want to see concrete action. It
is our responsibility to bridge the gap between policies,
plans and practical impacts across the globe. It is
important to draw attention to the unique contributions
of many young peacebuilders, activists and volunteers
in conflict prevention and justice systems as they
work to build and sustain peace. Youth and student

19-2206619/22

S/PV.8577

Maintenance of international peace and security

organizations are becoming increasingly active in
delivering aid and humanitarian assistance to people in
the most dangerous places. We already have the guiding
principles — investment, inclusiveness and partnership.
It is crucial that we undertake a partnership dialogue
with young people in order to work together to achieve
the goals of sustainable development.
I would like to echo Ambassador Heusgen of
Germany by paying special tribute to 16-year-old
Swedish activist Greta Thunberg for the way in which
she has inspired us, the world and even a 13-yearold girl in Poland, thereby demonstrating the power
of young people. In her speeches — including at the
landmark twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, organized by Poland in Katowice last year,
which operationalized the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change by adopting the Katowice rulebook — Greta
Thunberg continues to call for a change in our behaviour
vis-à-vis climate change.
Another important point — and I should like to
refer to the statements made by the representative of
Equatorial Guinea on behalf of the African members
of the Council and by Ms. Wevyn Muganda — is that,
in thinking about conflict prevention and effective
conflict resolution, we must address the problem in a
comprehensive way, in line with the three pillars of the
United Nations, which includes not only development
and peace and security, but also human rights — and
it was that human rights element that was mentioned in
Equatorial Guinea’s statement. One of the key elements
of the human rights pillar is justice. I fully concur with
Ms. Wevyn Muganda in that there can be no peace
without justice. That is exactly what Poland continues
to repeat in this Chamber at each and every opportunity.
In conclusion, let me again express our appreciation
to Peru for having put this important matter high on the
agenda of the Security Council. We hope to see it further
strengthened. We are looking forward to SecretaryGeneral’s youth, peace and security report in 2020 and
hope that that will become a recurrent report. Finally,
we would like to see young people in this Chamber, not
only at thematic debates on youth, peace and security,
but also at country-specific debates, as was the case
with the very brave young disabled person from Syria,
Nujeen Mustafa (see S/PV.8515).
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, allow me to thank the Secretary20/22

17/07/2019

General’s Envoy on Youth, as well as Ms. Muganda and
Ms. Ramyar, for their informative briefings.
Belgium welcomes the importance attached to
the youth, peace and security agenda in the Council.
Resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) underscore
the immense potential of young people in achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals. Let us work towards
maximizing that potential.
Estimates project that up to 600 million young
adults are living in fragile and conflict-affected States.
Those young people constitute not only the majority of
the population in those countries but also the majority
of their armed forces and security personnel. Young
women are often solely responsible for the economic
survival of their families. Yet, those young people
are all too often excluded from peace processes
or decision-making concerning the future of their
countries. Their political, social or economic exclusion
is a risk factor. Those varied forms of exclusion
can fuel a collective mistrust of the national and
international political institutions that are supposed to
serve and protect them. It is therefore crucial to create
an environment conducive to the participation and
inclusion of young adults in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding processes. Allow me to underscore four
points in that regard.
First, youth participation in formal and informal
peace and mediation processes can enhance their
legitimacy and sustainability. However, in order to
move from exclusion to genuine inclusion, we must
recognize young people as equal and powerful actors
who can make a positive contribution throughout
the peace process. That requires a change of norms,
practices and attitudes. That is not impossible; we have
recently seen significant youth participation in the peace
process in Colombia and witnessed the establishment of
a high advisory board for peace in Afghanistan, which
includes a youth committee.
Secondly, young people often constitute the
majority members of armed and military groups.
Their viewpoints and needs should be central to
processes of security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as well as in
community violence-reduction programmes and
actions to prevent violent extremism.
Thirdly, effective inclusion can be achieved only
by giving young men and women the dignity, protection
and quality of life to which they are entitled. In that
19-22066

17/07/2019

Maintenance of international peace and security

respect, Belgium remains firmly committed to the
promotion of human rights, which is a fundamental
condition for peace and development, attaching
particular importance to the rights of vulnerable groups.
Finally, we recognize the important role that new
information technologies can play. Two-thirds of Internet
users around the world are under 35 years old. Free of
territorial constraints, young people can now learn
from more varied reference models, as demonstrated
by the independent progress study on youth, peace
and security (see S/2018/86). While new information
technologies and social media may pose challenges,
those same technologies can go beyond the lines of
conflict and facilitate the civic participation of young
people. For example, civil society used social media to
engage young people in the High-level Revitalization
Forum on the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.
Belgium will continue to advocate for the greater
integration of the youth, peace and security agenda
in the debates of the Council. It is important that the
Council be informed in a timely and comprehensive
manner of the specific situations under this agenda item.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.
At the outset, I wish to thank this afternoon’s
three briefers, Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake,
Ms. Wevyn Muganda and Ms. Sofia Ramyar — young
and influential leaders committed to peace in their
countries and throughout the world. We also wish to
express our gratitude for the support and contributions
of civil society organizations in preparing this briefing,
and that of the Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy
on Youth, the United Nations Population Fund and the
United Nations Development Programme. We also
wish to express our appreciation and support for the
work of the Secretary-General’s Envoy for Youth and
highlight the commitment of the Secretary-General to
the empowerment of young people.
Peru is firmly committed to promoting and
recognizing the role that young people are called to
fulfil in preventing and resolving conflicts, ensuring
justice and building sustainable peace. As part of that
commitment and during our presidency of the Council,
we organized an open debate on this topic in April
2018 (S/PV.8241) and, as has been recalled by other
delegations, we submitted, together with Sweden,

S/PV. 8577

resolution 2419 (2018), which was adopted unanimously.
That resolution reminds us that we should stop viewing
young people as a problem and begin to recognize
them as central actors in peace processes, which is an
appropriate approach to exploiting and maximizing
their potential, commitment and resilience both in the
prevention and in the resolution of conflicts.
Nevertheless, resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419
(2018), which were adopted by the Council on this
topic, start from the premise that Governments and
the multilateral system still face obstacles in fully
including young people in processes aimed at building
sustainable peace, despite the fact that those same
young people represent the majority of the affected
population in armed conflicts around the world.
For the effective implementation of both resolutions,
we believe it fundamental to promote State dialogue with
youth-led organizations and to take their opinions into
account in drawing up policies and programmes. The
aforementioned resolutions can be implemented only
through the full and meaningful participation of young
people, while paying special attention to the inclusion
of young women in decision-making, mainly through
their political participation in peace negotiations and in
the management of more inclusive and representative
Government structures. We welcome the efforts
carried out by some peace missions in implementing
those resolutions, as is the case in Colombia, Kosovo
and Iraq, particularly through the establishment of
mechanisms that allow young people to participate
in and contribute to peacekeeping processes in their
respective national communities.
The youth, peace and security agenda is also
closely linked to the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. The Sustainable
Development Goals commit us, inter alia, to creating
decent employment for young people, guaranteeing equal
opportunities, promoting peaceful societies, promoting
human rights, safeguarding diversity and combating
discrimination. Financing the implementation of the
agenda is also a pending issue. States, international
organizations and donors should promote accessible,
flexible and innovative funding opportunities for
organizations that are led by and for young people that
seek to support peace processes through activities to
consolidate peace and prevent violence.
To conclude, we believe that the Council should
continue to promote this important topic and grant it

19-2206621/22

S/PV.8577

Maintenance of international peace and security

regular follow-up, particularly in the area of ​​conflict
resolution and building sustainable peace. We therefore
eagerly await the report that the Secretary-General will
submit by May 2020, in accordance with the request
made in resolution 2419 (2018).

22/22

17/07/2019

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

19-22066
