A/RES/69/2

United Nations

Distr.: General
25 September 2014

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 65

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 September 2014
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/69/L.1)]

69/2.

Outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of
the General Assembly known as the World Conference
on Indigenous Peoples

The General Assembly
Adopts the following outcome document:

Outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly known as the World Conference on
Indigenous Peoples
1.
We, the Heads of State and Government, ministers and representatives of
Member States, reaffirming our solemn commitment to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, in a spirit of cooperation with the indigenous
peoples of the world, are assembled at United Nations Headquarters in New York on
22 and 23 September 2014, on the occasion of the high-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples, to
reiterate the important and continuing role of the United Nations in promoting and
protecting the rights of indigenous peoples.
2.
We welcome the indigenous peoples’ preparatory processes for the World
Conference, including the Global Indigenous Preparatory Conference held in Alta,
Norway, in June 2013. We take note of the outcome document of the Alta
Conference1 and other contributions made by indigenous peoples. We also welcome
the inclusive preparatory process for the high-level plenary meeting, including the
comprehensive engagement of the representatives of indigenous peoples.
3.
We reaffirm our support for the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples, adopted by the General Assembly on 13 September 2007,2 and
our commitments made in this respect to consult and cooperate in good faith with
the indigenous peoples concerned through their own representative institutions in
order to obtain their free, prior and informed consent before adopting and
_______________
1
2

A/67/994, annex.
Resolution 61/295, annex.

14-57597 (E)

*1457597*

Please recycle

Outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples

A/RES/69/2

implementing legislative or administrative measures that may affect them, in
accordance with the applicable principles of the Declaration.
4.
We reaffirm our solemn commitment to respect, promote and advance and in
no way diminish the rights of indigenous peoples and to uphold the principles of the
Declaration.
5.
In addition to the Declaration, we recall the other major achievements of the
past two decades in building an international framework for the advancement of the
rights and aspirations of the world’s indigenous peoples, including the establishment
of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, the creation of the Expert
Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and the establishment of the
mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples. We commit
ourselves to giving due consideration to recommendations and advice issued by
those bodies in cooperation with indigenous peoples.
6.
We encourage those States that have not yet ratified or acceded to the
International Labour Organization Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989
(No. 169),3 to consider doing so. We recall the obligation of ratifying States under
the Convention to develop coordinated and systematic action to protect the rights of
indigenous peoples.
7.
We commit ourselves to taking, in consultation and cooperation with
indigenous peoples, appropriate measures at the national level, including legislative,
policy and administrative measures, to achieve the ends of the Declaration and to
promote awareness of it among all sectors of society, including members of
legislatures, the judiciary and the civil service.
8.
We commit ourselves to cooperating with indigenous peoples, through their
own representative institutions, to develop and implement national action plans,
strategies or other measures, where relevant, to achieve the ends of the Declaration.
9.
We commit ourselves to promoting and protecting the rights of indigenous
persons with disabilities and to continuing to improve their social and economic
conditions, including by developing targeted measures for the aforementioned
action plans, strategies or measures, in collaboration with indigenous persons with
disabilities. We also commit ourselves to ensuring that national legislative, policy
and institutional structures relating to indigenous peoples are inclusive of
indigenous persons with disabilities and contribute to the advancement of their
rights.
10. We commit ourselves to working with indigenous peoples to disaggregate data,
as appropriate, or conduct surveys and to utilizing holistic indicators of indigenous
peoples’ well-being to address the situation and needs of indigenous peoples and
individuals, in particular older persons, women, youth, children and persons with
disabilities.
11. We commit ourselves to ensuring equal access to high-quality education that
recognizes the diversity of the cultures of indigenous peoples and to health, housing,
water, sanitation and other economic and social programmes to improve well-being,
including through initiatives, policies and the provision of resources. We intend to
empower indigenous peoples to deliver such programmes as far as possible.

_______________
3

2/6

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1650, No. 28383.

Outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples

A/RES/69/2

12. We recognize the importance of indigenous peoples’ health practices and their
traditional medicine and knowledge.
13. We commit ourselves to ensuring that indigenous individuals have equal
access to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health. We also
commit ourselves to intensifying efforts to reduce rates of HIV and AIDS, malaria,
tuberculosis and non-communicable diseases by focusing on prevention, including
through appropriate programmes, policies and resources for indigenous individuals,
and to ensure their access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights
in accordance with the Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development, 4 the Beijing Platform for Action 5 and the outcome
documents of their review conferences.
14. We commit ourselves to promoting the right of every indigenous child, in
community with members of his or her group, to enjoy his or her own culture, to
profess and practise his or her own religion or to use his or her own language.
15. We support the empowerment and capacity-building of indigenous youth,
including their full and effective participation in decision-making processes in
matters that affect them. We commit ourselves to developing, in consultation with
indigenous peoples, policies, programmes and resources, where relevant, that target
the well-being of indigenous youth, in particular in the areas of health, education,
employment and the transmission of traditional knowledge, languages and practices,
and to taking measures to promote awareness and understanding of their rights.
16. We acknowledge that indigenous peoples’ justice institutions can play a
positive role in providing access to justice and dispute resolution and contribute to
harmonious relationships within indigenous peoples’ communities and within
society. We commit ourselves to coordinating and conducting dialogue with those
institutions, where they exist.
17. We commit ourselves to supporting the empowerment of indigenous women
and to formulating and implementing, in collaboration with indigenous peoples, in
particular indigenous women and their organizations, policies and programmes
designed to promote capacity-building and strengthen their leadership. We support
measures that will ensure the full and effective participation of indigenous women
in decision-making processes at all levels and in all areas and eliminate barriers to
their participation in political, economic, social and cultural life.
18. We commit ourselves to intensifying our efforts, in cooperation with
indigenous peoples, to prevent and eliminate all forms of violence and
discrimination against indigenous peoples and individuals, in particular women,
children, youth, older persons and persons with disabilities, by strengthening legal,
policy and institutional frameworks.
19. We invite the Human Rights Council to consider examining the causes and
consequences of violence against indigenous women and girls, in consultation with
the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences, the
Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples and other special procedures
mandate holders within their respective mandates. We also invite the Commission

_______________
4
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
5
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

3/6

Outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples

A/RES/69/2

on the Status of Women to consider the issue of the empowerment of indigenous
women at a future session.
20. We recognize commitments made by States, with regard to the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, to consult and cooperate in good
faith with the indigenous peoples concerned through their own representative
institutions in order to obtain their free and informed consent prior to the approval
of any project affecting their lands or territories and other resources.
21. We also recognize commitments made by States, with regard to the
Declaration, to establish at the national level, in conjunction with the indigenous
peoples concerned, fair, independent, impartial, open and transparent processes to
acknowledge, advance and adjudicate the rights of indigenous peoples pertaining to
lands, territories and resources.
22. We recognize that the traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of
indigenous peoples and local communities make an important contribution to the
conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity. We acknowledge the importance of
the participation of indigenous peoples, wherever possible, in the benefits of their
knowledge, innovations and practices.
23. We intend to work with indigenous peoples to address the impact or potential
impact on them of major development projects, including those involving the
activities of extractive industries, including with the aim of managing risks
appropriately.
24. We recall the responsibility of transnational corporations and other business
enterprises to respect all applicable laws and international principles, including the
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United
Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework 6 and to operate transparently
and in a socially and environmentally responsible manner. In this regard, we commit
ourselves to taking further steps, as appropriate, to prevent abuses of the rights of
indigenous peoples.
25. We commit ourselves to developing, in conjunction with the indigenous
peoples concerned, and where appropriate, policies, programmes and resources to
support indigenous peoples’ occupations, traditional subsistence activities,
economies, livelihoods, food security and nutrition.
26. We recognize the importance of the role that indigenous peoples can play in
economic, social and environmental development through traditional sustainable
agricultural practices, including traditional seed supply systems, and access to credit
and other financial services, markets, secure land tenure, health care, social
services, education, training, knowledge and appropriate and affordable
technologies, including for irrigation and water harvesting and storage.
27. We affirm and recognize the importance of indigenous peoples’ religious and
cultural sites and of providing access to and repatriation of their ceremonial objects
and human remains in accordance with the ends of the Declaration. We commit
ourselves to developing, in conjunction with the indigenous peoples concerned, fair,
transparent and effective mechanisms for access to and repatriation of ceremonial
objects and human remains at the national and international levels.

_______________
6

4/6

A/HRC/17/31, annex.

Outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples

A/RES/69/2

28. We invite the Human Rights Council, taking into account the views of
indigenous peoples, to review the mandates of its existing mechanisms, in particular
the Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, during the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly, with a view to modifying and improving the
Expert Mechanism so that it can more effectively promote respect for the
Declaration, including by better assisting Member States to monitor, evaluate and
improve the achievement of the ends of the Declaration.
29. We invite the human rights treaty bodies to consider the Declaration in
accordance with their respective mandates. We encourage Member States to include,
as appropriate, information on the situation of the rights of indigenous peoples,
including measures taken to pursue the objectives of the Declaration, in reports to
those bodies and during the universal periodic review process.
30. We welcome the increasingly important role of national and regional human
rights institutions in contributing to the achievement of the ends of the Declaration.
We encourage the private sector, civil society and academic institutions to take an
active role in promoting and protecting the rights of indigenous peoples.
31. We request the Secretary-General, in consultation and cooperation with
indigenous peoples, the Inter-Agency Support Group on Indigenous Peoples’ Issues
and Member States, to begin the development, within existing resources, of a
system-wide action plan to ensure a coherent approach to achieving the ends of the
Declaration and to report to the General Assembly at its seventieth session, through
the Economic and Social Council, on progress made. We invite the SecretaryGeneral to accord, by the end of the seventieth session of the Assembly, an existing
senior official of the United Nations system, with access to the highest levels of
decision-making within the system, responsibility for coordinating the action plan,
raising awareness of the rights of indigenous peoples at the highest possible level
and increasing the coherence of the activities of the system in this regard.
32. We invite United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, in addition to
resident coordinators, where appropriate, to support the implementation, upon
request, of national action plans, strategies or other measures to achieve the ends of
the Declaration, in accordance with national priorities and United Nations
Development Assistance Frameworks, where they exist, through better coordination
and cooperation.
33. We commit ourselves to considering, at the seventieth session of the General
Assembly, ways to enable the participation of indigenous peoples’ representatives
and institutions in meetings of relevant United Nations bodies on issues affecting
them, including any specific proposals made by the Secretary-General in response to
the request made in paragraph 40 below.
34. We encourage Governments to recognize the significant contribution of
indigenous peoples to the promotion of sustainable development, in order to achieve
a just balance among the economic, social and environmental needs of present and
future generations, and the need to promote harmony with nature to protect our
planet and its ecosystems, known as Mother Earth in a number of countries and
regions.
35. We commit ourselves to respecting the contributions of indigenous peoples to
ecosystem management and sustainable development, including knowledge acquired
through experience in hunting, gathering, fishing, pastoralism and agriculture, as
well as their sciences, technologies and cultures.

5/6

Outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly known as the World Conference on Indigenous Peoples

A/RES/69/2

36. We confirm that indigenous peoples’ knowledge and strategies to sustain their
environment should be respected and taken into account when we develop national
and international approaches to climate change mitigation and adaptation.
37. We note that indigenous peoples have the right to determine and develop
priorities and strategies for exercising their right to development. In this regard, we
commit ourselves to giving due consideration to all the rights of indigenous peoples
in the elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda.
38. We invite Member States and actively encourage the private sector and other
institutions to contribute to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous
Peoples, the Trust Fund on Indigenous Issues, the Indigenous Peoples Assistance
Facility and the United Nations Indigenous Peoples’ Partnership as a means of
respecting and promoting the rights of indigenous peoples worldwide.
39. We request the Secretary-General to include relevant information on
indigenous peoples in his final report on the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals.
40. We request the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Inter-Agency
Support Group on Indigenous Peoples’ Issues and Member States, taking into
account the views expressed by indigenous peoples, to report to the General
Assembly at its seventieth session on the implementation of the present outcome
document, and to submit at the same session, through the Economic and Social
Council, recommendations regarding how to use, modify and improve existing
United Nations mechanisms to achieve the ends of the United Nations Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, ways to enhance a coherent, system-wide
approach to achieving the ends of the Declaration and specific proposals to enable
the participation of indigenous peoples’ representatives and institutions, building on
the report of the Secretary-General on ways and means of promoting participation at
the United Nations of indigenous peoples’ representatives on the issues affecting
them.7
4th plenary meeting
22 September 2014

_______________
7

6/6

A/HRC/21/24.
