UNITED NATIONS

ITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

5

YEAR
th
MEETING:

19 APRIL

1982

CONTENTS
.. ,... ,... .... . .I. ... ... .... ... .. ... ,

I

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . . . . . . , , . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14969) , . , . . . . . , . , . . , , . . . . . . , , . . . . . , , . . . , . . . . . . ,

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2356)

SIPV .2356

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters com,,bined rwith figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
‘Nbtions document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Offjcial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Cowwil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2356th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President:

Mr. KAMANDA
(Zaire).

19 April

1982, at 11 a.m.

wa KAMANDA

Pwserzt:
The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2356)

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Morocco to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the ChargC
d’affaires a-i. of the Permanent Mission of
Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/ 14969)

2. The PRESIDENT
(i~ztr~p~ct(itiotz
fiorn
Frrm*h):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received from the representatives
of Djibouti
and the United Arab Emirates letters in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussions without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.

Adoption of the agenda
Thr

rigcndci

II’CIS ridopted.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the Chargb d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14969)

3. Mr. OVINNIKPV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (intPt.pI’Ct~itiOil
.fbrn Russirrn):
The Council is once again obliged to meet to discuss the question of the situation in the occupied Arab territories.
This time, we are considering the question of outrageous actions with regard to the Muslim Holy Places
in Jerusalem, committed under cover provided by the
Israeli occupying authorities.

I. The PRESIDENT
(interpwttrtion
j?om Frerzch):
In accordance
with decisions taken at previous
meetings on this item [2352nd to 2355th merting],
I invite the representatives of Israel and Morocco to
take places at the Council table. I invite the representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization
(PLO) to take a place at the Council table. I invite the
representatives
of Bangladesh, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, the Niger, Pakistan,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Somalia,
the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Turkey to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

4. The very context of this discussion is extremely
illuminating.
Members of the Council no doubt have
fresh in their memories the arguments put forward
by the Israeli representative at a recent meeting of
the Council. At that time he spoke of what he described as Israel’s desire to make constant efforts to
create an atmosphere of mutual understanding
and
co-operation on the West Bank of the Jordan and in the
Gaza Strip. However, as the facts show, that was
nothing more than a smakescreen.
Dozens more
Palestinians have been killed and wounded-and
this
includes old people, women and children-in
JeruI

safem, in the West Bank and in Gaza: that is the
tragic toll over the past few days. It is a vivid demonstration of what the Israeli occupiers are in actual
fact bringing to the Palestinian people: tears, blood
and destruction.

that it has been impossible to take the necessary measures against the arbitrary rule of the Israeli occupiers
in order to halt the annexationist ambitions of Israel,
IO. The delegation of the Soviet Union believes that
Israel must be vigorously condemned for its most
recent inadmissible
actions in the occupied Arab
territories. At the same time, today-like
yesterday.
and indeed tomorrow and until the time when a solution is arrived at-we must bear in mind the most
important thing: the whole problem that has arisen
in connection with the occupation by Israel in June
1967 of Arab lands is urgently awaiting a solution,
We must bring about the total withdrawal of Israeli
troops from all the occupied Arab territories. We must
implement fully the inalienable national right of the
Arab people of Palestine to its own State. Without
that, there cannot and will not be a just, and hence
lasting, peace in the Middle East.

5. On the other hand, the Israeli military machine
is now posed over southern Lebanon: if a halt is not
called to that, then in that region too we shall once
again witness the blood of innocent people being shed.
Therefore, it is the direct duty of the Council to keep
under review that question as well. On the whole, the
recent stepping up of Israel’s aggressive actions in the
Middle East has been making the already explosive
situation there even more dangerous.
6. The question of Jerusalem is a part of the problem of the Israeli occupation. Since the Israeli aggression against the Arab States in June 1967, the Security
Council and the General Assembly have repeatedly
adopted resolutions
condemning
Israel’s
actions
designed to bring about a change in the status of that
city. Those resolutions have been based on the important principle that the Israeli occupation is illegal, All
those documents contain a demand that Israel take no
arbitrary action in the occupied eastern part of Jerusalem. But in spite of that, Tel Aviv has proceeded
along the same course of its planned and open policy
of arbitrary rule in regard to Jerusalem, and indeed in
regard to all the occupied Arab territories.

I I, Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): The level of oppression, of wanton shooting at innocent children, women
and men, and of other forms of savagery continues
unabated in the occupied Palestinian and other Arab
territories. Curfews which have been imposed for a
whole week across the length and breadth of the
occupied territories-and
in the case of the Golan
Heights for almost 10 weeks now-are still in force and
have inflicted untold suffering, particularly in villages
and refugee camps whose inhabitants are surviving
from day to day. This situation is depriving them of
water supplies and basic sustenance and even bringing
their lives to a total standstill. Any child, woman or
man who ventures out of his dwelling is immediately
shot at and wounded, as we have seen from the newspapers and other media here and as we have been
informed in far greater detail by our own people in the
occupied territories. Indeed, we have received several
appeals addressed to the United Nations that something be done about the carnage,

7. The clumsy attempts by the Israeli authorities
today to evade responsibility for the new flagrant acts
of vandalism in Jerusalem, through references to the
actions of what they claim is a lone mentally deranged
person, cannot possibly mislead anyone. After all, if we
are to call things by their proper names, this is an act
of terrorism.
It was committed
by a soldier of the
Israeli army of occupation under cover provided by
other Israeli soldiers, That is the real point: this was
an act carried out by a terrorist under cover provided
by other terrorists.

12. In the J~~~ustrle/n Post of 14 March, we find some.
thing very germane to our discussion, something which
shows how deceitful the Israeli representative has been
here in trying to convey to the Council the impression
that the abominable act at Holy Places in Jerusalem
was the work of a lone deranged soldier. Here is what
that Israeli newspaper wrote:

8. It is quite clear that these recent events are one
further consequence of the fact that the Israeli occupiers continue to lord it over Arab territory, and are
a result of the policy of terror and violence elevated
to the status of Israeli State policy.

“The Israeli Government has decided to issue
commemorative
stamps in honour of Eliahu Betzouri
and Eliahu Hakim, who assassinated Great Britain’s
Minister of State, Lord Moyne, in 1944, and BenJoseph, who shot at a bus full of Arab civilians
-men, women and children-at
Rosh Pina in 1938.”

9. Equal responsibility
also lies with the overseas
protectors of Israel. Their assistance and support
have alone permitted Israel to keep the territories of
others under the yoke of occupation. It is precisely that
assistance from the United States, which has now
openly taken on the role of the strategic ally of Tel
Aviv, that has given Israel the ability and the means
to implement
in the Middle East its expansionist
designs against Arab lands, to assault the sovereignty
and territorial
integrity of neighbouring
States and,
finally, unabashedly to disregard the will of the international community. It is precisely because of the complicity of the United States here in the Security Council

13. In a letter published in the same newspaper,
two Jewish Israeli women commented:
“It is hard to see how anything but a double
standard allows us to elevate Ben-Joseph to the
status of martyred hero while we designate Palestinian would-be killers as murderous terrorists.”

2

14. I have received a message dated 29 March from
Mrs, Ruth Blau, the widow of a well-known rabbi of
Natorei
Karta of the Orthodox Jewry. I think that
message gives a clear picture of how real Jews feel
about what is happening, She addressed it to me and
asked me to read it out to the Council. I shall now do
so:

” ‘Our fathers have reached the frontiers
which were recognized in the partition
plan.
Our generation reached the frontiers of 1949. ”
I might add here that the Israelis did not hesitate to
gobble up lands after the signing of the General Armistice Agreement--’
including the city of Eilat itself,
which is the Palestinian port of Urn-al-Rashrash. They
also occupied parts of Al Oja Al Hafir between Palestine and Egypt and the demilitarized
zones between
Syria and Israel, and other places. I now continue
Moshe Dayan’s statement:

“The events taking place nowadays in the Middle
East in general and the Holy Land in particular bring
back to my mind” -and that was written by her late
husband--“memories
of my youth in France when
the European leaders’ failure to realize the situation
was bringing Europe and the world to disaster.

.’ ‘Now the six-day generation has managed to
reach Suez, Jordan and the Golan Heights. That
is not the end. After the present cease-fire lines
there will be new ones. They will extend beyond
Jordan-perhaps
to Lebanon and perhaps to central Syria as well.’

“From
1936 the French socialists were running
the country while, next door, Hitler, the ‘Fuehrer’
of a super-race, was preparing the conquest of
Europe.
He nevertheless always announced his
ideas, his ambitions and his plans and the Jews,
whose
sole existence was, according to him, a
danger to the ‘Great Germany’ to be, were turned
into the universal enemies of the Germans and even
of the world.

“An extract from his book, A Soldier Rqflrc*ts
On Pctrt*c> Hopes was published in the Middle
East RPcrdu--New York, Pegasus, 1969. This was a
speech of Moshe Dayan to the graduates of a cadet
school.

“Hitler’s
plan was expounded in Mcin Ktrmflf
and he continously threatened the whole world in
his speeches. Some leaders apparently did not take
his threats seriously: some were impressed by his
strong will; others, maybe, tried to show him some
friendship to quiet down the irascible leader. The
result was that Hitler swallowed the countries of
Central and Eastern Europe one after the other: then
France was invaded and occupied within a few days
by Hitler’s
army and his fifth column.

” ‘The Arabs do not agree to our venture. If
we want to continue our work in Eretz Yisrael
against their desires, there is no alternative but
that lives should be lost. It is our destiny to be in
a state of continual warfare with the Arabs. This
situation may well be undesirable, but such is the
reality.’
“Yoram Bar Porath, a writer in the Israeli newspaper Idiot A&crronot, wrote on 14 July 1972:

“The four years France was occupied by the
Nazis was a long nightmare. De Gaulle led the fight
from outside the country and the French Resistance
was organized inside. Those patriots were labeled
‘terrorists’
by the Germans. I was, without a gun,
a member of that underground movement.

” ‘It is a duty of the Israeli leaders to explain
to the public with clarity and courage a number of
facts that have been submerged with the passage
of time. The first of these is the fact that there
is no Zionism, settlement or Jewish State without
eviction of the Arabs and expropriation
of theit
land.’

“A Zionist State has been created in 1948 in the
Holy Land against the will of God and against the
will of a great part of His creatures. The main thing
for its leaders afterwards has been the building of
the ‘Great Israel’.

“Yoel Marcus wrote in Hu’rrwtz
I975 the following:
” ‘We

shall

have

to

mobilize

on 2.5 March
American

Jewry’ “-

“If Hitler wrote one book, Mein Kcrmflf, to explain
his Nazi ideas, there are a lot of Zionist books
explaining Zionist ideals and ambitions and from the
Israeli Parliament insults and threats are now raining
on Western leaders’ heads when they do not agree
completely
with Israeli leaders whose policies are
based on hatred of the Arabs, whom they have
turned into the universal enemies of the Jews.

indeed there is an article in today’s Ncto’ York Tirncs
by a prominent
American, in which, with anguish,
he asks American Jewry to raise their voices about
the misdeeds which Menachem Begin is perpetrating
and which are tarnishing the name of world Jewry
throughout the world, I shall continue the quotation:
” ‘We shall have to mobilize American Jewry,
still a powerful voice, . , We shall have to explain
again and again that a strong Israel is not only
in the American interest, but also still the only

“After the six-day war, Moshe Dayan made a
statement
which was reported in The Tirnc.v of
London on 25 June 1969:
3

way to convince the Arabs to find some form of
coexistence with her, We must make clear-and
first of all to ourselves-that
we do not necessarily intend to play according to Arab rules.
We shall determine which Arab move is, from our
point of view, a I’CISLIS hclli and at what point we
shall play the game differently from the way the
others expect us to, If the free world is frightened
and the West is in the process of decline, it may
be that we have a number of means available to
terrorize it more than the Arabs would. A word
to the wise is enough.’

reason for this new catastrophe will be exactly that
one given by the holy Rabbi on the way to the death
camp.
“It is in the hands of human beings, partners of
God in this world, either to bring its destruction DT
to help for its redemption. Both lack of responsibility and lack of clairvoyance of the European and
American leaders before the Second World War
have cost tens of millions of human lives and caused
a tremendous lot of suffering, when the only way
to prevent such a disaster would have been to stop
the evil, by all means, at the beginning. In this
atom-bomb age, we are now all of us, together, rich
or poor, powerful or not, on the brink of an abyss.
Will these leaders of nowadays continue to clear
their conscience by only ‘observing the events
with uneasiness’ on the television, make speeches
and never take action until all the new Fascists,
Nazis, racists of this generation bring the whole
world to its complete collapse?

“Why do people refuse to learn from the lessons
of the past? Why do they close their eyes before the
real danger while they mobilize all their energies
to protect themselves against an eventual, more
remote, danger-that
one which may precisely
proceed from the danger against which they remain
inactive? On the way to Auschwitz, a Jew asked
Rabbi Shlomo Zalman Ehrenreich, the Shimloer
Rav, why the Holy One-blessed
be He-had
let
this catastrophe fall upon the Jews of Europe.
He answered him, ‘We are punished because we did
not fight the Zionists enough’ “-

“The prophets of Israel have undoubtedly announced the Jews’ return to the Holy Land, at the
hands of God and at the end of the times, but it is
no less true that the redemption promised to the
Jews is also that of the whole world:

I think I need hardly state that there were throughout
the Second World War connections between certain
agents of the Jewish Agency and the Gestapo which
included acquiescence in the persecution of Jews to
make them leave the land even before Hitler decided
to commit his abominable act of total genocide. This is
documented and available. I continue the quotation:

IL . . I
“According
to Sforno, and conforming to the
interpretation
of Isaiah’s sentence: ‘and the righteous will inherit the land’, the Patriarch’s posterity
is his inheritance which became that of all of mankind
and which, at the coming of the Redeemer, will
extend to the ends of the earth.

“It is dangerous for everybody to let a people,
under the circumstances
the Palestinian
people,
who have suffered for more than three decades,
sink into despair. The story of Samson, a Jewish
judge at the time covered by the Bible, should be
meditated upon nowadays. His unfaithful wife cut
his hair while he was asleep after she had heard
from him that his physical strength came from his
hair, and she delivered him into the hands of his
enemies. They put out his eyes and threw him into a
prison. But his hair grew again and with it he regained his formidable strength. A prisoner and a
blind man, condemned to live for ever in darkness,
Samson knew that there was no hope for him in the
future. And one day, as he was brought into his
enemies’ temple to divert them, he asked to be guided
to its centre. There he embraced the two main pillars
of the idolaters’ temple, which crumbled upon him
and upon the people crowded in it.

“Here we are, once more, according to the Holy
Scriptures, quite far away from Zionist theories and
the meannesses of a Menachem Begin (Nobel peace
prize winner of 1978!) with his settlements established
by force, far from his claim to found, physically
speaking, the ‘Great Israel’.
“These new heavens and earth with its redeemed
inhabitants, as described in Isaiah’s prophecy 65: 17,
will be a regenerated, spiritualized world-a world
ofjustice in which all human beings will live in peace.
in recovered fraternity. No States, then, no more
wars, but the ascent, in crowds, of all the nations to
the House of the Unique God acknowledged, at last.
by the whole universe.”
The widow of the late Rabbi concludes:

“Egoism, the lack of justice and comprehension
of the Western nations, as well as the division of the
Arabs and consequently their inaction, are giving
the evil side 90 per cent of its strength. If, as a result
of such short-sighted
policies, the Middle
East
-and may God preserve us-will become one of the
foreseeable future Viet Nams in the world, and F am
afraid the largest one, the only valid answer to the

“My dear husband, Rabbi Amram. . . left this
world at a time when the Natorei Karta people of
New York were arranging for him to speak before
the United Nations Assembly when the Palestinian
leader Yasser Arafat made his speech, on the condition that he be provided with an international docu*
ment to travel, since he had no identity papers from
4

the State of Israel and he would never have accepted
to travel with a passport of a State which he did
not recognize as legal. Rabbi Amram Blau had
agreed to the idea of being away for a short time
from the Holy City in which he was born, in his
desire to tell the world about the old friendship
between Arabs and Jews”the friendship
The quotation

20. In considering the attack of I I April, one cannot
isolate it from certain contextual factors that preceded
and accompanied it. Among the preceding factors are
the placement of explosive charges at the entrance of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the building adjacent to it by
the Gush Emunim terrorist group, the deep diggings
under the Holy Sanctuary. which are threatening
it with collapse, the repeated attempts by various
Israeli groups to storm their way into the mosques of
the Holy Sanctuary, the repeated threats to blow up
the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the liquidation of religious
dignitaries.

I have referred to on many occasions.
continues:

“He would have explained why he wanted to see
in Palestine the creation of a State where all its
inhabitants, all believers would have lived in peace
as in the past. He would have developed with his
own words, and certainly more eloquently,
what
I tried to explain in this letter. “I pray your Excellency to help that a Jewish voice be heard by people
of good will.”

21. As regards the accompanying factors, we must
note the following: first, the ability of the armed culprit Alan Goodman to pass easily through two checkpoints manned by the Israeli army and then enter the
area of the Dome of the Rock: secondly, the covet
given him during the attack by the firing from many
directions; thirdly, the recent admission by the Israeli
authorities that one of the two men killed was hit by a
bullet different from that which caused the death of
the other victim.

lS. The PRESIDENT
(interpr~ttrtion .fhm Frmch):
The next speaker is the representative of the United
Arab Emirates, I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

22. This clearly indicates that the crime was committed by more than one person. In its 16 April issue,
The NPII- York TimcJs stated:

16. Mr, AL-QASIMI
(United Arab Emirates): I wish
at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of this body. We are confident
that with your well-known skills, you will lead the
deliberations
of the Council to a fruitful conclusion,

“Reporters
and photographers on the scene at
the time said they saw two Israeli civilians carrying rifles running from a crowd of stone-throwing
Arab demonstrators,
and shooting back over their
shoulders, after Mr. Goodman had been captured
and led away.”

17. The I lth of April 1982 will be recorded as one of
the darkest days in the history not only of the Muslim
community,
but of mankind in general. The sacrilegious
attack perpetrated on that dark day against the sanctity
of Haram al-Sharif. one of the holiest places of IIslam,
exemplifies
the vulnerability
of Jerusalem
under
Israeli occupation. The sad date of 11 April 1982 brings
to mind the similar date of 21 August 1969 when the
Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem was sent up in flames.

23. It was understandable for Israeli spokesmen to
describe the criminal, Alan Goodman, as deranged, a
description aimed at exonerating the Israeli establishment of any responsibility
in the commission of the
crime, It is not a novelty for Israelis to resort to distortions and fabrications, Yet we were astonished by the
similar description
given by Mr. Walter Stoessel,
Acting Secretary of State of the United States of
American, on I I April. He stated, infer ulirr: “According to the information available to us, this was the
work of a deranged individual,”

18. The fourth Geneva Convention of 1949,? was
concluded with the aim of affording maximum protection to territories under military occupation.
Israel,
as a party to this Convention and, accordingly, as a
military occupier, is obligated to guarantee maximum
protection
to the Palestinian people and to their resources and their institutions in the occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem.

24. The insanity of a culprit can be established only
in a court of law after a thorough examination of the
mass of evidence submitted by expert witnesses.
The facts available on the character of Mr. Goodman
indicate his full sanity. I shall now quote descriptions
of the character of Mr. Goodman given by friends and
colleagues of his who know him well. These descriptions were printed in The Ncl17 York Times of I5 April,
in an article by its correspondent Mr. David Shribman:

19. In the criminal attack on Hal-am al-Sharif on
II April, two of these categories were affected, namely,
population
and institutions.
Two persons were murdered in cold blood and scores were wounded. The
Dome of the Rock and Al-Aqsa Mosque-two
institutions holy to Muslim Palestinians-were
subjected
to the worst types of sacrilege and profanation, as well
as to material and artistic damage. Israel, the military
occupier, not only has failed to guarantee maximum
protection to these two religious institutions and their
worshippers but has even failed to offer them minimum
protection.

” ‘He was a very well adjusted guy,’ said Ira
Albert, a psychologist and one of Mr. Goodman’s
classmates at Baltimore’s ‘City College, an ilite
public high school. ‘If you had to pick one guy who
was well adjusted, it was him.’ ”
5

The same article states that many of his classmates
and friends, “like Robert G. Agus, a Washington
lawyer”, “could remember only that he was ‘a nice,
intelligent
and reasonably sensitive person.’ ” According to the same article, Mr. Emory Martinez, who
ran the rooming house where Mr, Goodman lived in
1979, stated:

sibilities at the beginning of this month, we thought
that would be the end of your troubles for this month,
We did not know that it was only the tip of the iceberg,
Your predecessor had left you some very unwelcome
duties, because your predecessor was not really
courageous enough to confront the issue within the
powers of the presidency.

‘*When I heard it, I could not believe it. It surprised me. I had other people there who would
have done stuff like that, but him-l
never would
have suspected it.”

31. Be that as it may, we watch television in this
city. The main feature these days has been somebody
in a bunker in Yamit, in an occupied place. who is
threatening to commit suicide. But that is where he
has ended up: he wants to be there. Of course, that
fellow has illegally occupied the land and established
himself there. He is promised maybe $lOO.OOO 01
$300,000 to leave and a nice house in another occupied
area near Jerusalem, near Hebron, near Nablus. It has
become some sort of merchandise: you occupy II
territory and refuse to leave until you make some good
dividends on that; it is a good business.

In a court of law such testimony would be considered primary evidence in establishing the sanity of
Mr. Goodman,
25. We believe that the United States bears great
responsibility for what is happening now in the occupied Palestinian
and Arab territories,
including
Jerusalem. The unlimited support of the United States
for Israel and its commitment
to facilitating
Jewish
immigration-even
through denying another country
equal treatment with other nations unless it changes
its immigration
laws to give the Jews special privileges-is ample evidence of that responsibility.

32. On the other hand, there is the destiny and future
of a hotel which is built on this or the other side of the
municipality
line.
33. These are the issues that are really disturbing to
the public in this country. The future of 4 million
Palestinians does not seem to disturb it. We hear about
submarines going to the Islas Malvinas or, as my British
friends like to call them, the Falkland Islands. We hear
of sanctions being taken by States-not
only by the
British, but by their friends-against
Argentina. They
even avoided the Security Council in taking such
measures, And yet we come to the Council with some
hope that the United Nations can do some justice and
invoke its powers, especially in the Security Council.
And we are, of course, faced with lengthy deliberations while people are being killed.

26. It is pertinent here to indicate that Alan Goodman
is an American citizen who emigrated to Israel, *joined
the Israeli army and committed
a hideous crime,
while Palestinians born in Palestine are denied return
to their homes and property.
27. Ironically enough, the only Palestinian
whose
return was facilitated by the United States was Mr. Ziad
Abu Ain. He was handed over to the Israeli authorities
on the fallacious and unproven pretext that he had
committed an act of violence in Tiberias. It is a wellknown fact that Palestinians have been subjected to
torture in Israeli prisons and never received a fait
trial.

34. We are told it was a solitary maniac, an American
citizen, who went there and, the moon over Jerusalem having made him moonstruck,
shot at worshippers-perhaps
he simply did not like the way they
prayed! No, that is not true. Because who in his right
mind opens fire at anybody, much less worshippers?
And, for that matter, who in his right mind displaces
millions of people, turning them out of their homes?
Who in his right mind permanently mobilizes 30 pei
cent of the prime-age population, as the Israelis are
doing, and keeps it constantly under arms? Who in his
right mind has 60 per cent of the population on reserve
and fighting? Who in his right mind would actually
drag the Council into meeting on such issues?

28. My country considers that a resolution of the
Council condemning the appalling acts of sacrilege
perpetrated within the precincts of Haram al-Sharif
and deploring the Israeli failure to protect and safeguard that sanctuary is not sufficient, since it would
deal with the symptoms rather than the origin of the
problem. To deal with its origin and to prevent the
recurrence of similar crimes requires that the Council
shoulder its responsibilities
as prescribed in the Charter of the United Nations. It requires that a final end
be put to the illegal Israeli occupation of Palestine and
that the Palestinians
be enabled to exercise their
inalienable right of self-determination.
That is what we
expect the Council to do.

35. It is not that they are really maniacs. This is the
implementation
of a policy-conceived,
of course, in
a criminal way. Right-thinking
people cannot really
accept that, but it seems to be a fact. We are dealing
with the derivative of a policy of really persistent
State terrorism, Shooting at worshippers in the AlAqsa Mosque is a provocation to and a humiliation of
not only the worshippers there, but all people of any
faith-not
just Muslims.

29. The PRESIDENT
(intrrp,.cttrtiotl
j7otn Fwtwh):
The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization.
I call upon him,
30. Mr. TERZI
(Patestine
Liberation
Organizalion): Mr. President, when you assumed your respon6

36. Perhaps it is a good thing that the Muslim world
reacted in a sensible way. There was a general strike:
that was one way of showing their displeasure and
wrath. They came to the Security Council: that was
another way. But I must say this: do not tax our
patience. There is a limit to the patience of the Muslims,
the Christians and the Arabs, and if their wrath
and their love and respect for their dignity get the
better of them the price will be too high even to describe. The friends of Israel will have to pay their
share for the crime to which they are a party.

shoot unarmed women and children causing death
and injury. The bodies of those killed are often
denied proper funeral services, the injured are often
left unattended without medical aid due to curfews
imposed on their areas which prevent them from
getting to the hospitals which are also under siege by
the army.
“Many areas in the Gaza Strip have been under
curfew for as long as five days without allowing the
inhabitants the opportunity to procure basic necessities to sustain them and their children. This is what
is happening at the moment in the town of Rafah
where 80,000 inhabitants have been subjected to total
curfew for five days.

37. Israel is abusing the hostage called the Government of the United States. I say the United States is
a hostage; and it has voluntarily permitted itself to
become a complacent and willing hostage. But at what
price? At the price of its moral values, at the price
of its commitment
to the principles of the Charter,
and at the price of its commitment
to the provisions
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights” but also
at the price of the blood of my brothers in Palestine,
at the price of the blood of the Palestinians and the
Arabs. This complacency of the Government
of the
United States is at the expense of international
peace
and security.

“The sanctity of the Holy Places is no longer
respected, as Israeli soldiers have even attacked the
peaceful worshippers with tear gas bombs and
bullets.
“Merely to walk in the streets of Caza has become dangerous as Israeli soldiers pick up children
and youths at random, beat them brutally or arrest
them.
“I submit this appeal asking you to intervene in
order to stop these inhuman attacks on the unarmed
and defenceless population.
I would ask you to
circulate my appeal to the representatives
of the
major Powers and to urge them to use their influence
to save the women, children and the elderly people
who are being terrorized every day simply because
they seek to regain their freedom and their acknowledged right to self-determination.

38. Of course I shall not go into the fact that the
relationship
of the United States with Israel is at the
expense of the poor American taxpayer, who is forced
to contribute
to these acts of State terrorism.
His
Government
is financing these acts of State terrorism.
He is an innocent victim of his Government’s
complicity, its open and direct involvement in the barbaric
crimes against my people. But the people of the United
States will eventually and inevitably wake up to the
reality and seek the remedy in their own way.

“For God’s sake act without delay to protect the
people of Gaza and the West Bank.” [SCLJSl14YYI. 1

39. In the Council, the Government of the United
States is duty bound to declare its commitment
and
position.
It is duty bound to reaffirm that the status
of the Holy City of Jerusalem has not been changed
and that the United States is committed to upholding
the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention,’
and
to reaffirm the applicability
of its provisions to occupied Jerusalem. The failure of the United States
Government
to state that in very clear terms can only
be interpreted by us Palestinians, Arabs and Muslims
all over the world as a clear and unambiguous commitment of that Government
to support and encourage
Israel in its policies and pr&ctices.

41. I add my voice: the Council is duty bound to act,
For God’s sake act now before it is too late.
42. The PRESIDENT
(intPrpretotim fiwm Fwnch):
The next speaker is the representative
of Somalia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
43. Mr. ADAN (Somalia): I wish first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. With your wide experience and
proved diplomatic
skill, I have every confidence in
your ability to preside over the deliberations
of the
Council with prudence and to discharge your task with
success.

40. On Saturday I received the following message
on my telex addressed to the President of the Security
Council
by Rashad Shawwa, the Mayor of Gaza in
occupied Palestine-our
people are still appealing:
“I appeal to you to intervene, in the cause of
humanity, to alleviate the brutal attacks of the Israeli
army on the civilian inhabitants of the occupied
Gaza Strip and the West Bank.

44. I wish also to express our
appreciation
to
Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
the representative
of the United
States, for the excellent manner in which she carried
out the duties of President of the Council during the
difficult month of March.

“The
population
here is continuously
being
oppressed and brutalized by the Israeli army, who

45. I welcome the opportunity to speak on the question before the Council because Somalia, a Muslim
7

Geneva Conventions of 1949 and its disregard for the
resolutions of the General Assembly and of the Security Council.

State, associates itself unreservedly with other members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference in
calling on the Council to respond appropriately
to
Israel’s latest betrayal of its responsibilities
as an
occupying Power.

51, The desecration of Al-Aqsa Mosque and the
Dome of the Rock on I I April arose from the example
set by a callous rkgime which routinely imprisons
children or even shoots them to death and which
demolishes the homes of their parents on the basis
of unproven suspicions. Clearly, the despicable act
being debated here today was encouraged and abetted
by the arrogant contempt of the Israeli rCgime for
human rights and for international
law. This violent
incident, therefore, provides a compelling reason fol
the Council to direct its strongest condemnation
against Israel for its dangerous and inhuman policies.

46. The murderous attack on Muslims at prayer on
Easter Sunday and the desecration of the holy precincts of Al-Aqsa Mosque were not isolated incidents.
The sense of outrage experienced by Muslims throughout the world was heightened by the knowledge that
Israeli policies and actions, which gravely offend
Muslim sensibilities, have been carried out in the area
of Haram al-Sharif ever since it came under Israeli
military control.
47, It will be remembered that, early in the Israeli
occupation, places of worship and structures having
religious significance for Muslims were demolished
in order to clear the area in front of the Wailing Wall.
Also since 1968, archaeological excavations in the
area of Al-Aqsa Mosque, which are likely to damage
its foundations, have continued, despite the protests of
Muslims all over the world. Furthermore, it will be
recalled that the attempt to burn the Al-Aqsa Mosque
itself in 1969, as in the case of the incident we are
considering today, gave rise to widespread demonstrations in every Muslim country to protest against
that sacrilegious action,

52. But condemnation
alone is not enough. Since
Israel has betrayed its responsibilities
as occupying
Power to protect the historic shrines and places of
worship in Jerusalem, I believe that the time has come
for the Council to demand and to insist upon the restoration to the City of its international status as a co~ptrs
sepurututn.
In the interests of international
peace
and security, it is of the utmost importance that Israel
should be prevailed upon to relinquish its illegal occupation of Jerusalem. Only then can there be an end to
the desecration of the Holy City and the forcible alteration of its demographic
character. The Council
cannot fail this time round in the discharge of its obligations to the Holy City and to its indigenous inhabitants.

48. All these incidents are symptoms of Israel’s
expansionist policies and of its contempt for the Arab
people under its illegal occupation. Whether we consider East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights, which
have been openly annexed in flagrant violation of international law, or the West Bank and the Gaza Strip,
which are being sub.jected to creeping annexation,
we see an expansiomst drive that tramples on the
inalienable political rights, the cultural and ethnic
identity and the religious rights of the people of the
occupied territories.

53. The PRESIDENT
(interprctotion f,wn French):
The next speaker is the representative of Djibouti.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
54. Mr. FARAH DIRIR (Djibouti):
Sir, allow me.
first of all, to convey to you my warmest congratulations, and those of my delegation, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. 1 am
confident that, with your well proven competence and
vast experience in diplomacy, the current debates of
the Council under your able guidance will be concluded with the achievement
of successful results
compatible with the aspirations of all freedom- and
peace-loving nations.

49. The Judaization of the West Bank and of Jerusalem through a policy of Jewish settlement and Arab
dispossession is a process that has been going on
since 1967. The dismissal of the democratically elected
mayors of the West Bank by a country which falsely
claims to be the sole democracy in the Middle East
and their replacement by discredited non-entities is
another aspect of the same process of annexation and
dispossession,
as is the establishment
of village
leagues, which are designed to strengthen Israeli
control.

55. My congratulations go, as well, to your predecessor, Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
for the excellent manner in
which she handled the deliberations of the Council
last month.

50. The various aspects of the Israeli presence in the
Middle East which I have touched upon have direct
relevance to the incident under consideration, That
incident is necessarily linked to the question of the
status of Jerusalem and indeed to the whole situation
arising from Israel’s continued illegal occupation of
Arab lands. It is also unquestionably linked to Israel’s
persistent colonialism,
its intransigent flouting of the

56. I should also like to express my sincere thanks
and appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to the
members of the Council for allowing me to participate
in the discussion of the question before it.
57. The Council is once again determined to confront
yet another challenge in regard to its task of maintaining international
peace and security: a serious
8

63. The failure of that draft resolution. and of others
before it, has obviously led to the tragic incident
whose occurrence has marked yet another phase in
which the Zionist entity, in its defiance of and contempt for the international community. has committed
sacrilegious acts of aggression against the Holy Places
in the Holy City of Jerusalem and has thus added a
dangerous precedent to its hideous record of atrocities
perpetrated against the Palestinian people and other
Arab inhabitants of the occupied Arab lands. The
Council’s current debates should bring out in the open
the sinister intentions of Zionist Israel, in the light of
the renewed escalation of terror and violence against
the Palestinian civilian population: the Council should
seriously ponder, in clear conscience, the extent to
which the lawlessness and unrestricted defiance of the
State of Israel might take the world closer to the brink
of dangerous confrontation, which could grow to international dimensions. What we expect of the Council
is that it deal with the serious matter before it in a
manner more propitious for and conducive to the
establishment ofpeace and security in the Middle East.

challenge to its credibility in the serious affair of preserving international peace and security.
58. We trust-as
we have always done-in
the
ability of the Council diligently to discharge its responsibilities for preserving international peace and security: yet at times our confidence is utterly shaken to
the point of exasperation when the Council frustrates
its own objectives and ideals and fails to take full
responsibility
for preserving international
peace and
security.
59. The creation of Israel and its rCgimes that have
emerged since then become a diabolical phenomenon
of dangerous confrontation to the Council. No nation
in the whole world has violated in so many ways the
moral code of conduct and international law and order
in international relations and has thus been condemned
by so many resolutions and decisions of the Security
Council, the General Assembly and other international
forums as has Zionist Israel since its inception.
60. The creation of Israel has become, ever since,
afirit <cc~~>rnp/iinstrument of war: a war of attrition: of
political, economic and spiritual unrest and annihilation: an instrument of war implanted in the Middle
East to exterminate the economic, human and spiritual
resources not only of the Palestinians but of the Arab
and other Islamic nations of the Middle East and
beyond.

64. The shooting incident, and the wanton killing of
the two Palestinian civilian worshippers in the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and the Dome of the Rock in Haram al-Sharif.
followed by the shooting spree by Israeli soldiers
against the Arab worshippers in the midst of their deep
prayers, leaving over 100 wounded victims inside the
holy mosque, have struck the Muslim communities
throughout the world with anger, revulsion and indignation.

6 I. Unfortunately,
in these circumstances,
the
Council has been left in suspense and has become
accustomed, over the past 35 years, to hearing complaints about the unacceptable behaviour of Israeli
forces and their ill-treatment
of Palestinian civilian
inhabitants of occupied Arab land. The Council has
been warned about the consequences of the provocative acts of Israeli aggression and the escalation of
tension in the Middle East. It is unfortunate that the
Council, in spite of all these warnings, has not been
able to take the necessary action to safeguard the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people in a mannel
compatible with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

65. These sacrilegious acts perpetrated against the
Muslim Holy Places in the Holy City of Jerusalem
cannot be overlooked as an act of lunacy committed by
a deranged individual.
It is inconceivable that a sophisticated military establishment such as that of Israel
would put an instrument of death into the hands of
someone whose physical and mental condition had
not been ascertained through prior routine check-ups.
64. The criminal in question was a normal Israeli
soldier, Now, if we accept for a moment that he was
deranged and that he lost his sanity just one second
before he started shooting, how can we justify the
outrageous acts of the Israeli soldiers who threw teargas canisters at the worshippers for no justifiable
reason other than to make a laughing stock of a religion to which 900 million Muslims adhere’?

62, It was not long ago that the Council failed to
adopt the draft resolution in document S/14943, of
I April 1982, which called on Israel:
“to rescind its decision of disbanding the elected
municipal council of Al-Bireh and its decision to
remove from their posts the Mayors of Nablus and
Ramallah”,

67. It is extremely ironic that the shameful incidents of trigger-happy Israeli soldiers laughing at the
wounded Arab worshippers in their agony of pain
resulting from the shooting spree in Haram al-Sharif
reminded LIS of the sadistic bouts of laughter and
amusement of the Nazi Germans at the sight of thei:
victims
being exterminated
in the infslmous gas
chambers.

as well as:
“to cease forthwith all measures applied in the West
Bank, including Jerusalem, the Gaza Strip and the
Syrian Golan Heights, which contravene the provisions of. . , [the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 19491.”

68. Zionist Israel has seriously and wilfully betrayed
the principles enshrined in the proclamation regarding
9

and all public and private sectors will be closed fol
the day.”

the protection of the Holy Places. At this point I cannot help relating to the members of this body a worthy
example of the excellence of the Islamic tradition
when it comes to respect for and protection of Holy
Places.

President Hassan Gouled especially called upon all
the faithful of the world to pray that the souls of the
martyrs should rest in eternal peace.

When the Holy City of Jerusalem came under
Muslim rule 1,344 years ago, the Muslims set an
example that can be a source of inspiration for mankind. When the conquering Muslim armies were at
the gates of the Holy City, they gave the defenders
of the city the option of putting themselves under the
protection of Islam. They accepted that proposal on
the condition
that the Khalifah in person come to
ratify the peace treaty, That Khalifah was Omer Ibn
Al-Khattab,
the second of the four Khalifahs. In
accordance with that condition, the Khalifah went to
the Holy City to fulfil the commitment. It happened
that the meeting took place in a church, and when the
Khalifah noticed that it was time for prayers he took
his leave and went out to fulfil his religious obligations.
When he returned he was asked why he had not performed his prayers in the church. He replied that he
could have done so, were it not for fear that Muslims
after him might arrogate to themselves the right to
make use of places of worship belonging to other
faiths on the pretext that the Khalifah had done so
before them.

69.

73. We are not participating in this debate “to fan
the flames of religious hatred and incitement”,
as has
been alleged on several occasions here in the Council.
but in fact to voice our outrage and apprehension at
the alarming developments in the occupied Palestinian
and other Arab territories, and to condemn the despicable act of sacrilege inflicted on the holy shrines of
Haram al-Sharif.
74. These recent incidents and others preceding
them have all revealed the Zionist plan to annihilate
the Arabs and their institutions. They have exposed
the Zionist intention to annex the West Bank, the
Gaza Strip, the Golan Heights and other parts of the
occupied Arab lands. We are confident that these
premeditated designs-no
matter who may nurture
them-are certainly doomed to failure. We believe that
no power on earth can liquidate the Palestinian cause.
for unlike Zionist Israel, the Palestinian people have
never been bankrupt of their spiritual might and moral
courage.

70. That was the kind of justice that the Muslims
brought with them, not only to Jerusalem, but to every
country that came under their rule. For the first time
in the history of mankind new elements-tolerance
and respect for human rights-were introduced, at a
time when the state of mind of nations was reflected
in the dictum, “‘woe to the vanquished”.

75. The whole world should reject outright the blatant
implementation
of the Zionist entity’s policy of absorbing and annexing the occupied Arab lands. We
all know that that plan has been in operation ever since
the State of Israel was created, The prevalence and
perpetration of widespread violence and a reign of
terror; the annexation of Arab lands: the creation of
new Jewish settlements with the simultaneous~expulsion and deportation of the indigenous Arab residents
along with the forcible transfer of their property and
their eviction from their homes: the arming and enlistment into the reservist army of the Jewish settlers by
the Israeli authorities: the armed incitement of those
settlers against the indigenous Arab population:
the
sacrilegious acts, including the desecration of the AlAqsa Mosque: and the profane murder in cold blood of
the worshippers in their deep veneration in the Haram
al-Sharif: these are but a few of the acts which arc
leading to the implementation
of the eventual annexation of all the occupied Arab lands.

71. The Muslims oi the world cannot accept that
the profane act of violence inflicted on Haram al-Sharif
was an isolated incident committed by a deranged
individual.
Rather it is the beginning of a dangerous
exploit and a premeditated pattern of behaviour aimed
at demolishing the holy shrines of Haram al-Sharif and
other spiritual and cultural institutions in the Holy
City of Arab Jerusalem.
72. It was against the background of these infamous
acts of aggression perpetrated against the holy shrines
of Haram al-Sharif that Muslim nations throughout
the world, in their outrage, made the solemn declaration of last Wednesday, 14 April, as a day of solidarity with the Palestinian people, In response to that
declaration, the President and head of Government of
the Republic
of Djibouti,
El Haj Hassan Gouled
Aptidon, decreed that

76. The people and Government of the Republic of
Djibouti hail the struggle of the Palestinian people, who
in their heroic confrontation with the Israeli conspiracies have chosen not to yield to repressive methods,
but to continue to shoulder their responsibilities
and
to foil the Israeli scheme.

“In view of the sacrilegious attack perpetrated
against the Al-Aqsa Mosque and other sacred
places of Islam by the Zionists, Wednesday, I4 April
1982, will be observed throughout the territory of
the Republic of Djibouti as a solemn day of reaffirmation of solidarity with the Palestinian people,

77. We reaffirm and pledge our solidarity with and
full support for the Palestinian people and the PLO, the
sole representative of the Palestinian people, in theil
righteous struggle for their national legitimate rights,
including their right to self-determination
and the
IO

establishment of an independent
Palestinian territory.

State of Palestine

in

I know, of course, that the Soviet Constitution
guarantees freedom of religion-but.
then. it also guarantees freedom of expression, freedom of association.
freedom of movement, and virtually all basic freedoms.

78. In conclusion, it is high time that the Council
shouldered its grave responsibility by taking quick and
effective action in arresting any further deterioration
of the situation in the Middle East and by ensuring
that Palestinian and other Arab rights in the occupied
Arab land are not violated.
79. The PRESIDENT
(intop,‘c’totion
I call on the representative of Israel.

85. Incidentally,
the Soviet Constitution
also introduces the right to conduct atheistic propaganda while
it prohibits the right to reply to such propaganda 01
even to conduct religious education for children and
young people. In effect, this means that there is a
constant bombardment of anti-religious propaganda, to
which no redress is even available. How does this work
out in practice? Well, over the years the Soviet Union
has closed tens of thousands of churches, synagogues
and mosques. At best, they are used as barns or stables:
at worst, as museums of atheism.

,f,om Frrrzrh}:

80. Mr. BLUM
(Israel): The statements
of the
representative of Jordan are becoming increasingly
bizarre. Today we have been treated to a welcome
innovation.
We have been privileged
to enjoy his
valuable theological insights, with which he interspersed his statement today.

86. For instance, those who have been to the formel
Cathedral of St. Isaac in Leningrad know what has
happened to that Christian holy place, Those who have
been to the former Khazan Cathedral in Leningrad
know what has happened to that holy place: it is a
museum of atheism.

81. Last Friday he posed here as the protector and
defender of General Assembly resolution 181 (II). Of
course, I could not spare him slight embarrassment
when I pointed out that it was his country, in conjunction with other countries, that destroyed, through
armed aggression, resolution 181 (II). I also had occasion last Friday to mention some of the statements
made in the Council in 1948 condemning
Transjordanian aggression 12355th mrPting, partr.s. 95 to ‘XT’],

87. The Muslims of the Soviet Union have not fared
any better. There are about 50 million of them-one
of the largest Muslim communities in the world. But
the number of trained ulema-that
is, Muslim religious
clergy-is
derisively low. There are only two /T~LJ~/.csscs-theological
colleges-one
of which provides
the equivalent of secondary school education, though
boys can enter only after completing their military
service, and the other providing supposedly highel
Muslim theological
education. Students are not accepted every year and the total student population of
these nzcdr~~ssrs for the six-year course is about
70 young men each. The essential qualification
for
entry is a good knowledge of Arabic, something which
is extremely difficult to acquire outside the mr~f/~.s.sr
since there are very few people who now know this
language in Central Asia and, religious education
being banned, none of the ulema dare take the risk of
teaching it.

82, Well, the representative of Jordan is undaunted.
He has carried his attempt to falsify history one step
further today. Last Friday he posed as the defender
of the resolution which his country helped to destroy;
today he complained of Israel’s presence in Eilat,
which is located within the territory projected as
Israel under the said resolution. Be that as it may, it
is high time that we expose these attempts of the representative of Jordan to masquerade here and that we
state the case very clearly.
83. The aggression committed by Transjordan and
other countries in 1948 was successful in destroying
resolution 181 (II). But it failed in its other avowed
purpose, namely, that of crushing the State of Israel.
However, the fact that the Arab States failed in their
armed aggression aimed at destroying Israel does not
legitimize
their violation of international
law. At the
same time, that armed aggression precludes them from
now invoking in any form the benefits of the General
Assembly resolution which they both rejected and
destroyed by force of arms.

88. Now, what has happened to the mosques in the
Soviet Union? There were about 25.000 mosques in the
Soviet Union 60 years ago. There are 398 left-socalled working mosques-despite
the fact that the
Muslim population
has increased considerably ovel
the past 60 years, Religious publications are almost
non-existent
and copies of the Koran are in “.Jery
short supply.
89. If the representative of the Soviet Union wants
to check on my figures, I have the honour to refer him
to an article published in a book entitled iidigion in
Cotnmrrnist Ltrnds,
1979; that article is by A. Benningsen and Chantal Lemercier-Quelquejay,
entitled
LL ‘Official’ Islam in the Soviet Union”.

84. We have also been treated today to a statement
by the representative of the Soviet Union, who has
joined the list of bigots who have sponsored this debate.
I welcome his participation because it puts this entire
exercise in its proper perspective, I for one could not
fail to be moved by the display of concern of the representative of the Soviet Union for the sanctity of holy
places. After all, his country has an enviable record
in preserving holy places all around the Soviet Union.

90. So again we have been treated here today to a
manifestation
of Soviet cynicism which is all too well
Irn~.ju n.
II

91. I understand that it is much more convenient for
the representative
of the Soviet Union to keep the
Council busy with alleged desecrations of Holy Places
in other parts of the world rather than have it discuss
the situation in Kampuchea or the activities of SovietCuban mercenaries in various parts of Africa or the
situation in Poland or, for that matter, in Afghanistan.
How many mosques, Mr. Ovinnikov, has the Soviet
army of occupation destroyed in Afghanistan over the
past two years? Could you oblige the Council by
enlightening us on that and other relevant facts before
leaping into this debate as the protector of Holy Places?

about the Israeli occupation-that
it might end soon,
that it is inhuman? No. he passed over it in silence.
98. The representative of Israel does not like Soviet
representatives speaking in support of the just cause of
the Arab peoples. But we do not do it because we
dislike the internal situation in Israel itself. We might
not agree with it, but that is the business of Israel itself.
What we are against is Israel as an aggressive State,
a State that is pursuing annexationist policies in the
Middle East. We oppose aggression: we oppose the
aggressor and we defend the victims of aggression.
Soviet policy with regard to a political settlement in the
Middle East is clear and comprehensible.
We have
repeatedly set it forth and I can state it once again,
particularly for the personal attention of Mr. Blum.

92. The PRESIDENT
(irzte/pret~rtio~l j?om Fwnrh):
I shall now call on the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization who wishes to make a statement in reply and on those representatives who wish
to speak in exercise of their right of reply.

99. It has three elements: first, total withdrawal of
all Israeli troops from all the occupied Arab territories:
secondly, the implementation
of the inalienable rights
of the Arab people of Palestine, including its right to
the creation of.its own State; and thirdly, respect for
the rights of all States in.that region to live in peace.

93. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
I wonder how anyone can dare speak about religion
when the fundamentals of the teachings of Zionism
all refer to Our Redeemer as the Beautiful Dreamer
who came from Nazareth to Jerusalem to sow the seeds
of hatred. This is what Herzl, the founder of Zionism,
did.

100. That policy recognizes the right of Israel also to
exist. However, Israel does not want to acknowledge
the right of the Palestinians to exist, the right to have
their own State. Israel does not want to withdraw its
troops from the occupied Arab territories. That is the
essence of the problem.

94. I wonder how many of us know that in the textbooks in Israel now the plus sign has been changed
into an inverted “t” simply because it looks like a
cross. It is a shame that anyone would still have the
audacity to come here and speak about religion when
even the cross-like plus sign, which is used all ovel
the world and has been for centuries, has been removed
and replaced by an inverted “t”. This is very Orwellian, I must admit. But as least Orwell used the “t”
properly and not inverted.

101. Therefore I must reassure the representative of
Israel. I can tell him that there is a simple and very
effective means of putting an end to statements, not
only on the part of the Soviet representative but also
on the part of many other representatives,
against
the expansionist policy of Israel. To do this it would
be enough for Israel to withdraw all its troops from the
occupied Arab territories and to ensure implementation of the inalienable rights of the Arab people of
Palestine. Is Israel ready to do this or not? I should
like the representative of Israel to answer that question.

95. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpwtution
from
Russian):
The representative of Israel, Mr. Blum, responding to the Soviet
representative used the tactic which amounts to telling
the adversary that he is a fool. It is not a very elegant
device. But that is not the point. The point is that the
one resorting to this as part of his equipment is in
practice virtually confessing that not everything is in
order in his own house.

102. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): Before I speak in
exercise of my right of reply, I wish to elaborate on
some statements that I made earlier. Indeed, it is my
solemn duty to do so, having received messages from
the beleaguered Palestinian and other Arab peoples
asking me to address an appeal to the Security Council
in their hour of need.

96. Now, what did the representative of Israel say in
substance about the arguments contained in the Soviet
statement? He did not say anything at all, not a single
word. He simply avoided the issue. In our statement
we said that recent actions of the Israeli occupying
authorities
had led to dozens of newly dead and
wounded Palestinians. I do not think that the representative of Israel denied that fact and I doubt that he
can deny it. He simply avoided mentioning it,

103. I think we are all aware that the Israeli troops
and armed settlers-those armed settlers being the very
same people who took over, usurped and confiscated
the remnants of the Palestinian homeland and COIItinue doing so, to the point where they now have
almost 40 per cent of it-are enjoying the spring hunting
season, literally. The only difference is that the hunted
are not certain animal species. And not all animal
species are accepted as being the objects of hunting,
I am talking about those that are.

97. The Soviet statement said that the reason for the
existing tension in the Middle East was the continued
occupation by Israel of Arab lands. That is the root
~)f all evil. Did the Israeli representative say anything
I2

104. Those that are being hunted are mainly Palestinian children between the ages of 6 and 16. They are
totally unarmed and without any means of defence.
I have received numerous appeals and reports, one
of which is from Mr. Paul Ajlouni of Jerusalem, a journalist, and which describes how armed Israeli settlers,
aided and abetted by the official Israeli occupation
authorities,
have been behaving towards the beleaguered Palestinian people, Up to this moment, the
reports of authoritative eyewitnesses describe in detail
how the Israeli armed forces and armed settlers go to
peaceful and serene villages and abduct, beat up and
brutalize children. They go regularly, every night, to
these villages adjacent to the settlements in which they
have implanted themselves. They roundup the children
and elderly men and women, take them to the adjacent illegal settlement and force them, as the point of
a gun, to spend the whole night in the open without
cover, without provisions and without water. Such
acts are being perpetrated every night.

of Nations, even though we naturally were unhappy
about the dismemberment
of our country-by
armed
force started to implement their plan of taking over the
whole of Palestine, when the Palestinian people were
totally without arms. There is no question whatsoever
about this: in fact, the Israeli leaders, including
Mr. Ben-Gurion,
were about to reject the partition
plan but were advised that the Arabs had no choice
but to protest the dismemberment
of their country.
108. But what are we talking about here? We are
talking about the Palestinian people, and I would
repeat what I said at an earlier meeting-that
the Palestinian people were not given the chance, either through
an election or a plebiscite or in any other manner, to
express their views on the resolutions of the General
Assembly. It was the Israeli representative-either
the Permanent Representative Mr. Eban or possibly the
Minister for Foreign Affairs (I do not exactly remembet-)--who said before the Assembly that General Assembly resolutions
are normally
recommendations
which are not binding, but that what we are dealing with
here is a Trust Territory, and a Trust Territory has a
unique status and we therefore declare before the
Assembly that we shall adhere to and respect the
General Assembly resolutions.

105. After enumerating many of the acts during the
hunting spree, Mr. Ajlouni describes how the Israeli
troops even break into hospitals and clinics, to prevent
them from attending to the wounded. Indeed, at one
hospital Israeli troops attacked the few doctors still
available in the occupied territories, Such is Israeli
Zionist behaviour, which a former member of the
Israeli Supreme Court, Mr. Cohen, has described, in
commenting on Israeli brutalities in the Golan Heights,
as “barbarian
behaviour”.
These are not my words
-they are the words of a former member of the Israeli
Supreme Court, He would have spoken no less indignantly, I am sure, if he had been commenting on the
hunting season of the Zionist Nazi practices and
ideology.

109. Whatever subsequent resolutions may have been
adopted-and
there have been tons of resolutions,
including Security Council resolution 242 (1967)-to
end the consequences of Israeli aggression in 1967,
there is no authority which can invalidate a General
Assembly resolution which is still on the books,
whether it is 181 (II) or 194 (III), resolutions which
we reiterate every year, It is therefore not the Palestinians who aborted the implementation
of those resolutions; it was the Israeli military machine, which
managed to occupy four fifths of Palestine, even while
the troops of the United Kingdom,
the mandatory
Power, were still in the country. And they had no
plans whatsoever to stop at the level of four fifths.

106. It is my solemn duty to convey to the Council
these reports about the unspeakable savagery to which
the Palestinian and Arab peoples are being subjected
as we are debating today what is happening to them.
The Council cannot, and should not, stand idly by
while those heinous crimes are being committed.

r”

110. They continued their aggression against the
remaining one fifth. And that was what compelled
small contingents of the Arab armies to go into the
country after the departure of the British-to
save
the remnants, this one fifth, of Palestine from the
massacres to which the other four fifths had been
subjected and which had resulted in the expulsion of
the vast majority of the inhabitants of Palestine, who
owned at least 94 per cent of the lands and territory
there.

107. The representative of Israel has again tried to
refute what I stated categorically at the last meeting
of the Council, namely, that the only legally valid resolutions for a solution to the question of Palestine are
General Assembly resolutions 181 (II), which calls
for the creation of a Palestinian Arab State, and 194
(III), which mandates the right of every Palestinian
refugee to go back to his home, unconditionally,
unless
he chooses to do otherwise. The Israeli representative
has tried to give the Council the impression that it was
the Arabs who had aborted the implementation
of that
resolution.
At the expense of having to repeat what
I said at the last meeting, let me say that it was the
Israelis themselves who, a few days after adoption of
General Assembly resolution I81 (III-and
we know
that the General Assembly is the ultimate decisionmaker in these matters, particularly when the problem
concerns a Trust Territory inherited from the League

II 1. In my last statement I mentioned some of the
cities and towns which were 100 per cent Palestinian
and which would have been a part of the Palestinian
Arab State. In fact, a corridor to the city of Jaffa was
suggested. It was 100 per cent Arab: the city of Lydda
was 100 per cent Arab; the cities of Ramla, Sustha,
Tiberias were overwhelmingly
Palestinian, as were two
thirds of West Jerusalem, in addition to what is now
called Arab Jerusalem: and many more-for
instance,
13

Ashkelon. But I need not go further with this enumeration of cities, towns and villages.

reply. That was all I wanted to say to the Council.
The President must rule as he sees fit.

112. The Israeli representative thought that he had
caught me in a serious error when he talked about
Eilat, or Urn-al-Rashrash, having been seized after the
General Armistice Agreement. Let me remind him that
in its last clause the General Armistice Agreement
specifically states that it is being concluded without
prejudice to the ultimate solution of the Palestine
problem.

I 18. The PRESIDENT
(intc/‘l)/‘(Jtf/tiO/l,fi.O/ll
Frrnc*h):
There are no other names on my list of speakers. The
Council is still seized of the matter and this is not out
last meeting. Members of the Council and others
participating in the discussions can of course speak at
subsequent meetings. We shall now continue hearing
representatives who wish to speak in exercise of theit
right of reply.

113. The acid test came in 1949, when the Palestine
Conciliation
Commission was set up by the United
Nations [Gcnertrl Ass~~ud~ly resolution
194 (III)]. They
had long meetings in Lausanne4 in an effort to resolve
the Palestinian issue on the basis of the General Assembly resolution, and the Protocols was initialled by
the Arab States, including some Palestinian leaders.

119. Mr. BLUM
(Israel): The representative
of
Jordan has again subjected us to his fanciful “facts”.
To give just one example, he alleged that Israel took
control of Eilat after the coming into effect of the
General Armistice Agreement between Jordan and
Israel of 1949. But the real facts are somewhat different.

114. The Israeli delegation, having initialled those
Protocols, which could have solved this problem
more than 30 years ago, reneged. A Palestinian member
of one of the Arab delegations came to a Jewish fl-iend,
whom he knew very well, in Haifa, and said to him,
“What is happening?” His Jewish friend told him,
“My dear friend, every time we tell the old man about
a return of territory or the return of a single refugee,
his eyes turn red,” He was talking about the late
Mr. Ben Gurion. It was therefore inadmissible-and
this has nothing to do with whether Urn-al-Rashrash, or
Eilat, was within the proposed Palestinian State or the
Israeli State: I shall look into that-to capture it by
force after the signature of the General Armistice
Agreement. Otherwise, all the towns, villages, lands
and so on should have been returned simultaneously,
It was a violation of the General Armistice Agreement.

120. The Armistice Agreement between our two
countries was signed in April-I
believe on 3 April.
Israel took control of Eilat in March-I
believe on the
17th. I speak without documentation,
but I am positive that Israel’s taking control of Eilat occurred in
March. The Armistice Agreement was concluded in
April. So much for the “facts” of the representative of
Jordan.

115. I hope that the members of the Council know
that the facts as I have stated them are the truth and
nothing but the truth.

I 16. The PRESIDENT
(iMtCI.PI.Ct~/tion,fi,on? French):
Before the representative of Israel speaks in exercise
of his right of reply, I call upon the representative of
Spain on a point of order,
III.

Mr.

de PINI6.S (Spain) (intcrpwtntion
,fh~m
I apologize to the representative of Israel,
but I should like to know how many times-two,
three,
or four-the
right of reply can be exercised in the
Council. It seems to me that according to the rules
we do not have the right to continue making statements in exercise of the right of reply. We are hearing
new statements now: these are not, strictly speaking,
statements made in exercise of the right of reply,
I must therefore conclude that the debate has not yet
ended. All those who wish to make new statements
should inscribe their names on the speakers’ list, and
we can hear them at another meeting. I think that what
we are hearing now are actually new statements: WC
are not confining ourselves to exercising the right of
Sprrnish):

121. In his first statement today, the representative
of the Soviet Union posed as the protector of holy
places, and in his second statement as an apostle of
peace.
122. Now, I shall not go into an analysis of the peaceful role of the Soviet Union in various parts of the
world. Members are acquainted with that role. But as
far as the Middle East is concerned, I think I owe him
a few words,
123. Mr. Ovinnikov, a peace treaty was signed some
three years ago between Egypt and Israel. What was
the Soviet role in welcoming that tremendous step
towards peace-making in our region after three decades
of warfare and bloodshed? How did the Soviet Union
encourage peace-making in our region? Has it ever
welcomed that peace treaty? Has it introduced in the
Organization any draft resolution calling upon the
parties to persevere in their efforts towards reaching
a comprehensive peace in the Middle East? Well,
you know exactly what the response of your country
has been: It has been inciting against peace. It has been
lining up opponents to that peace, in keeping with the
now traditional role of the Soviet Union in the Middle
East over the past three decades of heightening tension, of increasing polarization, of fomenting dissension, of fishing in the troubled waters of the Middle
East.
124. That has been the Soviet policy in the Middle
East, and it has contributed substantially to every
conflagration that we have had in our region since the

early 1950s. There has been no war in the Middle East
over the past three decades that has not been preceded
by Soviet incitement
and Soviet encouragement of
aggression. And here you come before the Council
today as an apostle of peace in the Middle East.

the conclusion of the so-called strategic partnership
Israel annexed the Syrian Golan Heights: that was the
first step towards the implementation
of the secret
understanding. At present we witness Israel attempting
in fact to annex the West Bank and the Caza Strip:
that is the second stage of the implementation of the
secret understanding between the United States and
Israel.

125. Interestingly
enough, you did not say one word
about the desecration of 25,000 mosques in the Soviet
Union over the past 60 years. You did not say one
word about the desecration of mosques in Afghanistan
by the Soviet army of occupation over the past two
years. This, to follow your logic, must clearly be an
admission of guilt on your part, Mr. Ovinnikov.

132. Therefore, the representative of Israel should
not engage in anti-Soviet slander, He will not be able
to conceal from anyone, still less from the Arabs, that
his policy is aimed against the fundamental interests
of the Arab countries, that Israel’s policy in the Middle
East is one of expansionism and aggression.

126. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (intrrpt.rttrtiotl
fh)m Rtt.ssian): Mr, Blum
wondered why the Soviet Union did not support, as
he put it, the peace treaty on the Middle East. Well,
I am ready to answer that question.

133. The PRESIDENT
finte,prc~t~riiotl.f,.otn French):
There are still two speakers on my list. Since it is so
late, I intend to adjourn the meeting after we have
heard them. Anyone else who wishes to take part in
the debate may inscribe his name for a subsequent
meeting.

127. We did not support the Camp David accords
-in fact we were actually against them-because
the
second part of those accords was a secret understanding that the Arab people of Palestine should not
be allowed to implement
its right to self-determination, should not have its own State. We categorically
disagree with that. That is why we oppose the Camp
David accords and the so-called peace treaty-which
is
in fact a separate treaty.

134. I call on the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization.
135. Mr. TERZI
(Palestine Liberation Organization): Papers and documents should not be misnamed;
they should be judged by their effects. The so-called
peace treaty, or the framework for peace in the Middle
East-usually
referred to as the Camp David accordsis nothing but the usurpation of the right of a people,
the Palestinian people. That paper, as is known, has
131 lines on the future of the Palestinian people-in
the absence of that Palestinian people and against the
wishes of that people-and only something like 22 lines
about Egypt, the other party to the framework. It is a
misnomer.

128. What is noteworthy is that the representative of
Israel is speaking endlessly against Soviet statements
and engaging in anti-Soviet slander. Is that a coincidence? No, it is not. It is an attempt to divert attention from the essence of the matter. This anti-Soviet
slander is being exploited by Israel and its older partner, the United States, so that under cover of that
slander they can engage in dirty machinations in the
Middle East. We do not have to look very far foi
examples; I shall give a very concrete one.

136. It is a bill of slavery: it is a violation-nay,
an
attempt at an annulment-of
the rights of the Palestinian people. It has facilitated the establishment of bases
for the rapid deployment force, that military arm of
the United States, to be deployed outside or beyond
Sinai. It is not merely a force to be placed between
two nations which have just fallen in love-1 do not
understand how people falling in love and becoming
friends could need a rapid deployment force in between them. It means the importation and stationing
of troops of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
in Africa. Maybe that is what resulted in the strategic
alliance.

129. Only last year, Israel and the United States
concluded a treaty on so-called strategic co-operation.
It would appear that that treaty was aimed against the
Soviet Union. But I should like the representative of
Israel to tell us why the effect of that treaty was halted
by the United States after Israel committed an act of
annexation with regard to an Arab State, Syria.
130. I shall answer that question myself, because
anti-Sovietism
is just a smokescreen for this socalled strategic co-operation:
the actual core of the
so-called
strategic co-operation
agreement in the
Middle East is the alliance of Israel and the United
States against the Arabs. The United States suspended
putting that treaty into effect only because Israel made
si too hasty attempt to implement the secret articles of
the treaty and placed the United States in an embarrassing position.

137. That so-called peace treaty was only the green
light for the Israelis to continue their aggression,
to invade Lebanon, to annex Jerusalem, to annex the
Golan, to strike at Baghdad, to remove those settlers
from Sinai and place them in and around Jerusalem,
Nablus, Hebron, and the Palestinian territories. What
is more, that so-called peace treaty has kept the Security Council busy for quite a few weeks now as a result
of the escalating brutal acts of Israel, supported by the

13 I. But those secret agreements are now being
implemented
before our very eyes. Precisely after
I.5

ment was entered into to preserve, protect and extend
the interests of my Government and the Government
of Israel, in so far as these interests-as
they so frequently do- substantially
coincide. The agreement
was temporarily suspended in its implementation,
ful
reasons well known to my Government and to the
Government of Israel. Our relations have always been
conducted as between friends, allies, peoples, whose
enduring, as against transient, interests substantially
coincide. That will remain the basis, I trust, of a long
and fruitful association in years to come.

United States-acts that have been denounced by the
European Community
and are considered by it as
violations of the freedoms and rights of the inhabitants
of the occupied West Bank and the Gaza [s//49541.
138. It is a misnomer; it is not a peace treaty. I think
that as we sit here in the Council we had better call
things by their proper name.
139. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): My mind reels with the recitations of the representative of the Soviet Union regarding the “secret”
agreements into which my Government
has, in his
perspective, entered in recent months. To the best of
my knowledge, my Government
never enters into
agreements which are secret-or
which, at least,
remain sect-et for very long.
140. I do not wish to be flippant in any way, however, about my reaction to his comments on the agreement undertaken between my Government
and the
Government of Israel in the latter part of 1981. That
agreement was not, and is not now, directed against
anyone, any nation or any group of nations, within the
Middle East or outside the Middle East. The agree-

16

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may br obtained
t’rom bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
or write to: United Nations.
Sales Section.
New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
der Nations
Units
monde entier.
Informez-vous
auprts
cles ventes. New York ou Gentve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

sent en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
de votre librairc
ou adressez-vous
A : Nations

PUBLICACIONES

Las puhlicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE

LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00400

dfpositaircs
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distrihuidoras
en
Unidas,
Seccibn de Ventas,

&j-60989-June

1989-~.0~0
