Resolutions adopted on reports of the Fourth Committee

2. Instructs the Fourth Committee, acting on behalf
of the General Assembly, to fill such vacancies as may
occur among the non-administering Members of the
Committee;
3. Decides that, at its regular session in 1955, the
General Assembly will examine the question whether
the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories should be renewed for a further
period, together with the questions of the composition
and terms of reference of any such future committee.
402nd plenary meeting,
10 December 1952.
bi accordance with the ter,ns of resolutions 332 (IV) and
646 (VII), the Fourth Committee, at its 306th meeting oti
15 De.-embtr 1952, elected, on behalf of the Ge11eral A.fsembly,
fo11r members lo the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Gtn,'trning Territories to fill the vacancies created by the
expiration of the terms of office of Bran/, Egypt, India and
the Unioti of Soi>iet Socialist RepHblics.
The States elected were: BRAZIL, CHINA, I NOIA and IRAQ.

647 (VII). Participation of Non.Self-Governing
Territories in the work of the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Terri•
tories

The Ge,aeral Assembly,
Recalling that, in resolution 566 (VI) adopted on
18 January 1952, the General Assembly invited the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories to examine the possibility of associating the
Non-Self-Gpverning Territories more closely in its
work and to report the results of its examination of
this problem to the General Assembly at its seventh
session in connexion with the Assembly's consideration
of the Committee's future,
Recalling that it has been found both possible and
useful to associate Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the work of technical organs of the United Nations. including the specialized agencies,
Recognizing that direct 'participation of the NonSelf-Governing Territories in the work of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories can be of further assistance in promoting the
progress of these Territories and their peoples towards
the goals set forth in Chapter XI of the Charter of
the United Nations,
.
Noting that the Members administering NonSelf-C10verning Territories have from time to time
attached qualified persons from these Territories to
their delegations to the Committee,
l. Considers it desirable that there be associated in
the work of the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories qualified indigenous representatives from Non-Self-Governing Territories, and
invites the Administering Members to make such participation possible ;
2. Invites the Administering Members to transmit
copies of the reports on economic, social and educational conditions of the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories, together with
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, to the
executive and legislative branches of these Territories;
1

33

3. Invites the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories to study further tht
question of the direct participation, in its discussiovi
on economic, social and educational conditions, of rep·
resentatives of those Territories the inhabitants ol
which have attained a wide measure. of responsibilit;;
for economic, social and educational policies, and to
include recommendations on this question in its re·
port to the General Assembly at its eighth session.
402nd plenary meeting,
10 December 1952.
648 (VII). Factors which should be taken Into
account in deciding whether a Territory is or
is not a Territory whose people have not yet
attained a full measure of self-government
The General Assembly,
Taking into account the obligation to transmit information, accepted in virtue of Article 73 e of the
Charter, by the Members which have or assume responsibilities for the administration of Territories
whose peoples have not yet attained a full measure of
sel £-government,
Talei,a9. into acco""' that this obligation remains in
force with regard to each Territory until such time
as the objectives of Chapter XI of the Charter are
.
fulfilled,
Taking into accoi:nt the statement contained in resolution 222 (III), adopted by the General Assembly on
3 November 1948, to the effect that it is essential for
the United Nations to be informed of any change that
may take place in the constitutional status of any NonSelf-Governing Territory, and that, not later than six
months after the· submission of the aforesaid information, such information as may be required in such cases
should be communicated, including information about
the constitution, legislative acts or executive orders
regarding the government of the Territory as well as
about the constitutional relationship of the Territory
to the government of the metropobtan country,
Having examined the report • of the Ad H oc Committee on Factors ( Non-Self-~erning Territories).
Recognizing that, in deciding whether a Territory
has or has not attained a full measure of self-government, an enumeration of factors would be a useful
guide both for the General Assembly and for the Administering Member concerned,
Having regard to its resolution 567 (VI) of 18 January 1952,
1. Approves provisionally the annexed list of factors which may serve as a guide, both for the General
Assembly and for the Members of the United Nations
which have or assume responsibilities for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories, in deciding
whether a Territory has or hu not attained-a full measure of self-government;
2. Recognises that ,-each concrete caae should be
considered and decided in the light of the particular
' See document A/Zl 78.

M

General Auembly--Seventh Seulon

circumstances of that case and taking into account the
right of self-determination of peoples;
3. Declares that the factors, while ¥rving as a
~ui<le in determining whether the obligations as set
1o;·th in Article 73 e of the Charter still exist, should
in no way Le inteq,reted as a hindrance to the attainment of a full measure of self-government by the
Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. Furt/rer declares that, for a Territory to he
deemed self-go\'erning in economic, social or educational affairs it is essential that its people shall have
attainecl a full measure of self-government as referred
to in Chapter XI of the Charter;
5. Recommends that, provisionally, the annexed list
of factors should be taken into account in any case
which the General Assembly examines resulting from
any communication received by the Secretary-General
in virtue of General Assembly resolution 222 (III)
concerning the cessation of the transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter, or in relation to other questions that may arise concerning the
existence of an obligation to transmit information under this Article ;
6. Decides to set up a new Ad H oc Committee of
ten Members, consisting of Australia, Belgium, Burma,
Cuba, Guatemala, Iraq, Netherlands, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela, with instructions to continue and carry put a more thorough study of the factors which will have to be taken into account in deciding whether a Territory has or has not attained a
full measure of self-government;
7. Jwuites the said Cornmittee to take into account,
inter alia, the list• of factors prepared in 1952 by the
Ad H oc Committee set up under General Assembly
resolution 567 (VI) and the statements transmitted
by governments in compliance with the aforementioned
resolution and, further, to take into account the following additional elen1ents :
(a) The possibility of defining the concept of a
full measure of self-government for the purposes of
Chapter XI of the Charter;
( b) The features guaranteeing the principle of the
self-determination of peoples in relation to Chapter XI
of the Charter ;
(c) The manifestation of the freely expressed will
of the peoples in relation to the determinat10n of their
national and international status for the purposes of
Chapter XI of the Charter;
8. lwvites all Members of the United Nations to
transmit in writing to the Secretary-General, by 1 May
1953, a statement of the views of their governments on
the subjects contained in the terms of reference of
the Committee;
9. Rll/f'ISls the Secretary-General to convene the
Ad Hoe Committee so that it may begin its work not
later than feur weeks before the opening of the 1953
seuion of the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Goveming Territories.
402nd pl1,uv:, "'"""9,
10 Dec,mbet' 1952.

ANNEX

Factor• indicative of the atlainment o/ i,adependence or o/ other aeparate ayalema o/ ,el/•
government
1

FIRST PART

Factors indicative of the attainment of independ,nct
:\. /ntemational status
I. International responsibility. Full international responsibility of the territory for the acts inherent in the exercise of
its external sovereignty and for the corresponding acts in the
administration of its internal affairs.
2. Eligibility for membership in the United Nations.
3. General international relatiims. Power to enter into direct
relations of every kind with other governments and with international institutions and to negotiate, sign and ratify international instruments.
4. National defence. Freedom of the territory to enter into
arrangements concerning its national defence.
B. Internal stlf-goi·ernrnent
1. Form of govern,nent. Complete freedom of the people of
the territory to choose the form of government which they
desire.
2. Tl!f'f"itorial government. Freedom from control or interference by the government of another State in respect of the
internal government (legislature, executive, judiciary) and administration of the Territory.
3. Economic, social and culttcral jurisdiction. Complete autonomy in respect of economic, social and cultural affairs.
SECOND PART

Factors indicative of the attainment of other stf>aratt systems
uf self-go1•"nment
A. Gen"al
1. Political atlvancement. Political advll!lcement of the population sufficient to_ enable them to decide upon the future
destiny of the territory with due knowledge.
2. O,-icm of l#w po,-lalion. The opinion of the population
of the territory, freely expressed by informed and democratic:
processes, as to the status or change in status which they
desire.
3. V oltcnlary limitation of sovertigflty. Degree to which the
sovereignty of the territory is limited by its own free will when
that territory has attained a separate system of self-,ovemment.
B. 1nt,nsatiOfltJl stattu
1. G1n1ral int,,.,.otional r,latiofu. Degree or extent to
which the territory exercises the power to enter freely into
direct relations of every kind with other governments and
with international institutions and to negotiate, sign and ratify
international instruments freely.
2. Eligibility for me'"'1ersliip in tla, Unitetl Notions.
C. lnllf'tla/ 11lf-1ov1rnment
1. Territorial gOflemment. Naaire and measure of control
or interference, if any, by the government of another State in
respect of the internal government, for example, in respect of

the followl111:
L1gi,lo1W1: The enactment of law, for the territory by an
indfaenou1 body whether fully elected by free and democratic
proceaaes or lawfully constituted in a manner receiving the
free consent of the population;

Reaolutiom adopted on reporla of the Fourth Committee
E.rec11tive: The selection of members of the executive branch
of the government by the competent authority in the territory
receiving consent of the indigenous population, whether that
authority is hereditary or elected, having regard also to the
nature and measure of control, if any, by an outside agency on
that authority, whether directly or indirectly exercised in the
constitution and conduct of the executive branch of the government;
Jwliciary: The establishment of courts of law and the selection of judges.
2. Participation of the population. Effective participation of
the population in the government of the territory: (a) Is there
an adequate and appropriate electoral and representative system? (b) Is this electoral system conducted without direct or
indirect interference from a foreign government? a
3. Economic, social and cultural jurisdiction. Degree of autonomy in respect of economic, social and cultural affairs, as
-illustrated by the degree of freedom from economic pressure
as exercised, for example, by a foreign minority group which,
by virtue of the help of a foreign Power, has acquired a
-privileged economic status prejudicial to the general economic
interest o{ the people of the territory ; and by the degree of
freedom and lack of discrimination against the indigenous population of the territory in ~ocial legislation ancl social developments.
Fartors indicative of the free assoriatiot1 of II territory with
other component parts of the metropolitan or other coNntry
A. General
1. Political odvanctment. Political advancement of the population sufficient to enable them to decide upon the future
destiny of the territory with due knowledge.
2. Opinio11 of the pop11lation. The opinion of the population of the territory, freely expressed by informed and democratic processes, as to the status or change in status which
they desire.
3. Geographical con.rider1Jtions. Extent tG which the relationa of the territory with the capital of the central government
may be affected by circumstances arising out of their respective geographical positions, such as separation by land,
.sea or other natural obstacles.
4. Ethnic and cult11ral considerations. Extent to which the
population are of different race, language or religion or have
a distinct cultural heritage, interests or aspirations, distinguishin1 them from the peoples of the country with which they
freely associate themselves.
S. Constit11tional con.rid,rations. Association (a) by virtue
of the constitution of the metropolitan cou.ntry, or (b) by
virtue of a treaty or bilateral agreement affecting the status

• For example, the followinf questions would be relevant:
(i> Has each adult inhabitant equal power (subject to
special safeguards for minorities) to determine the character
of the government of the territory?
(ii) Is this power exercised freely, i.e., is there an absence
of undue influence over and coercion of the voter and of the
imposition of disabilities on particular political parties? Some
tests which can he used in the application of this factor are
as follows:
(a) The existence of effective measures to ensure the demo•
cratic elg)_reuion of the will of the people ;
(b) The existence of more than one political party in the
territory;
.
(c) The existence of a secret ballot;
(d) The existence of lep) prohibitions on the exercise of
undemocratic practices in the course of elections;
(,) The existence for the individual elector of a choice between candidates of differing political parties;
(f) The absence of "martial law" and similar measures at
election times ;
(iii) Is each individual free to express his political
opinions, to support or oppose any pelitical party or cause,
and to criticize the government of the day?

SS

of the territory, taking into account (i) whether the c:on■ti•
tutional guarantees extend equally to the usociated territory,
(ii) whether there are powers in certain matten cautltutionally reserved to the territory or to the central aatborh:,,
and (iii) whether there is provision for the putic:lpatloa of
the territory on a basis of equality in any ~hanges in the constitutional system of the State.
B. Status
1. Legislative representation. Representation without di•·
crimination in the central legislative orpns on the same basis
as other inhabitants and re,lona.
2. Citirenship. Citizenship without discrimination on the
same hasis as other inhabitants.
3. Govnwmfflt officials. Eligibility of officials from the
territory to all public offices of the central authority, by
appointment or election, on the same basis as those from other
parts of the country,
C. lnt,rnal constil11tional condmons
1. S11lf ra111. Universal and equal suffra,e. and free periodic
elections, characterized by an absence of IDldue irdhaence over
and coercion of the voter or of the imposition of disabilities
on particular political parties.b
2. Local rights and .rtattu. In a unitary ■)'Item equal risbts
and status for the inhabitants and Jocal bodiea of the territory
as enjoyed by inhabitants and local bodiea of other parts of
the country ; in a federal system an identical decree of self•
government for the inhabitants and local bodies of all parts
of the federation.
3.. Local official.r. Appointment or election of .offlclala in
the territory on the same basis as tho1e in other parts of the
couqtry.
4. lnt,""°' l1gi.,lotion. Local self-,overnment of the ■ame
scope and under the same conditions u enjOJC(l by other
parts of the country.

649 (VD). Admlnletntlve lllllom affeedq
Tl'IUt Terrltorlea
The Ge,.eral Assembly,
Recalliflg that the Trusteeship Agreements for the
Trust Territories concerned authorize the Adminiering Authorities to establish customs, fiscal or administrative unions or federations,
Recalling its resolution 224 (III) of 18 November
1948, recommending that the Truateeship Council
should investigate the question of ac:bninistrative unions
in all its aspects, and resolution 326 (IV) of 15 November 1949, recommendinJ that the Trusteeship
Council should complete the investigation,
Recalli,.g, further, that in resolution 326 (IV) it
noted that the Trusteeship Agreements do not authorize
~ For example, the followi• tests would be relevant:

(a) The existence of effective measures to ensure the
democratic expression of the will of the people;
( b) The existence of more than one political party in the

territory;

( c) The existence of a aec:ret ballot :
(d) The existence of )epl prohibitions on the exercise of
undemocratic practices in the course of electiona;
(,) The existence for the individual elector of a choice
between candidates of differins politlcal parties ;
(/) ~• absence of "martial law" and similar -■urn at

election times ;

(1) Freedom of each individ-1 to ~ hia polidcaJ
opinions, to support or oppoee any polidcal party or caue.- and
to criticize the ,overnment of the day.
