164

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

the new international economic order, without being a
substitute for or an alternative to co-operation between
developed and developing countries, and that the Caracas
Programme of Action 160 adopted by the High-level Conference on Economic Co-operation among Developing
Countries, held at Caracas from 13 to 19 May 1981, provides their basic framework for specific activities and
arrangements in the field of economic co-operation among
developing countries,
Mindful of the various resolutions adopted within the
United Nations system in support of economic co-operation among developing countries and calling for appropriate action on them,
Looking forward to the cross-organizational programme
analysis on economic co-operation among developing
countries, to be considered by the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination at its twenty-fifth session, and
to the cross-organizational programme review of the activities of the United Nations system on the same subject, to
be held at the second regular session of the Economic and
Social Council in 1985,
I. Urges the organs and organizations of the United
Nations system to provide and to intensify support and
assistance, in accordance with their mandates, to economic co-operation among developing countries, giving due
regard to the Caracas Programme of Action;
2. Urges the Secretary-General, giving due consideration to the conclusions emerging from the ongoing crossorganizational programme analysis, to pay careful attention to economic co-operation among developing
countries in preparing his programme budget proposals for
the biennium I 986-1987 and to include in his future performance reports on the programme budget specific information on the implementation of activities for economic
co-operation among developing countries;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the executive heads of the bodies and organizations of the
United Nations system and of the specialized agencies, to
keep the activities of the United Nations system in support
of economic co-operation among developing countries
under periodic review in the existing inter-agency machinery;

4. Recommends that the documentation being prepared for the cross-organizational programme review of
medium-term plans in economic and technical co-operation among developing countries and for the cross-organizational programme analysis should be combined into one
report so as to ensure an integrated approach to this area;
5. Requests the executive secretaries of the regional
commissions to continue to intensify activities to support
economic co-operation among developing countries at the
subregional, regional and interregional levels and to
include an assessment of progress made in their reports to
the Economic and Social Council;
6. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in view
of its key role in the area of economic co-operation among
developing countries, to continue to intensify activities in
this area, in accordance with its mandate;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
104th plenary meeting
18 December 1984
160 A/36/333 and Corr I. annex

39 /217.

Biennial programme of work for the Second
Committee

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 38/429 of 19 December 1983, in
which it decided to adopt, beginning at its fortieth session,
a biennial programme of work for the Second Committee,
apart from its general debate,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council decision
1984/182 of27 July 1984, in which it recommended to the
General Assembly for its consideration a number of suggestions relating to the biennial programme of work for the
Second Committee. contained in the annex to that decision,
1. Decides that the Second Committee, in drawing up
its biennial programmes of work, should:
(a) Endeavour to adopt a biennial cycle of consideration of reports submitted to it, with the exception of those
reports which are specifically mandated to be considered
annually, once every three years or more, or on an ad hoe
basis;
(b) Consider all reports of standing intergovernmental
bodies on a biennial basis, except the reports of the Economic and Social Council, the Trade and Development
Board and the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme;
(c) Consider, m principle, all recurrent Secretariat
reports on a biennial basis, except the report of the Director-General for Development and International Economic
Co-operation on operational activities for development;
2. Decides to approve, in principle, annex I to the present resolution as the basis for the formulation of the biennial programme of work for the Second Committee and to
review it periodically;
3. Decides that all requests for Secretariat reports to be
submitted to the Second Committee should henceforth
conform to the biennial programme of work, except where
the urgency of the subject-matter requires otherwise;
4. Requests intergovernmental bodies reporting to the
Second Committee to adjust their cycle of meetings to
conform to the biennial programme of work;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Second Committee for consideration and approval each
year a proposed biennial programme of work, taking into
account relevant resolutions and decisions of the General
Assembly of that year;
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council, in discharging its responsibilities in preparing the work of the
General Assembly in the economic, social and related
fields, to take fully into account the approved programme
of work for the Second Committee of the General Assembly in formulating its own biennial programme of work
and in this context:
(a) To concentrate, in its consideration of reports of
intergovernmental bodies submitted through it to the
General Assembly, on the co-ordination aspect of the
work of those bodies in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations;
(b) To consider undertaking an in-depth review of the
reports of intergovernmental bodies which the General
Assembly does not consider directly in a given year and to
submit substantive recommendations thereon to the
Assembly for consideration and action;
(c) To consider reviewing those reports of intergovernmental bodies which the General Assembly considers

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

directly in a given year but not to consider draft proposals
on them, except specific recommendations contained in
the reports which require action by the Council and proposals that concern matters relating to the co-ordination
aspect of the work of those bodies;
(d) To transmit in some cases, as it deems appropriate,
certain reports directly to the General Assembly without
debate;
7. Decides to approve the biennial programme of work
for the Second Committee for 1985-1986 contained in
annex II to the present resolution.

.,

4

165

D. Consideration as required or at longer intervals
Review and appraisal of the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States
Restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the United
Nations system 162
l lnited Nations Special Fund
United Nations Revolving Fund for Natural Resources Exploration

b

7

104th plenary meeting
18 December 1984

8
9
111

ANNEX I

United Nations Special Fund for Land-locked Developing
Countries
lJnified approach to development analysis and planning
Long-term trends in economic development
Role of qualified national personnel in the social and economic
development of developing countries
Role of the public sector in promoting the economic development of developing ,countries

Programme of work for the Second Committee
A.

Annual corlSlderallon

I. General debate
2.
3.
4.
5.

Development and international economic co-operation
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Trade and Development Board
Report of the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation on operational activities for
development of the United Nations system
6. Report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme

B.

Biennial considera//on in odd vears

1. Environment
2. Human settlements
3. Science and technology for development
4. Economic and technical co-operation among developing
countries

5.

Implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Action
for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries

6.

Effective mobilization and integration of women in development
Technical co-operation activities undertaken by the SecretaryGeneral
8. United Nations Capital Development Fund

ANNEX II
Biennial programme of work for the Second Committee for I 985-1986 163

(a)

(b)

tc)

Transport and Communications Decade in Africa
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General on the Transport
and Communications Decade in Africa

id)

Cnr,cal situation offood and agriculture in Africa
D,x:umentation Report of the Secretary-General on the critical situation of food and agriculture in Africa

(e)

lndustr,a/ Development Decade for Africa
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General on the Industrial
Development Decade for Africa

(f)

Countries stricken by desertification and drought
Documentation Repon of the Secretary-General on countries
stricken by desertification and drought

(g)

Target for World Food Programme pledges for the perwd /987 1988
Code of" conduct on transnational corporations
Documentation Report of the Commission on Transnational Corporations on its reconvened special session

9. United Nations Volunteers programme
10. Special programmes of economic assistance 161
C.

Biennial consideration ,n even vears

Industrialization
Food problems

3.

New and renewable sources of energy
Development of the energy resources of developing countries

4.

(h)

5. Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator
.6. World Food Programme

7. United Nations Fund for Population Activities
8. United Nations Children's Fund
9. United Nations Institute for Training and Research
10. United Nations University
11. Implementation of the medium-term and long-term recovery
and rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region
12. Special programmes of economic assistance 161
l61 Upon a request of the General Assembly that a special programme of
economic assistance be organized for a specific country, the Secretary-General arranges for a mission to that country and submits an individual report to
the Assembly at its following session. Thereafter, the periodicity of review
missions and individual reports is at the discretion of the country concerned.
As a general rule, individual reports would be submitted every two years on
the basis of a review mission. In alternate years, reporting to the Assembl~ is
based on information provided by the Government concerned. which is
included in a report covering a number of countries.
162 The Second Committee should consider this item everv three years.
and the cycle of its consideration should correspond to that o( the proposed
medium-term plan by the General Assembly.

,·ls.11srance ro the Palestiman people
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General on assistance to
the Palestinian people

Repon of the Secretary-General on economic
development projects in the occupied Palestinian
territories

7.

I.
2.

1985
Item I. Report ofrhe Economic and Social Council 164
Permanent sovereignty over national resources in the occupied Palesllman and other Arab territories
Documentation Repon of the Secretary-General on permanent
sovereignty over national resources in the occupied
Palestinian and other Arab territories

(1)

World Tourism Organi~atton
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General of the World
Tourism Organization on the implementation of
the Manila Declaration and the Acapulco Document on World Tourism

Item 2. Development and international economic co-operation 165
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General on international
co-operation in the fields of money, finance. debt
163 The Second Committee will, in accordance with established practice
and m pursuance of General Assembly decision 38/429. hold a general
debate each year at the beginning of its work.
164 The list of questions and documentation under this item is only indica•
t1ve of requests for reports from the General Assembly. The list will be finalIZed only after the Economic and Social Council completes its work each
vcar
• 165 Under this item the Second Committee will also have before it the
reports of the Industrial Development Board and the World Food Council.
The Committee may wish to decide not to consider draft proposals on these
reports, except specific proposals re9uiring action by the General Assembly
contained in the reports of these bodies or in the report of the Economic and
Soctal C1.\unc1L

General Assembly ~Thirty-ninth Session

166

an<l resource flows, rncluding development assistance and trade. with special attention to the mterests of developing countries
(a)
(b)

(c)

International /)eve/opmenr Srratl'gl' for the lhird l 'n11ed Natwm
Development Decade
Charter o/'Economic Right, and /Jutw, o(Statn
Documentation Report of the Ad Hot' Committee of the Whole to
ReVJew the Implementation of the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States

Documentation
( m)

Report of the Secretary-General on immediate
measures in favour of developing countries

lVew and renewahte sources qf energy

166

Documentation

1

nl

Report of the Secretary-General on the implcmen1ation of the Nairobi Programme of Action for the
! )evelopment and lltilization of New and Renewable Sources of Energy
Development of rh,· energr resources or developing countnes 166
Documentation

Trade and developnrmt
Documentation Report of the frade and Development Board

Report of the Secretary-General on the development of the energy resources of developing
,'nun tries

Report of the Secretary-General on economll
measures as a means of political and econom1,
coercion against developrng countries

Item 3. 1 i{)eratwna/ actil'llies _fi,r development
Operational actn'ltles o( the L'ruted Nut/Ons system
Documentation Report of the Director-General for Development
,,nd International Economic Co-operation on the
,perat1onal act1vit1es of the l lnited Nations system

(d)

Science and techno/og1· fi,r development
Documentation Report of the Intergovernmental Committee on
Science and Technology for Development

Report of the Secretary-General on the role of
~uahfied national personnel in the social and economic development of developing countnes

(c)

Econormc and technical co-nperal!on am/Ing dcvclopuig countnn
Documentation Report of the High-level Committee on the Review
of Technical <·o-operation among Developing

Report of the Secretary-General on the development aspects of the reverse transfer of technology

1a1

hi

l 'nued ;\atwns D,·,'C!opment Programme
Documentation Relevant chapters of the report of the Governing
( ·ouncil of the United Nations Development Programme

Report of the Secretary--General on activities of the
United Nations system in support of economic cooperation among developing countnes

1c1

[ ·mted !•iatwns Capllal /Jel'elopment Fund
Documentation Relevant chapter of the report of the Governing
( 'ouncil of the United Nations Development Programme

Report or the (,overning Council of the I 1nited
Nations Fnv1ronment Programme

ldl

Umted Natums te,·hn,ea/ co-operat10n activities
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General on United Nations
technical co-operation activities

1

('ountnc~

(t)

Environment
Documentation

Report of the ( ioverning Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme on the implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification

(g)

(h)

Report of the (iovernmg Council of the llniled
Nations Environment Programme on the implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification m the Sudano-Sahehan region

(cl

Note by the Secretary-General on international
conventions and protocols m the field of the environment
Report of the Secretary-General on remnants ol
war

1n

Liqwdation o(th,, l'n,ted Nations Emergency Operation Trust Fund
and al/ocat1on 0(1he rema,ning halance
Item 4. l 'n11ed ,\1111ons lmtllutc/i,r /'raining and Research 16"
Report of the Secretary-General on the future programmes and needs of the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research

Report of the Secretary-General on the living conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian terntories

Item 5. Speua/ programmes of economic assistance
Documentation Reports of the Secretary-General on 1nd1vidual
:ountnes

Report or the Secretary-General on the co-ordination of human settlements programmes within the
United Nat10ns system

Report of the Secretary-General presenting summary reports on countries with no separate
•ndividual reports in that year

Documentation

Effective mobilrzatwn and intcgratwn of women in development
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General on the world survey on the role of women in overall development
Implementation of the Substantial New Programme o(Actwn fi,r the
/ 980s for the Least Developed Countrtes
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Substantial New Programme of
Action

(j)

New international human order. moral aspects of development
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of
General Assembly resolution 38! 170

(I)

Urutcd ,\'atwns i·,,tunteers programme
Relevant chapters of the report of the Governing
( ·ounc1I of the United Nations Development Programme

Documentation

Human sel/lements
Documentation Report of the Commission on Human Settlement,

(i)

(k)

Relevant chapter of the report of the Cioverning
·ouncil of the United Nations Development Pro~ramme
1.

Long-term trends in economic development
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General on the overall
socio-economic perspective of the world economy
to the year 2000
Immediate measuf/'s in favour of the developing counlrlcs

166 Sub-items 2 (m) and (n) and item 4 are included, as an exception, for
I 985 in the light of requests contained in resolutions 39/173, 391176 and 39
I 77 for reports of the Secretary-General

/986 1" 7

Item I.

Repw1 of the Economic and Sooa/ CouncJ/ 164

1al

Populatwn and dne/opment
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General on action taken on
the recommendations of the International Conference on Population for the further implementa11on of the World Population Plan of Action

!hi

Transport and C m1mu111cat10ns Decade for Asia and the Paulic.

/985-1994
Documentation

lc)

Report of the Secretary-General on the Transport
and Communications Decade for Asia and the
Pacific, I 985-1994

Confidence-building ,n international economic relatwns
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General on confidencebuilding in international economic relations

16 7 The programme of work and documentation list for 1986 will be
updated in 1985, taking into account relevant decisions of the General
\ssembly at its fortieth session

V.
(d)

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committt·e
Dornmentation

Protectwn against products harmful to health and the enr,ronmenr
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General on protection
against products harmful to health and the environment
Item 2.

Repon ,,f the Secretary-General presenting summary reports on countries with no separate
mdi~idual reports in that 'year

Development and international Cl'orwmic rn-uperal/011 168

Trade and development
Documentation Report of the Trade and Development Board

/111plnnen1atwn ,!( the ,11ed1um-term and long-term recovery and
reh11/•1/ita11on pmgramm1• in the Sudano-Sahc/1an region
Documentation

Report of the Secretary-General on special meas-ures in favour of island developing countnes

(b)

Industrialization
Documentation Report of the Industrial Development Board
Report of the Secretary-General on the Industrial
Development Decade for Africa
Food problems

(c)

Documentation

Report of the World Food Council
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation of
food and agriculture in Africa

(d)

New and renewable sources of energy
Documentation Report of the Committee on the Development and
Utilization of New and Renewable Sources of
Energy

(e)

Development of the energy resources of del'elopmg countnes
Documentation

(a)

(b)

(c)

Report of the Secretar~-General on the development of the energy resources of developing
countries

Item 3. Operational activ1t1es for develop mm I
Operational activities o(the United Natwns system
Documentation Report of the Director-General for Development
and International Economic Co-operation on a
comprehensive policy review of the operational
activities of the United Nations system
United Nations Development Programme
Documentation Relevant chapters of the report of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Fund for Populatwn Act1l'ities
Documentation

Relevant chapters of the report of the Governing
Council of the U mted Nations Development Programme
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
report of the Executive Director of the United
Nations Fund for Populat10n Activities on the
United Nations Population Award and Trust Fund

(d)

United Nations Children's Fund
Documentation

Relevant chapter of the report of the Economic and
Social Council

(a)

World Food Programme
Item 4. Training and research
United Nations Institute_fi,r Training and Research
Documentation Report of the Executive Director of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research

(b)

United Nations University

(e)

Documentation
(c)

(a)

(b)

Report of the Council of the United Nations University

Unified approach to development 11na/_vs1.1· and planmng
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General on a unified
approach to development analysis and planning

Item 5. Special economic and disaster relief assistance
Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordrnator
Documentation Report of the Secretary-General on the Office of
the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator
Special programmes of economic assistance

168 Under this item the Second Committee will also have before it the

reports of the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for
Development and the Commission on Human Settlements. The Second
Committee may wish to decide not to consider draft proposals on these

Report~ of the Secretary-General on individual
rountnr,;;

(cl

(a)

167

39/218.

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the medium-term and long-term recovery
and rehabilitation programme in the SudanoSahelia11 region

Development and international economic cooperation

I he <;enera/ Assembl;.
Emphasizing the vital importance of issues related to
money, finance, debt, resource flows and trade for development, prosperity and good relations among peoples and
the urgency of measures to promote wider co-operation
among nations on these issues,
t:mphasizing also the need for consistency between the
international trade, mQnetary and financing systems and
policies,
I. Requests the Secretary-General to consult Governments of States Members of the United Nations and members of the specialized agencies and to ascertain their specific views on expanding international co-operation in the
fields of money, finance, debt and resource flows, including
development assistance and trade, with special attention
to the interests of the developing countries, taking into
account the effects of the economic crisis on their economic and social development;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to seek the
views of the relevant organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system, in particular the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, as well as
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, on enhancing their effectiveness to support in every respect the
actions taken by States to strengthen international cooperation in these areas,
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
report based on the outcome of the consultations in relation to the issues referred to in paragraphs l and 2 above
to be circulated to Governments not later than the first
quarter of 1985 and to be updated subsequently, as appropriate. for submission to the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
104th plenary meeting
18 December /984

39/219.

Role of qualified national personnel in the
social and economic development of developing countries 169

The Ceneral Assembly.
Referring to its resolutions 33/135 of 19 December
1978. 35/80 of 5 December 1980 and 371228 of 20
December 1982 on the role of qualified national personnel
in the social and economic development of developing
countries,
Referring also to its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
reports, except specific recommendations requiring action by the General
Assembly contained in the repNts of these bodies or in the report of the Economic and Social Council.
16 Q Sec also ,ect. X B4. dec1,1on 391439, para. (h).
