II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the direct consequence of the imposition of the so-called
"new constitution" by the South African racist regime;
3. Condemns the South African racist regime for defy­
ing relevant resolutions of the United Nations and persist­
ing with the further entrenchment of apartheid, a system
declared a crime against humanity and a threat to interna­
tional peace and security;
4. Further condemns the continued massacre of the
oppressed people, as well as the arbitrary arrest and deten­
tion of leaders and activists of mass organizations and
demands their immediate and unconditional release;
5. Rejects any so-called "negotiated settlement" based
on bantustan structures or on the so-called "new constitu­
tion";
6. Reaffirms that only the total eradication of apartheid
and the establishment of a non-racial democratic society
based on majority rule, through the full and free exercise of
adult suffrage by all the people in a united and unfrag­
mented South Africa, can lead to a just and lasting solu­
tion of the explosive situation in South Africa;
7. Urges all Governments and organizations to take
appropriate action, in co-operation with the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity and in
accordance with the present resolution, to assist the
oppressed people of South Africa in their legitimate strug­
gle for national liberation;
8. Requests the Security Council, as a matter of
urgency, to consider the serious situation in South Africa
emanating from the imposition of the so-called "new con­
stitution" and to take all necessary measures, in accor­
dance with the Charter of the United Nations, to avert the
further aggravation of tension and conflict in South Africa
and in southern Africa as a whole.
13th plenary meeting
28 September 1984

39/3. Credentials of representatives to the thirty­
ninth session of the General Assembly
A
The General Assembly
Approves the first report of the Credentials Committee. 5
32nd plenary meeting
l 7 October l 984

B
The General Assembly
Approves the second report of the Credentials Commit­
tee.6
102nd plenarJ,' meeting
17 December 1984
5 Official Records of the General Asscm/J/1'. rhir/\·-n,nrh Sf'sswn. Annexe.,,
agenda item 3. document A/391574.
6 Ih1d.. document N39i574/Add.l.
7 N39/562-Si 16775, annex. For the pnnted text. see O//,nal Records o/'thC'
Security Cvuncd. Thirti·-ninth Year, Supp/onent /i1r Jufr. . lugusr and \ep
tember /984, document S 16775. annn

15

39/4. The situation in Central America: threats to
international peace and security and peace ini­
tiatives
The General Assembly,
Recalling Security Council resolution 530 (1983) of 19
May 1983, in which the Council encouraged the efforts of
the Contadora Group and appealed urgently to all inter­
ested States in and outside the region to co-operate fully
with the Group, through a frank and constructive dialogue,
so as to achieve solutions to the differences between them,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 38/ JO of 11
November 1983, in which the Assembly, inter alia,
expressed its firmest support for the Contadora Group and
urged it to persevere in its efforts, which enjoy the effective
support of the international community and the forthright
co-operation of the countries in and outside the region,
Noting with satisfaction the results of the efforts made by
the Contadora Group, in particular the Contadora Act on
Peace and Co-operation in Central America of 7 Septem­
ber 1984,7
Considering that the Contadora Act is the result of an
intense process of consultations and negotiations between
the Governments of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras and Nicaragua, promoted by the Contadora
Group.
Also considering that the Contadora Act is a major step
in bringing to fruition the negotiation process in that it lays
the foundations for detente, lasting peace and the promo­
tion of economic and social development in the region,
Taking note of the report submitted by the Secretary­
General in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 38/
10, 8
I. Urges each of the five Central American Govern­
ments to speed up its consultations with the Contadora
Group with the aim of bringing to a conclusion the negoti­
ation process with the early signing of the Contadora Act
on Peace and Co-operation in Central America, thereby
facilitating full compliance with the commitments pro­
vided for in the Act and the entry into force of the various
mechanisms for implementation and follow-up;
2. Also urges all States, in particular those with ties to
and interests in the region, to respect fully the purposes
and principles of the Contadora Act and the commitments
undertaken by virtue of their accession to its Additional
Protocol;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 530 (1983), to report at regular
intervals to the Council on developments in the situation
and the implementation of that resolution;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly, by 15 December 1984 at the latest, a
report on progress made in the implementation of the
present resolution;9
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "The situation in Central
America: threats to international peace and security and
peace initiatives''.
39th plenary meeting
26 October 1984
8 A/391562-S/ 16775. For the printed text, see Offic1al Records ofthe Secur­

ur C,,uncil, Thtr1y-n1nth Year, Supplement for July, August and September
/9114. document S/16775.
9 The report was issued under the symbol A/39/827-S/l 6865. For the
pnntcd te,t, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-ninth Year,
Suppl,•1111·111 (or Octoher. Nmnnll/'r und Dec,•mber 1984, document S/16865.
