A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/51
17 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 137
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/49/738)]
49/51.

Report of the International Law Commission
on the work of its forty-sixth session

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its forty-sixth session, 1/
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development of international
law and its codification in order to make it a more effective means of
implementing the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the
United Nations and in the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations 2/ and to give increased importance to its
role in relations among States,
Recognizing the importance of referring legal and drafting questions to
the Sixth Committee, including topics that might be submitted to the
International Law Commission, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission further to enhance their contribution to the progressive
development of international law and its codification,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of international
law which, given their new or renewed interest for the international
community, may be suitable for the progressive development and codification of
international law and therefore may be included in the future programme of
work of the International Law Commission,
_____________
1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 10 (A/49/10).
2/

95-76765

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

/...

A/RES/49/51
Page 2

Recognizing also the role of the International Law Commission in the
fulfilment of the objectives of the United Nations Decade of International
Law,
Considering that experience has demonstrated the usefulness of
structuring the debate on the report of the International Law Commission in
the Sixth Committee in such a manner that conditions are provided for
concentrated attention on each of the main topics dealt with in the report,
and that this process is facilitated when the Commission indicates specific
issues on which expressions of views by Governments are of particular interest
for the continuation of its work,
1.
Takes note of the report of the International Law Commission on
the work of its forty-sixth session;
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for
the work accomplished at that session, in particular for the completion of a
draft statute for an international criminal court 3/ and the adoption of final
draft articles on the law of the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses; 4/
3.
Recommends that, taking into account the comments of Governments,
whether in writing or expressed orally in debates in the General Assembly, the
International Law Commission should continue its work on the topics in its
current programme;
4.
Notes the intentions of the International Law Commission for the
programme of work for the remainder of the current term of office of its
members, 5/ and urges the Commission to resume, at its forty-seventh session,
the work on the draft Code of Crimes against the Peace and Security of Mankind
and on State responsibility in such a manner that the second reading of the
draft articles of the Code and the first reading of the draft articles on
State responsibility may be completed before the end of the present term of
office of the members of the Commission;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to update the survey of State
practice relevant to international liability for injurious consequences
arising out of acts not prohibited by international law, prepared by the
Secretariat in 1984, 6/ as a useful contribution to the ongoing work of the
Commission on the topic;
___________
3/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 10 (A/49/10), para. 91.
4/

Ibid., para 222.

5/

Ibid., para 390.

6/
Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1985, vol. II,
part I, (addendum).

/...

A/RES/49/51
Page 3

6.
Endorses the intention of the International Law Commission to
undertake work on the topics "The law and practice relating to reservations to
treaties" and "State succession and its impact on nationality of natural and
legal persons", on the understanding that the final form to be given to the
work on these topics shall be decided after a preliminary study is presented
to the General Assembly, and, in connection with the latter topic, requests
the Secretary-General to invite Governments to submit, by 1 March 1995,
relevant materials including national legislation, decisions of national
tribunals and diplomatic and official correspondence relevant to the topic;
7.
Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the International
Law Commission to improve its procedures and methods of work;
8.

Requests the International Law Commission:

(a)

To consider thoroughly:

(i)

The planning of its activities and programme for the term of office
of its members, bearing in mind the desirability of achieving as
much progress as possible in the preparation of draft articles on
specific topics;

(ii)

Its methods of work in all their aspects, bearing in mind that the
staggering of the consideration of some topics might contribute,
inter alia, to a more effective consideration of its report in the
Sixth Committee;

(b) To continue to pay special attention to indicating in its annual
report, for each topic, those specific issues on which expressions of views by
Governments, either in the Sixth Committee or in written form, would be of
particular interest for the continuation of its work;
9.
Takes note of the comments of the International Law Commission on
the question of the duration of its session, as presented in its report, 7/
and expresses the view that the requirements of the work for the progressive
development of international law and its codification and the magnitude and
complexity of the subjects on the agenda of the Commission make it desirable
that the usual duration of its sessions be maintained;
10. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the role of the
Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and
those concerning the summary records and other documentation of the
International Law Commission;
11. Once again expresses the wish that seminars will continue to be held
in conjunction with the sessions of the International Law Commission and that
an increasing number of participants from developing countries will be given
the opportunity to attend those seminars, appeals to States that can do so to
make the voluntary contributions that are urgently needed for the holding of
the seminars, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the seminars, from
within existing resources, with adequate services, including interpretation,
as required;
___________
7/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 10 (A/49/10), para. 402.
/...

A/RES/49/51
Page 4

12. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the International Law
Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the
Commission at the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly, together with
such written statements as delegations may circulate in conjunction with their
oral statements, and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the
debate;
13. Recommends the continuation of efforts to improve the ways in which
the report of the International Law Commission is considered in the Sixth
Committee, with a view to providing effective guidance for the Commission in
its work;
14. Also recommends that the debate on the report of the International
Law Commission at the fiftieth session of the General Assembly commence on
23 October 1995.
84th plenary meeting
9 December 1994
