United Nations

asdf

Security Council

S/PV.7011 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7011th meeting

Thursday, 25 July 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. DeLaurentis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 

Mr. De Antueno
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Gorjestani
Mr. Delgado Samayoa
Mr. Maes
Mr. Taib
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Ustinov
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Griffiths

Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Supporting the Great Lakes Framework
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region (S/2013/387)
Letter dated 3 July 2013 from the Chargé d’affaires, a.i. of the United States
Mission to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/394)

13-40841 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1340841*

S/PV.7011 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mozambique.
Mr. Balói (Mozambique): Mr. President, the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
is honoured to participate in this ministerial debate
on the situation in the Great Lakes region under your
presidency. We commend the Secretary-General for his
informative report (S/2013/387) on the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region. SADC also commends Ms. Mary Robinson,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, and the President of the World Bank,
Mr. Jim Yong Kim, for their valuable support to the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework.
As one of the guarantors of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, SADC is encouraged by the
steady progress in its implementation. We commend
the Secretary-General for his continued engagement
in that process. His visit to the Great Lakes region
with the President of the World Bank last May attests
to his commitment. We welcome the commitment
of the World Bank to pledge an additional $1 billion
for development endeavours in the region, which are
critical for rebuilding communities impoverished by
the protracted insecurity and instability.
Similarly, we commend Ms. Robinson for her lively
engagement with the Government, civil society and
other stakeholders whose involvement in efforts to find
lasting peace, security and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region is pivotal. For the
Framework to succeed, we must embrace a holistic, allinclusive approach.
Parallel to those efforts, SADC is pleased with
progress in the deployment of the Force Intervention
Brigade, which should be completed soon. Once
it becomes fully operational, it will contribute to
reducing the threats posed by armed groups on the
State authority of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, ensure the security of civilians and make space
for stabilization activities. We believe that this Charter
organ will continue to provide the necessary support
for the Intervention Brigade to fulfil its mandate,
particularly by ensuring that it has the capacity to carry

2

out targeted offensive operations in a robust, highly
mobile and versatile manner.
We note with concern the resurgence of violence
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Threats posed by rebels of the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) are real and must be countered as
prescribed in resolution 2098 (2013), which the Council
adopted on 28 March. Recent clashes in Goma between
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) and the M-23, instigated by the latter,
demonstrate the utter contempt of that rebel group.
We all know what the Force Intervention Brigade is
required to do in that regard, either unilaterally or
jointly, with the FARDC.
SADC is aware that the Intervention Brigade alone
cannot bring about lasting peace, security, stability and
prosperity to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region. In that regard, we encourage the use
of all the relevant regional and subregional dialogue
mechanisms so as to build the much-needed confidence
among national stakeholders, as well as between
neighbouring countries.
We anticipate the conclusion of the political process
being facilitated by President Yoweri Museveni of the
Republic of Uganda. We believe that those political
talks, involving all stakeholders, will go a long way in
attaining the goals of sustainable and durable peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
It was in the same spirit that the SADC extraordinary
summit held in Maputo in June underscored the need to
consider engaging all opposing forces in an effort to
find a lasting political solution within the Great Lakes
region under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. We are reiterating that call today.
We have been given a unique opportunity to change
the way we do business, by implementing to the letter
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework in
good faith. The people of eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo have suffered for too long. We commend
the fact that the Security Council should remain seized
of the matter.
Let me conclude by reaffirming that the member
countries of SADC associate themselves with the
efforts of the United Nations and the wider international
community aimed at the restoration of peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region.

13-40841

S/PV.7011 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the the floor to the
representative of Burundi.
Mr. Kavakure (Burundi) (spoke in French): It
is my great pleasure to address the Security Council
today. Allow me, at the outset, to convey the greetings
of His Excellency Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, President of
the Republic of Burundi, as well as of all Burundians.
For the umpteenth time, the topic of the security
situation in the Great Lakes region is once again before
the Council today, in the context of this high-level
meeting, in order to consider the best approaches to
lasting security, stability and development in the Great
Lakes region. I thank the organizers of this debate and
hope that it will be successful.
The Government of Burundi welcomes and
strongly supports all the initiatives and commitments
already made to restore peace and security in the Great
Lakes region. As the headquarters of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, Burundi is an
integral part of the commitments made under to the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
signed in Addis Ababa on 24 February and baptized the
“hope agreement” by the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, Ms. Mary Robinson.
The Government of Burundi welcomes the efforts
already under way by Ms. Robinson to implement the
Framework, in particular the organization of a regional
conference on women, peace, security and development
in the Great Lakes region, held in Bujumbura from
9 to 11 July. Burundi fully endorses the results of
the conference in terms of women’s crucial role in
implementing the Framework agreement.
In that context, the Government of Burundi
has fully endorsed the outcome of the high-level
ministerial conference held in Addis Ababa on 19 July
concerning regional approaches to development and
the implementation of the Framework — again, the socalled “hope agreement”, to recall the expression used
by Ms. Robinson.
The Government of Burundi considers the
approaches developed at the Bujumbura and Addis
Ababa conferences to be complementary and fully
focused on the fact that breaking the cycle of violence
requires determined action on multiple fronts, including
women’s economic empowerment.

In particular, the Addis Ababa conference noted
that increased regional cooperation and economic
integration, along with improving infrastructure
and increased trade, could foster participation in the
economy and create opportunities for disadvantaged
groups, such as women and youth, as well as strengthen
political agreements to produce concrete results.
Also at Addis Ababa, our delegation advocated
for the quick financing of projects proposed by the
Economic Community of the Great Lake Countries
(CEPGL). With its headquarters in Gisenyi, Rwanda,
located opposite the city of Goma, capital of the
Congolese province of North Kivu, in the very heart of
the Great Lakes region, the CEPGL is currently being
relaunched and deserves every support to achieve its
goals.
The integration projects put forward by the
CEPGL — approved by the Addis Ababa conference,
which was sponsored by the World Bank, the United
Nations and the Commmission of the African
Union — focus primarily on the energy sector, for
example, the rehabilitation of the Ruzizi I and II power
plants and the construction of the Ruzizi III unit.
There is also a proposal for developing agriculture
on the Ruzizi plain, as well as a project for fostering
cross-border trade, specifically by modernizing four
border stations to serve as one-stop border crossings
and building markets and roads in their vicinity. It is
important to note that cross-border trade is largely the
purview of women, which is why the conference in
Addis Ababa included the topic of modernizing border
stations, with an emphasis on gender.
The conference in Addis Ababa also recognized the
importance of establishing transport corridors in the
region between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its eastern neighbours, as well as the construction
of railway lines to link Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda and
Burundi with the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The conference also recommended improving
existing ports, creating new sea ports and improving
national airports in conformity with regional airport
standards, as well as establishing industries to support
agricultural development in view of developing regional
fertilizer-production facilities, among other things.
With regard to national airports, I should like to
emphasize the special role of the Bujumbura International
Airport when it comes to rotation operations of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission

13-408413

S/PV.7011 (Resumption 1)

in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I ask that
the airport receive priority consideration in terms of
development projects.
In conclusion, I would like to express the wish
that this high-level ministerial debate also address the
resolutions and decisions of the recent conference held
in Bujumbura, on integrating the gender dimension in
the implementation of the hope agreement, as well as
those of the Addis Ababa ministerial conference, on
development and regional integration.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Ms. Mapisa-Nqakula (South Africa): At the
outset, let me join previous speakers in congratulating
Secretary of State John Kerry on his country’s
assumption of this important role. I wish the United
States delegation continued success in steering the
work of the Council during its presidency. We also
congratulate Mr. Martin Kobler on his appointment
as the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. And
we commend Mr. Russ Feingold on his appointment
as United States Special Representative for the Great
Lakes Region of Africa. We also wish to thank all those
who have spoken before us.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Mozambique on behalf of the Southern
African Development Community.
South Africa attaches great importance on the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
We commend the Secretary-General for giving special
attention to the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as well as the progress already made
in implementing what has become known as the
“framework of hope”.
The prospects for peace in the region depend
upon compliance with, and the implementation of, the
Framework by all signatories. The recent visit in May
by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the President
of the World Bank, Mr. Jim Yong Kim, is encouraging
for peace efforts. We are also encouraged by visits
undertaken by the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region, Ms. Mary
Robinson, whose efforts are critical to the success of
the Framework. We encourage the Special Envoy to

4

accelerate her efforts as she takes concrete steps in her
engagement with the relevant parties. In that context,
we welcome the innovative approach of proposed
benchmarks in pursuit of indicators that are specific,
measurable, achievable, relevant and time-based.
We also welcome the pledge by the World Bank of
$1 billion for development projects aimed at economic
rejuvenation and job creation in the Great Lakes region.
We commend the steps taken by the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to establish
a national oversight mechanism in accordance with
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
and resolution 2098 (2013). We look forward to the
early commencement of its work. We encourage the
Government to make further strides to implement its
commitment in terms of the Framework, including
security sector reform and the establishment of the rapid
reaction force to be able to take over, when appropriate,
the responsibilities of the Force Intervention Brigade of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic People’s Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and restore State authority.
South Africa remains deeply concerned about the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
strongly condemn the continuing attacks perpetrated
by armed groups against the people of the country in
particular, and against MONUSCO. We also take note
of the fact that thousands of refugees have poured into
Uganda, and many others have been internally displaced
following new eruptions of violence in the Kamango
and Mataho areas. Clearly, the humanitarian impact of
those attacks, particularly on vulnerable groups, is of
major concern.
South Africa reaffirms its commitment to
supporting peace initiatives in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In that regard, we commend President
Museveni’s mediation efforts aimed at facilitating the
peace talks.
While supporting the Force Intervention Brigade’s
deployment to the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we remain convinced that a longterm solution to peace and stability in the Congo can
only be guaranteed by a political solution. Moreover,
improved relations between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its neighbours is an important
ingredient for peace, stability and security. With regard
to our contribution to the Force Intervention Brigade,
we are finalizing our deployment in line with the

13-40841

S/PV.7011 (Resumption 1)

commitments we have made and will assume our duties
and responsibilities in the Mission.
Finally, we all have a responsibility to ensure that
the renewed energy for establishing long-lasting peace
is well coordinated and well sustained.
The President: I now give the floor to the Executive
Secretary General of the European External Action
Service.
Mr. Vimont (spoke in French): On behalf of
Ms. Catherine Ashton, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, it is a privilege for me to participate in today’s
meeting on the situation in the Great Lakes region.
The very holding of today’s meeting, presided over
this morning by Secretary of State John Kerry and in
the presence of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, bears
witness to our collective determination. We are all
aware that the future of the African continent will be
played out in its different regions, including the Great
Lakes region, which is one where the European Union
has long been involved in seeking lasting peace in the
face of the very difficult and complex challenges that
exist. The European Union intends to remain involved
in the region.
The current situation as regards the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework Agreement constitutes a
window of opportunity based on an ambitious approach
of voluntarily addressing the various aspects of the
crisis, be it at the regional, national or local levels.
Ms. Mary Robinson, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region, often speaks of
the “Framework of hope”, as several participants have
already mentioned. The European Union fully agrees.
Despite the difficulties, doing nothing is not an option.
That is why I would like to emphasize, as others have
done before me, the importance for the international
community to provide its unstinting support to
Ms. Robinson and, more broadly, to the activities of
the United Nations and all the regional organizations
involved, beginning, of course, with the African Union.
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
the appointment of the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Martin Kobler.
Implementing the Framework will be a complex
undertaking, but it continues to be of crucial
importance. Unwavering, coherent and sustained
political support on the part of all those who have

endorsed the Framework Agreement will allow us to
make a difference and guarantee success. It is therefore
essential that all signatories of the Agreement remain
focused on the same objectives and commit resolutely
to its prompt and effective implementation based on
the concrete work undertaken by the Technical Support
Committee.
We cannot hide the truth — the situation in the
Great Lakes remains fragile. The suffering of people,
particularly women and children, who are often the
first victims of violence, is indefensible. Even if all
the preconditions for sustainable peace can at last be
met — they have now certainly been identified — we
must nevertheless not underestimate the challenges
before us. In particular, the prevailing tension at the
border between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda remains a source of concern, while a
positive regional dynamic is essential if we are to
be successful in implementing any agreement on the
Great Lakes region. All the countries of the region
must therefore be encouraged to embark upon the
path of cooperation, with the fullest respect for their
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In that regard, the increasing tension on the ground
in recent days, particularly near Goma, is worrying. It
could compound regional divisions and national and
local antagonism. It is essential that all armed groups
operating in eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo be dismantled, particularly the Mouvement
du 23 mars and the Forces Démocratiques de Libération
du Rwanda. That is why the European Union welcomes
the establishment of the Force Intervention Brigade
within the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic People’s Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). It is important to find the
proper balance between a necessary political process,
on the one hand, and the capacity of the MONUSCO
Intervention Brigade to carve out space to promote
such a political agreement, on the other hand.
In addition, the challenges of governance and,
in particular, that of security sector reform, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are the central
pillars of stability in the eastern region of the country.
We call on the Government of the Democratic
Republic to tirelessly pursue the implementation of the
commitments that it entered into under the Framework
agreement.

13-408415

S/PV.7011 (Resumption 1)

Today’s meeting is taking place a few days after the
28 Foreign Ministers of the European Union adopted
conclusions on the Great Lakes region that are both
political and practical and provide for specific actions
based on the priorities identified by Ms. Robinson for
the implementation of the Framework. Those guidelines
relate primarily to the following goals.
Trust and cooperation between the countries of the
region needs to be restored in an atmosphere of respect
for each country’s sovereignty.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo should be
supported in its efforts to put an end to the structural
weaknesses in the eastern part of the country, thus
improving local governance and security while
restoring consensus among the different communities.
In that regard, I would like once again to draw
attention to the centrality of the role of security sector
reform. The European Union and its member States
stand ready to fulfil their commitments in support
of the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. However, it is essential that MONUSCO be
able to promptly define its own priorities in that key
area in order to contribute to a division of labour and a
clarification of the efforts that will be required of the
different stakeholders.
We also need the promotion of a common vision for
every country of the region on democracy and human
rights, based on an open political system and transparent
elections, which will be even more important after the
start of the electoral cycle in the region beginning in
2015. And, lastly, what is needed is the creation of a
strong regional economic impetus for the benefit of
all, so that the dividends of peace and security can
be consolidated. In that regard, the European Union
is ready to continue and to maintain its assistance in
every area it has worked on for the past several years.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that while
the promotion of peace and development in the Great
Lakes can and should be encouraged and shared in
by the international community, those goals cannot
be achieved without the ownership of Governments,
civil society and other influential local and regional
stakeholders. All must therefore now shoulder their
responsibilities and take the opportunity afforded them
by the implementation of the framework of hope. We
have reached a crucial time in the long history of the
Great Lakes region, and we must not let it slip away.

6

The President: I now give the floor to the Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Belgium.
Mr. De Coninck (Belgium) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Belgium,
I too would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate, which enables us to
make a mid-course assessment of this issue, between
the first follow-up meeting of the 11+4 format of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, held
in Addis Ababa at the end of May, and the second, to
be held at the end of September on the margins of the
General Assembly.
Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by Mr. Pierre Vimont on behalf of the
European Union, and would like to add the following
comments in its national capacity.
My country believes that the Framework agreement
constitutes a unique opportunity for achieving a lasting
solution to the nearly 20-year crisis in the Great Lakes
region. We support the Force Intervention Brigade of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
which we hope will be effective and credible, as well
as the diplomatic action of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Mary Robinson. Belgium,
with its numerous bilateral contacts and expertise,
and as one of the international partners cited in the
Framework, is ready to contribute actively to finding
concrete solutions.
We have seen encouraging signs. The technical
support committee of the regional oversight mechanism
has produced a list of benchmarks. For its part, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has established
a national oversight mechanism. Ms. Robinson has
organized an important conference in Bujumbura on
the role of women in peace, security and development.
Besides these examples, a constructive first meeting
on regional cooperation took place last week in Addis
Ababa.
The process is still fragile, however. There is
a real risk that setbacks could wipe out the relative
progress made since the signing of the Framework.
Any slackening or loss of momentum could weaken the
process further. In that regard, I would like to discuss
three points that we believe deserve special attention.

13-40841

S/PV.7011 (Resumption 1)

First, a dangerous gap is developing between the
medium and the short terms. The implementation
of the Framework’s commitments, such as regional
development, the re-establishment of State authority
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the reforms that must be undertaken are fundamental
goals for the medium term, but in the short term they
are dependent on a settlement of the current crisis
in North Kivu. We therefore believe it essential for
the international community to continue to insist
unanimously on a halt to all violence, whose victims
are the civilian population. The Mouvement du 23 mars
rebel group must stop threatening the city of Goma. It
must lay down its arms and abandon its ambitions for
establishing a parallel administration. In that regard,
we note the United States appeal about outside support
for that movement.
Secondly, in our view, it would be helpful to clarify
the relationship between the MONUSCO Intervention
Brigade’s actions against armed groups and a
credible programme of disarmament, demobilization
and
reintegration/disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation, reintegration and resettlement. The
effectiveness and credibility of the Brigade’s actions
depend on it.
Thirdly, security sector reform, especially reform
of the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo, is an essential factor, but it is sometimes
subject to misunderstanding between the international
community and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We would like to see a more structured dialogue
between the relevant Congolese authorities and their
partners in the area of military cooperation. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, in accordance
with the Security Council resolutions that define his
mandate, has an essential role to play here. Belgium
continues to actively pursue bilateral cooperation in
this area, and we are ready to participate in efforts to
organize a more structured dialogue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tanzania.
Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania):
We thank you, Mr. President, and the United States
presidency for convening this important debate in
support of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region.

The message conveyed in the Council today by
Secretary of State Kerry, the Secretary-General, the
President of the World Bank, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region and others
has rekindled our sense of commitment and hope. It is
in that spirit that we align ourselves with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Mozambique and
Uganda on behalf of the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), respectively.
We would like to add some perspectives to this
discussion, however. First, we reiterate our hopes and
reaffirm our unflinching support for the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. The Framework has truly
offered an opportunity to break out of the spiral of
violence and instability that has marred our region for
far too long. That violence has claimed millions of lives
and inflicted wanton suffering on innocent civilians for
many years, as Secretary Kerry pointed out.
With the adoption of the Framework and the
establishment of the regional oversight mechanism,
we have embarked on a unique and important journey
towards the long-sought goal of attaining enduring
peace and stability, as well as prosperity for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the entire Great
Lakes region. And we thank the Secretary-General
for reflecting those developments in the report that is
currently before the Council (S/2013/387).
Secondly, we wish to echo President Kikwete’s
appeal. The solution to the conflict in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo will be not
military but political, and achieving that goes beyond
the Framework to its implementation. We therefore
welcome some of the positive developments in that
area. Reforms are under way in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Economic Community of
the Great Lakes Countries is being revived and there
are talks of greater integration and cooperation among
some members of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, as well as renewed bilateral
and international cooperation in the areas of trade,
investment and commerce.
But there are also matters of concern that require
urgent attention. The political process envisaged in
the Framework must be reinvigorated. There are those
who would be too happy to create distractions to the
challenges we face. Our collective focus and the focus
of the Council must be on the abiding commitment

13-408417

S/PV.7011 (Resumption 1)

to succeed, and therefore we should not yield to such
destructive forces.
It is in that sense that we believe the Kampala
talks, under the auspices of the ICGLR, deserve
our support, and we commend President Museveni
and the Government of Uganda for their efforts. We
must ceaselessly continue to call for and encourage
dialogue and negotiations with a view to building
mutual confidence between and among parties that
demonstrably share our vision for peace and stability
in the region. Likewise, we must continue to encourage
concerned regional Governments to engage all
political groups whose rebellion is the main cause of
the protracted violence and instability in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other parts of
the region.
We must also be bold and honest enough to admit
that it is only through an all-inclusive conciliatory
process that we shall meaningfully attain long-term
peace, which has eluded us for decades. We cannot
be sincere in our objectives through the Framework if
we continue to neglect that basic reality. The Council
has been witness to countless instances of avowed
enemies making peace with each other solely through
negotiations and dialogue. Indeed, that is the spirit
of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
Scapegoating has never been a successful tool of
diplomacy and certainly not of conflict resolution.
Thirdly, we wish to affirm our support to the full
deployment of the Force Intervention Brigade, a robust
arm of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), as mandated by the Council, to which
the United Republic of Tanzania is a troop-contributing
country. The Force deserves our full support, and
especially that of the Council. It does not need to be
maligned on baseless and unfounded claims.
The United Republic of Tanzania has had the
privilege to serve on the Council. We took our service as
a mandate of trust for Africa and the global community.
We were mindful that the trust came with certain
responsibilities, prerogatives and probity. It was meant
never to be misused or abused, but to be exercised with
a great sense of uprightness, balance and duty.
Regrettably recent allegations against the Force
Intervention Brigade and its leadership reflect a pattern
that must concern all of us — a tendency to malign
those that are mandated and have acted in good faith in

8

the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. In the
recent past, the Group of Experts that was established
by the Council was the subject of such malicious and
unfounded allegations. The Council should demand
proof and act decisively to protect those entrusted with
such noble responsibilities.
We nonetheless commend the Council for its
continued support to MONUSCO in fulfilling its
mandates amidst a barrage of negative campaigns
from some rebel groups and other detractors. In our
view, those campaigns seek only to undermine the
full realization of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework and to defeat MONUSCO’s mandate. But
we are confident that the international community
will prevail. No force or even destructive propaganda
campaigns should surpass our yearning for enduring
peace, stability and prosperity in the Great Lakes
region. This is the Framework of hope that the United
Republic of Tanzania supports and shall steadfastly
continue to support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Congo.
Mr. Balé (Congo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to express my delegation’s deeep
appreciation at seeing United States Secretary of State
John Kerry presiding over this ministerial meeting of
the Council. His presence among us today demonstrates
the great interest of the United States in the tragic
situation prevailing in the eastern Democratic Republic
of Congo, which is a threat to international peace and
security throughout the Great Lakes region. The report
of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region (S/2013/387), published barely one
month ago on 28 June, remains fully relevant in light of
the latest developments in that neighbouring country.
The resurgence of fighting clearly demonstrates
the volatility of the situation and the scale of the
challenges to be overcome, not only with regard to the
implementation of the Framework, but also given the
humanitarian tragedy and the various forms of violence
it encompasses, especially against civilians, including
the women and children who seem to be the victims of
choice. My country, which strongly condemns all those
forms of violence, believes that every effort should be
made to put an end to the suffering of the people of the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

13-40841

S/PV.7011 (Resumption 1)

As tragic as it is, the deterioration of the situation
cannot be allowed to shake the oft-reiterated will of
our Heads of State, who have undertaken to support
the initiative of the Secretary-General through their
commitment to the Framework agreement and, in
a common spirit, have striven to meet the peace and
security challenge in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in the Great Lakes region in general. By
taking ownership of that important instrument, they
have played their rightful role in seeking to save that
brotherly country from its tragic fate of destabilization
and recurrent wars, which are impeding its progress
towards development. This is demonstrated by the
ongoing deployment of troops to the Force Intervention
Brigade; the domestic measures taken by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as announced by its Minister for Foreign Affairs in
this Chamber, in accordance with its obligations;
and the active participation of their respective high
representatives in the technical support committee,
which has already held two meetings in Nairobi in the
space of a month.
The mini-summit, held on 24 March in Oyo in the
Republic of Congo, initiated by President Denis Sassou
Nguesso and attended by President Joseph Kabila
Kabange of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
President Paul Kagame of Rwanda and President Yoweri
Kaguta Museveni of Uganda is therefore rightly seen by
the Secretary-General as being among the diplomatic
and political initiatives inspired by the Framework
Agreement. It was held only one month after the
signing of the Framework agreement, on 24 February in
Addis Ababa, and is, in our view, a useful contribution
to the implementation of that important instrument and
a catalyst for building confidence among the parties
concerned. The same is true of the various consultations
that have taken place with its authors. It is clear that
the implementation of any agreement, even one signed
in good faith, can prosper only in a climate of mutual
trust.
The recent consultations with President Kabila
Kabange, held in Brazzaville on 19 July, must be seen
in that context. On that occasion, President Sassou
Nguesso reaffirmed his willingness to contribute to all
approaches and support all efforts to find lasting peace
in that fraternal country.

Allow me to associate the commitment made
by of our Heads of State with the decisive role of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, Ms. Mary Robinson, whose actions are
a real driver for the implementation of the Framework
agreement. I wish particularly to underscore my
country’s great interest in the regular consultations
that she is organizing with signatory countries and
their representatives in New York. This approach
is consistent with our vision of the partnership that
the United Nations must develop with the countries
of the region, building on the efforts and initiatives
undertaken at the regional and subregional levels. The
Congo supports such action and urges the countries of
the region and the international community as a whole
to support them in the implementation of the road map.
In the same vein, my country’s Government calls on
the Council to work to effectively implement all of the
provisions of resolution 2098 (2013), while encouraging
the parties concerned to focus, to the extent possible,
on dialogue.
Here we call for strict compliance by all with
the provisions of the Framework agreement. That
mechanism represents an undeniable opportunity
for peace and stability, not only for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo but for the Great Lakes region
as a whole. As we belong to the same geographical area
and must focus all of our efforts on common economic
and social development, we have no other choice.
In order for the Framework agreement’s integrated
peace, security and development approach to fulfil its
promise, each and every stakeholder — signatories,
guarantors and members of the international
community — must uphold their commitments so that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region can finally vanquish the demons of
chronic instability and recurring war, so that their longsuffering inhabitants can finally hope for a more secure
and prosperous future.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

13-408419
