S/PV.9213

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9213rd meeting

Thursday, 8 December 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Olanda
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. Shaheen
Ms. Jacobs
Ms. Saha

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa and the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (S/2022/896)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-73200 (E)
*2273200*

S/PV.9213

Central African region

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (S/2022/896)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Abdou Abarry, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa; and His Excellency
Mr. Gilberto da Piedade Veríssimo, President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of Central
African States.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/896, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa
and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa.
I now give the floor to Mr. Abarry.
Mr. Abarry (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you warmly, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and wish you every success in
your work.
The presentation of the twenty-third report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa
and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA) (S/2022/896) gives me the
pleasant opportunity to address Council members, with
emotion, as, from 2020 to 2021, I was the Permanent
Representative of the Niger and I worked alongside
some current Council members in search of viable
solutions to the major challenges threatening peace and
security in the world. I stand before members today
in a different capacity, that of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of UNOCA, as a
continuation of that commitment.
2/18

08/12/2022

Exactly one year ago, I presided over the Security
Council (see S/PV.8933), and in that meeting my
predecessor, Ambassador François Louncény Fall,
conducted the same exercise that I am undertaking
today. I would like to pay tribute to Ambassador Fall
for his excellent work as Head of UNOCA and thank
him for his wise counsel, which enabled me to begin my
term under good auspices.
Since I took office in Libreville at the beginning
of September, I have had the unique opportunity
to see what I would call the two faces of Central
Africa: a land of great challenges, but also of great
opportunities, particularly in terms of economic and
social development and the strengthening of democracy
and the rule of law.
With regard to democracy and the rule of law, a
review of recent electoral processes in Central Africa
shows significant progress despite major challenges.
The change in Government in Sao Tome and Principe
and the results of the elections in Angola, although
close, are clear indications that elections are far from
being a mere formality in Central Africa. We should
also welcome the holding of peaceful elections in the
Republic of the Congo and Equatorial Guinea.
A positive trend that I have seen since I took office is
the increased participation and representation of women
in political institutions and processes, as a result of the
elections I mentioned previously, among other things.
Therefore, thanks to the incentive measures taken in
Angola and Sao Tome and Principe, the elections in
those countries have resulted in a greater proportion of
women in parliamentary assemblies and in Government.
The election of women to head the National Assemblies
of those two countries, for the first time in their history,
and the election of a woman, Ms. Esperança da Costa, as
Vice-President of Angola, are a new source of pride for
the subregion, where Rwanda is already a global model
and where other countries, notably Gabon, the UNOCA
host country, have made significant efforts in recent
years to promote the participation and representation
of women.
During the period covered by this report, Central
Africa’s commitment to the environment and the
fight against climate change and its effects, including
its effects on peace and security, has continued and
been strengthened. The Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and some of its
member States were particularly active during the
22-73200

08/12/2022

Central African region

twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
which was recently held in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt,
after also hosting preparatory meetings for that
important conference.
I would like to stress that this commitment is far
from being simple posturing in the subregion.
First of all, Central Africa is home to the Congo
basin, one of the two green lungs of our planet. However,
despite the goodwill shown by the States concerned,
I am afraid that this global ecological heritage can be
preserved only if the States of that geographical area
cooperate with each other and receive adequate support
from their partners.
Secondly, I recall that Central Africa is suffering
the full effects of climate change, particularly with the
multiplication of extreme climatic events. Moreover,
competition for access to natural resources, such as
water, land and pastures, continues to be one of the
causes of intercommunal violence, which is constantly
increasing in number and intensity in some countries in
the region and is being used by certain armed groups.
In addition to climate and environmental threats,
Central Africa faces other challenges related to
governance, human rights and the security situation. I
would like to refer to a few of them.
With respect to governance and human rights, it is
clear that, despite the organization of regular elections,
which we welcome, the credibility of those elections
is often questioned by certain actors who, at the same
time, challenge the legitimacy of the elected leaders.
Most of the time, that challenge is expressed peacefully.
In other cases, however, that challenge is expressed
through violence, such as the recent events in Chad and
Sao Tome and Principe. While condemning all attempts
to seize power by force and attacks on public order, we
must continue to call on the States of Central Africa to
further open up political and civic space to promote a
peaceful and orderly expression of opinions and to take
measures to strengthen the inclusivity, diversity and
credibility of political processes. That is the only way to
ensure the legitimacy of the institutions resulting from
the elections. We also urge State authorities to ensure
full respect for fundamental rights and freedoms and to
avoid any disproportionate use of force in maintaining
public order.

S/PV.9213

In terms of security, Central Africa continues to
harbour armed groups and terrorist groups, whose
harmful actions have dire consequences, mainly for the
civilian population, but also for economic resources.
Thousands of people have been forced to leave their
homes, sometimes even their countries of origin, and
are in need of humanitarian assistance.
I would like to mention the situation in the Lake
Chad basin, where violent extremist groups continue
to have significant capacity to cause harm, despite
their weakening. Military pressure must be maintained
against these groups in a coordinated manner, within
the framework of the joint multinational force. To this
end, I welcome Chad’s announced strengthening of its
military presence in the Lake Chad basin.
I call on partners to provide adequate support for
ongoing military efforts, but also for the implementation
of the Regional Strategy for Stabilization, Recovery
and Resilience of the Boko Haram-Affected Areas of
the Lake Chad Basin Region, which should address
the root causes of this crisis. I would like to commend
the good cooperation between UNOCA and the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, as well as
the actions of the Peacebuilding Commission in favour
of a sustainable return to peace in this area.
The situation in the North-West and South-West
regions of Cameroon continues to threaten the stability
of this country, which is a pillar of economic integration
in Central Africa. Attacks on civilian targets, including
schools, and the spread of violence to other parts of
Cameroon are unacceptable and must stop immediately.
I commend the Cameroonian authorities for their
commitment to resolving this crisis peacefully through
discussions with the armed groups and the diaspora.
During the reporting period, maritime security
in the Gulf of Guinea continued to show significant
progress. We need to maintain this momentum by
building national capacity and strengthening regional
coordination, including within the framework of the
Yaoundé Architecture. I welcome the efforts of ECCAS
to adopt regional strategies on maritime governance,
maritime security and the blue economy, which will
culminate in the first maritime summit of the subregion
to be held in January 2023 in Kinshasa.
Central Africa is clearly facing many challenges,
but this subregion also has, as I said at the beginning
of my briefing, many assets that, if properly exploited,
could enable it to meet these challenges successfully.

22-732003/18

S/PV.9213

Central African region

08/12/2022

These assets are first and foremost Central Africa’s
abundant resources, including its human resources
and specifically its dynamic youth, whose average
age is just over 17. Well-trained, supported, motivated
and adequately involved in the management of public
affairs, these young people are precious human capital
that could enable us to rapidly achieve the objectives
of sustainable development. However, we must also
remain aware that, if these young people are poorly
trained or victimized by socioeconomic exclusion, they
could be attracted to terrorist and criminal groups, thus
becoming a factor of instability.

that the last elections in these countries were marked
by violence, international support for national and
regional efforts may be needed to ensure peaceful
electoral processes. I would like to reiterate UNOCA’s
commitment, within the framework of its mandate,
to playing a full role in this regard, working in
coordination with other relevant United Nations entities
and in support of States and such regional organizations
as ECCAS. To this end, increased support from the
Security Council at the political level will be essential.

Central Africa’s strengths also lie in the role and
capacity of subregional organizations to promote
a common vision on key issues, without which no
progress is possible. I have therefore observed since
I took office that ECCAS is showing a clear desire to
play its full role as the Central African pillar of the
African Peace and Security Architecture. Its will to
do so has taken the form of rapid actions to support
the political transition in Chad and preserve stability
and democratic gains in Sao Tome and Principe. In
both cases, ECCAS has expressed its willingness to
work closely with the United Nations, as evidenced
by the joint visit I made with the President of the
ECCAS Commission, Ambassador Gilberto da Piedade
Veríssimo, to Sao Tome following the serious events
that occurred in that country. I take this opportunity to
welcome the participation of Ambassador Da Piedade
Veríssimo in today’s meeting.

I now give the floor to Mr. Da Piedade Veríssimo.

For greater efficiency, the United Nations entities
in Central Africa have initiated a tradition of regular
consultations. In this context, I am pleased to report
that my colleagues from the Office of the Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, the peacekeeping
operations in the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and I have just held a
coordination meeting from 29 November to 1 December
in Luanda, Angola, during which we identified ways
and means of “delivering as one” on meeting the
challenges of peace, security and governance facing the
region. I am also pleased with the good collaboration
we are seeing with other United Nations presences in
the region, including the resident coordinators and the
country teams, which are important partners in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that the year
2023 will be marked by important political processes
in some Central African countries. Bearing in mind
4/18

The President: I thank Mr. Abarry for his briefing.
Mr. Da Piedade Veríssimo (spoke in French):
It is an honour for the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), on whose behalf I
am addressing the Security Council and the entire
diplomatic community in New York at today’s open
debate, to be invited to give an overview of the political
and security situation in the Central African region,
following my colleague and brother, Ambassador
Abdou Abarry, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA). Although he has already
largely presented the contours and challenges of the
current situation in the region, I would like to focus
my briefing on the cases of the Republic of Chad and
the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe and
on the collaboration between our regional organization,
ECCAS, and UNOCA, in the area of promoting peace
and security in Central Africa.
Before going any further, allow me to take this
opportunity to express my warm congratulations to
the President of the Security Council for her country’s
presidency of the Council in the month of December
2022, and for the way in which she is conducting the
Council’s work, which, I cannot help but say here, is
commensurate with the role that India plays on the
international scene.
With regard to the political situation in the region,
it is worth recalling the recent holding of elections at
several levels in the Republic of the Congo, the Republic
of Angola, the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and
Principe and the Republic of Equatorial Guinea. The
Commission of the Economic Community of Central
African States deployed international electoral
observation missions in each of these countries to
monitor their electoral processes and ensure that
22-73200

08/12/2022

Central African region

they complied with international, continental and
subregional electoral standards.
In the Republic of Chad, ECCAS closely followed
the proceedings of the Sovereign Inclusive National
Dialogue held in N’Djamena between August and
October. It took note of the extension of the transition
period, as decided by the participants in the dialogue.
ECCAS therefore maintained its commitment to
supporting the ongoing transition process as the only
way to prevent the risk of instability in the country,
which would have the immediate effect of destabilizing
the Sahel and Central African regions.
However, ECCAS is continuing consultations
with the Chadian authorities and all the sociopolitical
actors in the country, particularly those who did not
take part in the dialogue, with a view to achieving
greater inclusion of all the stakeholders in the transition
process. In that context, the extraordinary meeting
of the ECCAS Conference of Heads of State and
Government, held in Kinshasa on 25 October, appointed
His Excellency Félix Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo,
President of the Democratic Republic of Congo, as
facilitator for reconciliation among the stakeholders in
the Chadian process.
With regard to the unfortunate events of 20 October,
which resulted in serious violence, with the death of
men in four towns in the country, including the capital,
N’Djamena, the same meeting of 25 October condemned
in the strongest terms any recourse to violence for
political ends. ECCAS is currently working on setting
up an international fact-finding mission, to which it
has invited the United Nations, the African Union,
the Community of Sahel-Saharan States and the Lake
Chad Basin Commission. The mission has received
the positive approval of the Chadian authorities and
will shortly visit the four towns in the country where
the violence took place in order to establish the facts,
determine responsibilities and propose ways and means
of ensuring justice for the victims.
After the deterioration of the security situation in
Chad, particularly in terms of human security following
the events of 20 October, the Central African region was
once again caught by surprise with the emergence of a
political and security crisis in Sao Tome and Principe, a
member State of our Community, where it was far from
expected, since the transfer of power regularly took
place after elections, whose results were ultimately
accepted by all the political actors.

S/PV.9213

It will be recalled that, after the presidential and
legislative elections of 2021 and 2022, all of which were
monitored by ECCAS, political tensions arose, but they
were rapidly overcome. There had been an easing of
tensions and a calming of the political situation in Sao
Tome and Principe to the extent that no one could have
imagined any violent action less than a month after the
inauguration of the new Government. However, that
is what happened in the early hours of 25 November
with the attack on a military barracks for purposes
that have not yet been clearly established. In addition
to the military response, which quickly brought the
situation under control, it is worth noting that a number
of civilians were arrested, including the former Speaker
of Parliament, a Central Bank official and a former
soldier from the ex-Buffalo Battalion of the former
South African Defence Forces, who were identified as
the masterminds of the attack, and an investigation by
the judiciary was launched.
However, it should be pointed out that, after initially
announcing the arrest and detention of the assailants and
their accomplices, the Sao Tome and Principe national
and international communities were surprised and
deeply shocked by the broadcasting of video images and
photographs showing acts of torture and unacceptable
cruelty towards the unarmed detainees, whose hands
were tied from behind and bloodied, resulting in the
death of men in the military barracks. We now know
that the Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces
of Sao Tome and Principe has since resigned from his
position after apologizing to the people of Sao Tome
and Principe.
The day after 25 November, that is, from 26 to
27 November, I went with my colleague Ambassador
Abdou Abarry, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of UNOCA, to Sao Tome
and Principe. We met with the highest authorities, in
particular the President of the Republic and the Prime
Minister, accompanied by the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs, Defence and the Interior, who asked us to
send a mission to shed light on the two events, namely,
the attack on the military camp and the human rights
violations. We also met with the Chief of the General
Staff, accompanied by his deputy and the Inspector
General of the Armed Forces, as well as with the BASTA
political party of former Speaker of Parliament Delfim
Neves. A joint communiqué on the visit was issued on
27 November, and on 29 November, an international
fact-finding mission from ECCAS, comprising five

22-732005/18

S/PV.9213

Central African region

members and led by the Commissioner for Political
Affairs, Peace and Security, with the support of the
United Nations Resident Coordinator Office in Sao
Tome and Principe, began its work.
The mission has so far enjoyed the cooperation
of the civilian and military authorities of Sao Tome
and Principe and the significant support of the United
Nations. It has already met with a number of actors and
will deliver its report at the end of its mission before
the end of this month. The report of the fact-finding
mission will be submitted, on the one hand, to the
President of the Republic and the Prime Minister of
Sao Tome and Principe and, on the other hand, to the
Chair of the ECCAS Conference of Heads of State and
Government. It is expected to include recommendations
that ECCAS will ultimately help Sao Tome and Principe
to implement with the support of the United Nations
and other actors of the international community.
Still on the security front, the situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo
remains worrisome. The activity of terrorist movements
and armed groups in South Kivu, North Kivu and Ituri
continues to undermine the initiatives undertaken by
the Congolese authorities, including the declaration of
a state of siege in the latter two provinces more than a
year ago. The persistent activity of armed groups and
terrorist movements, particularly the Mouvement du 23
mars, is at the heart of the diplomatic tensions between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda,
with each country accusing the other of supporting
the groups and movements. In its application of the
principle of complementarity, ECCAS fully supports
the Luanda and Nairobi processes set up by the African
Union and the East African Community with a view
to resolving the regional and national dimensions of
the security crisis in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. To that end, ECCAS is on the one hand
exploring ways to support the regional force currently
deployed in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and on the other serving as an observer and a
focal point for the two processes, which are currently
running in parallel.
The issue of insecurity in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo cannot be adequately analysed
without discussing the role of the United Nations force
that has been deployed there for two decades and is
commonly referred to by its acronym, MONUSCO — the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. There is no
6/18

08/12/2022

doubt that the United Nations peacekeeping efforts
over the past 22 years have greatly contributed to
restoring peace and stability in several parts of the
country. However, it is also true that the persistence
and even the exacerbation of insecurity in certain areas
of North Kivu and Ituri provinces in recent years have
contributed to the deterioration of relations between the
Mission, on the one hand, and the Congolese authorities
and people on the other.
As subregional organizations are now working on
deploying a regional force in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, it is perhaps time that the United
Nations gave careful thought to the effectiveness of its
peacekeeping missions in present-day hotspots like
those in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
That also applies to the situation in the neighbouring
country of the Central African Republic, where the forces
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) are facing similar challenges. ECCAS,
like other African subregional organizations, I hope, is
ready to contribute to those thoughts. But as we wait
for them to produce results, it is vital for MONUSCO
work quickly on the modalities of its coordination with
the regional forces of the East African Community to
ensure that their combined efforts lead to a restoration
of lasting peace in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
As I conclude, I would like to take this opportunity
to commend the quality of our cooperation with
UNOCA, which has continued to improve since its
establishment in 2011. Prior to the establishment of
the ECCAS Commission, the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa (UNSAC) was one of the main frameworks for
that cooperation, and it will remain so. But it can also be
said that beyond UNSAC, such cooperation has mainly
taken the form of joint actions in conflict prevention
through good offices, awareness-raising, training to
combat hate speech, capacity-building for the benefit
of women and young people, based on resolutions 1325
(2000) and 2250 (2015), civil society and support for
the implementation of reform. Those actions have led,
for example, to the establishment of the Network of
Women Mediators of Central Africa and the Coalition
of Civil Society Organizations for Peace, Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Central Africa, and will
lead to support for developing legal instruments to
establish new community institutions.
22-73200

08/12/2022

Central African region

Regular consultations on subjects of common
interest between the leaders of both organizations will
continue to be an important part of the cooperation
between ECCAS and UNOCA. The recent experience in
Sao Tome and Principe, which undoubtedly helped save
lives, demonstrates their effectiveness and relevance.
It should also be noted that besides its collaboration
with UNOCA — but always with its support — ECCAS
works with other United Nations agencies such as the
United Nations Development Programme, UNICEF,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the International Organization for
Migration, the World Health Organization and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in
various areas related to human security that if neglected
could lead to or exacerbate conflicts.
The challenges created by the situations in the
Central African Republic, the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Chad and Sao Tome and
Principe — and not forgetting Cameroon — provide
us with an opportunity to rethink, reimagine, and
continually reinvent our cooperative relationships in
the work of promoting sustainable peace and security
in Central Africa. I hope that 2023 will give us an
opportunity to commit to that path and to advance
the peace and security agenda in those countries and
situations. I would be remiss if I concluded without
reiterating the gratitude of the ECCAS to the Security
Council for its continued efforts to promote peace on
the African continent in general and in Central Africa
in particular.
The President: I thank Mr. Da Piedade Veríssimo
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I thank the
President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Abarry for their briefings. We look forward to working
with Mr. Abarry in his new role and commend the
ongoing efforts of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA) to support and promote
peace, stability and security in Central Africa. I would
like to make four points today.
First, as we consider opportunities, elections in
the subregion are intrinsic to building and sustaining
peace, as we have seen in Sao Tome and Principe and

S/PV.9213

Angola. It is critical to ensure that political processes
remain inclusive, peaceful and credible. UNOCA and
its partners have an important role to play in supporting
those processes, but it is up to Member States to draw
on that support and deliver democratic elections and
inclusive transitional processes.
Secondly, the United Kingdom reiterates its support
for Chad’s transition to civilian and constitutional rule.
However, we remain concerned about the fact that
the transition, as currently envisaged, contravenes
the conditions set out in the African Union Peace and
Security Council communiqué of 14 May 2021 that
President Déby Itno agreed to uphold. We were saddened
to see the eruption of violence in October and welcome
the launch of an inquiry, as well as the engagement of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
with heads of missions in N’Djamena on that important
issue. We urge UNOCA, the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Chadian Government
to ensure that the investigation is credible, transparent
and independent. We also call on the Government to
ensure due legal process for the remaining individuals
currently detained, including minors.
Thirdly, the ongoing crises in Cameroon and the
dire humanitarian situation, which require urgent
attention, are a continuing challenge for the subregion.
The United Kingdom calls on all the parties to engage
in inclusive dialogue and enable safe access to schools
and humanitarian assistance.
Finally, I want to reiterate our concern about the
ongoing violence in the Central African Republic and
the distressing toll it is taking on the population. It is
compounding an already acute humanitarian situation
and risks undermining progress on reconciliation. The
targeting of civilians by national forces and the Russian
Wagner Group mercenaries, as well as by armed groups,
continues to play a destabilizing role in the country. We
call on the Government of the Central African Republic
to conduct full and timely investigations into allegations
of human rights violations and abuses to ensure that all
the perpetrators are held to account.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I have the honour to make this statement on behalf of
the Permanent Representatives of the three African
members of the Security Council — Gabon, Ghana and
Kenya (A3).
We warmly congratulate Ambassador Abdou
Abarry, Special Representative of the Secretary-

22-732007/18

S/PV.9213

Central African region

General and Head of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). It is a real pleasure
to see that he remains committed to the service of
international peace and security. We wish him every
success in his new position and assure him of our full
support in the implementation of his mandate, which
we feel sure will contribute to peace and security in the
Central African subregion. We also thank the President
of the Commission of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), Mr. Gilberto Da
Piedade Veríssimo, for his insightful briefing. Our
statement today will focus on three key issues.
First, on the political front, the A3 welcomed the
peaceful conduct of the various elections held recently,
in a demonstration of the willingness of the States of
the region to strengthen and preserve their democratic
gains. We encourage them to continue their efforts in
that direction. We welcome the active participation of
women and youth in political processes, in particular
in Angola, which elected its first female President
of the National Assembly. We also note the signing
of the Doha Peace Agreement and the holding of an
inclusive and sovereign national dialogue launched in
N’Djamena, which are significant developments in the
work of ensuring a return to constitutional order.
The A3 deplores the incidents that occurred in
Chad on 20 October following demonstrations and that
resulted in the death of several civilians, and we urge
the Chadian authorities to expedite investigations into
those events. We condemn the attempted coup d’état on
the night of 25 November in Sao Tome and Principe,
which we believe is likely to weaken the democratic
gains in that country. The international community
should support Sao Tome and Principe in its quest for
economic development through democracy and good
governance and the establishment of strong institutions.
Elsewhere, we were pleased to note the positive actions
taken in Cameroon, notably the organization of an
inclusive dialogue aimed at resolving the security crisis
in the north-west and south-west of the country.
On the security front, several countries in the
region remain plagued by crises and tensions that
are complex and multidimensional. They include
terrorism and violent extremism, cross-border crime,
the persistence of armed groups, maritime insecurity,
the illicit exploitation of natural resources and
intercommunal clashes exacerbated by the increasing
effects of climate change. We are deeply concerned
about the continuing terrorist attacks by Boko Haram
8/18

08/12/2022

and splinter groups in the Lake Chad basin, which are
causing widespread casualties and damage to civilian
infrastructure in Cameroon and Chad. Armed groups
have also intensified their attacks in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, resulting in similar
human suffering. The A3 firmly condemns such
destructive activities and reiterates its call to the States
of the region and the international community to make
concerted, sustained efforts to address the root causes
of terrorism in the region.
The persistence of such armed groups is an ongoing
threat to peace and security in Central Africa. For
decades, negative forces have carried out massacres
and abuses of civilians, along with the destruction
and looting of property, with total impunity. They
often self-finance through their illicit exploitation of
natural resources, and their actions are having a direct
impact on the future of millions, especially young
people and women. The A3 firmly condemns them and
demands that they immediately and unconditionally
join disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and ongoing political consultations.
The A3 welcomes the commitment of the regional
economic communities that are working to put an
end to the rampant insecurity in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo through the Nairobi and Luanda
processes. Those initiatives must be supported by the
United Nations.
We welcome the ongoing deployment of the
East African Community regional force and hope
it will help to resolve the deadly crisis in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is crucial that the
international community provide effective support to
those subregional efforts. The A3 also underscores the
importance of boosting cooperation, first among Central
African States through ECCAS and its counterpart,
the Economic Community of West African States,
and secondly between the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel and UNOCA. Such synergy
is key to improving the coordination of economic,
security and political actions in order to meet the real
needs of populations and bring about lasting peace in
those subregions.
On the humanitarian front, the number of refugees
and displaced persons in the region continues to grow
to record levels. In the Lake Chad basin, 9.7 million
people will require humanitarian assistance. The
deteriorating humanitarian situation, exacerbated by
the adverse effects of climate change in Central Africa,
22-73200

08/12/2022

Central African region

is extremely worrying. Those who voice scepticism
about the obvious and direct linkage between climate
change and conflicts in Central Africa demonstrate
only that they are ignoring the realities of what is going
on in the region, in particular around Lake Chad and
the Great Lakes. Recurring episodes of flooding and
drought are forcing populations to migrate and leading
to intercommunal clashes. Today many countries and
communities in Central Africa are facing a problem with
two sides — climate change and violent conflicts — with
a real risk that the impact of the climatic changes will
exacerbate the likelihood of violence. There is therefore
an urgent need to implement prevention, mitigation and
management mechanisms focused on the security risks
caused by the effects of climate change by strengthening
the adaptive capacities of fragile States and those
emerging from conflict. Without that, communities
will be even poorer and less resilient.
While emphasizing that the future of the planet
depends heavily on the Congo Basin rainforest, we
would like to remind the Council that Africa is the
least-polluting continent in the world and the most
vulnerable to natural disasters. We want to take this
opportunity to remind the international community
that it should keep its promises to finance adaptation
and mitigation policies.
The A3 welcomes the continued efforts of
humanitarian actors to provide assistance to the most
vulnerable, at times putting their own lives at risk. We
call for safe and unhindered humanitarian access in
countries in conflict and echo the Secretary-General’s
call for international donors and partners to fund
humanitarian response plans in the region. We support
the efforts of UNOCA to systematically integrate the
dimensions of climate change and natural resource
management into conflict prevention, mediation,
peacebuilding and development processes.
In conclusion, the A3 reaffirms respect for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the countries of
Central Africa. We also reiterate our full support for
Mr. Abdou Abarry and his team in their tireless efforts
on the ground. The A3 hopes that the Council will
continue to support UNOCA’s work by adopting the
presidential statement that has been under consideration
by Council members for several months now.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Abdou Abarry, for his first

S/PV.9213

briefing of the Council since his assumption of his new
post. I also thank the Chairperson of the Commission
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), Mr. Gilberto Da Piedade Veríssimo, for his
valuable briefing.
Central Africa continues to grapple with many
challenges that require greater efforts to address
them and their root causes, foremost among them the
insecurity created by transnational organized crime
and the spread of extremism and terrorism, in addition
to the deteriorating humanitarian situation exacerbated
by climate change and its repercussions. We need to
devise a comprehensive approach to respond to that
complex situation, aimed at enhancing cooperation
and coordination at all levels, especially between
neighbouring countries and between them and regional
and subregional bodies. Those stakeholders play
an important role in finding practical and effective
solutions because they have the right expertise and tools.
Joint action is needed to address the complex
security challenges in the region. While multilateral
efforts have helped recently to reduce incidents of
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, many other outstanding
issues still require serious attention, including the
continued threats posed by terrorist and armed
groups to regional security and stability, as we have
witnessed in the terrorist group Boko Haram’s attacks
in the Lake Chad basin and other regions. We believe
that joint meetings of the two Special Envoys and the
stakeholders concerned in the region, such as the one
held in Nairobi in October to discuss the threats of
terrorism and extremism in the Great Lakes region, are
important examples of ways to promote cooperation
between regional organizations and the United Nations
with the aim of supporting local efforts and building
the capacities of States in the region. We look forward
to the summit on maritime security to be held early
next year, as the Special Representative mentioned.
In view of the political developments in the
countries of the region, whether related to elections
or political processes, we should not fail to emphasize
the importance of enhancing the participation and
empowerment of women and young people, given the
vital role they play in building stable and prosperous
societies. We underscore that achieving lasting stability
in Central Africa requires a constant focus on preventive
diplomacy and inclusive political dialogue in order to
address conflicts peacefully and prevent their outbreak

22-732009/18

S/PV.9213

Central African region

in the first place, as well as to promote social cohesion
in the region.
The humanitarian situation in the region requires
just as much attention as other problems. We note that
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
is addressing a situation in which nearly 13 million
people are in need of assistance, including more than
7.5 million who are internally displaced and need
urgent humanitarian relief. More than half of them
are in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo
alone. Additionally, we note the ongoing humanitarian
challenges in the north-west and south-west regions of
Cameroon. In that regard, we stress the need to provide
humanitarian assistance and allow that assistance
unhindered access to those in need, as well as to provide
protection for the humanitarian workers.
We must also pay attention to the effects of climate
change on the security and humanitarian situations in
the region. Heavy rains, floods and desertification are
affecting the population and damaging property as well
as exacerbating tensions and conflicts. It is therefore
imperative to foster communities’ resilience to climate
change, including in the Lake Chad and Congo basins.
That requires investing more time and resources in
order to develop effective and sustainable solutions
to the challenges associated with climate change. We
commend the efforts of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa to support African and other
actors who continue to expand their knowledge of the
links between climate change, peace and security in
the region.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates
its support to the countries of the region and the
international and regional organizations and other
stakeholders that are working tirelessly to ensure
peace, stability and prosperity for the peoples of
Central Africa.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Abarry for his
first briefing to the Council in his capacity as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA). He can count on Mexico’s full support. We
are also grateful for the information provided by Mr. Da
Piedade Veríssimo.
While we recognize that some progress has been
made in Central Africa in terms of elections and
maritime security, we are concerned about the fact that
10/18

08/12/2022

a number of challenges related to regional governance,
security and peacebuilding persist. Mexico believes
that situations as complex as those faced by the Central
African Republic and the escalation of violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo require greater
regional coordination. In that connection, we call
for the greater involvement of regional organizations
in support of the transition in Chad. The decision by
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) to appoint President Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi
Tshilombo of the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
transition facilitator is a positive sign. We believe that
further delays in the Chadian transition process would
set a dangerous political precedent for the entire region.
Moreover, the speedy restoration of constitutional order
in Chad is a prerequisite for its ability to confront the
threat of terrorism and its economic challenges with
the necessary legitimacy. We urge the transitional
authorities to scrupulously respect their obligations
under international human rights law.
With regard to Cameroon, we consider political
mobilization in favour of national reconciliation to
be critical. It is urgent to break the cycle of violence
there, which is fuelled by inequality, poverty and
discrimination. New foundations must be built to
ensure the peaceful coexistence of the country’s various
communities. The risk that the violence in north-west
and south-west Cameroon may affect its neighbours
justifies greater regional involvement in facilitating
dialogue between the parties. We also believe that the
Cameroonian diaspora can play a key role in restoring
peace to the country.
Mexico considers UNOCA’s role to be fundamental
in strengthening regional coordination in Central
Africa and would like to highlight two issues in that
regard. First, UNOCA should continue to contribute
to the consolidation of the regional institutional
architecture. Strengthening ECCAS’s institutional
reform process is key to that, as it will enable it to play
a more active role in the resolution of crises within
the region. Better use should be made of the regional
legal framework to address transnational problems. The
Kinshasa Convention, for example, could be used more
effectively in combating the illicit flows of weapons
that exacerbate conflicts throughout the region.
Secondly, the support provided by the international
community and agencies to UNOCA can yield positive
results only if the national political actors act responsibly
in taking on their share of the work. We welcome the
22-73200

08/12/2022

Central African region

international funding provided for projects related to
democratic governance and the holding of free, fair
and inclusive elections. But for those efforts to make
a real difference, the national political actors must
commit to respecting the rules of the democratic game
and electoral outcomes. Otherwise political crises will
continue to recur and their humanitarian and economic
effects will prevent Central Africa from reaching its
potential. In a context where humanitarian needs and
global economic recovery efforts are placing new limits
on the resources available for international cooperation,
it is vital to do everything possible to maximize the
impact of international assistance for the countries of
Central Africa.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Abarry and Mr. Da Piedade Veríssimo for
their briefings.
The countries of Central Africa have recently
been taking active measures to maintain political
stability and restore socioeconomic development,
demonstrating enormous resilience and potential. At
the same time, owing to the global economic downturn,
geopolitical conflicts and food and energy crises, the
region’s political, economic and security situation has
been marked by an increased risk of instability and
uncertainty. The stability of the region is vital for the
peace and development of the entire continent. The
United Nations and the international community as a
whole should devote more attention and assistance to the
region, engage with countries there to understand their
difficulties, challenges and real needs and help them
build their capacities in governance, counter-terrorism,
poverty reduction and sustainable development, with a
view to achieving long-term peace and stability in the
region. China would like to underscore three points in
that regard.
First, we should respect the efforts of the
countries in the region to handle their domestic issues
independently. During the reporting period, Chad,
Angola, Equatorial Guinea, Cameroon, the Republic of
the Congo and Sao Tome and Principe made positive
progress in their respective political processes,
including the successful holding of important
elections in some of those countries. We hope that all
of the national actors in those countries will take the
opportunity to further promote dialogue and unity and
work together for reconstruction and stability. The
international community should show genuine respect

S/PV.9213

for the sovereignty and ownership of the countries in
the region, take full heed of and accommodate their
concerns, provide constructive assistance and refrain
from imposing solutions from outside.
China has been closely following the political
and security situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and acknowledges the progress that the
Government has made on various fronts, including
in the 2023 electoral process and in promoting good
governance, local development and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. We support
Cameroon’s efforts to safeguard its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, and we are
confident that the Government and the people of
Cameroon are capable of properly resolving the issues
in the south-west and north-west regions of the country.
Secondly, we should support regional and
subregional organizations in playing their unique
roles. China welcomed the convening of the twentyfirst summit of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), as well as ECCAS’s continued
efforts to promote regional integration. As is pointed
out in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/896), the
social and intercommunal tensions in some countries in
the region are not likely to be resolved any time soon.
Boko Haram and other terrorist groups are active in the
region, piracy persists in the Gulf of Guinea and the
region is also facing various non-traditional security
challenges. We support the development of security
mechanisms in the Central African region to enhance
the subregion’s capabilities in maintaining stability and
combating terrorism and achieving collective security
and common development. United Nations entities
with a local presence and the wider international
community should provide more support to regional
and subregional organizations in training personnel,
institution-building, logistical backstopping and
resource management.
Thirdly, we should help the countries of the
region improve their living standards and achieve
socioeconomic development. Some countries in
the region have recently seen sharp increases in
the numbers of hungry people and refugees, and
humanitarian needs are growing. The developed donor
countries and international financial institutions
should fulfil their aid commitments, provide adequate
humanitarian financing and help the countries affected
alleviate their financial distress and end humanitarian
crises as soon as possible. The keys to helping

22-7320011/18

S/PV.9213

Central African region

countries in the region develop are eradicating poverty,
building infrastructure, improving education and
health, increasing employment, facilitating trade and
enhancing food security. China will continue to actively
implement President Xi Jinping’s Global Development
Initiative and support Central African countries
through various means, such as debt suspension and
development assistance.
Since taking office, Special Representative Abarry
has travelled extensively in the region, actively engaged
with various stakeholders and made positive efforts to
promote regional cooperation and address common
challenges, all of which China appreciates. We hope that
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
will continue to work within the scope of its mandate,
maintain close communication and cooperation with
the countries and entities of the region and play an even
greater role in promoting the stability and development
of the Central African region.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We welcome Mr. Abdou Abarry to the
Security Council in his new capacity as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Central
Africa. We thank both him and Mr. Gilberto Da
Piedade Veríssimo, President of the Commission of the
Economic Community of Central African States, for
their detailed briefings.
Russia has consistently supported the work of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa as an
important instrument of preventive diplomacy. We can
see that the good offices of the Special Representative
are sorely needed in the subregion. It is important to
note that mediation efforts are being accompanied by
direct engagement between the parties in problematic
hotspots and coordination with the relevant regional
mechanisms, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the Economic Community of Central
African States. The Central African region is a crucial
location in terms of countering the spread of terrorism
throughout the continent. We attach particular
importance to the regional efforts aimed at developing
concerted approaches for countering that threat, and
the work of the Multinational Joint Task Force is a
good example of that. According to various reports,
the terrorist activity of Boko Haram has somewhat
diminished recently, but we still consider that group
one of the main threats to peace and security in Central
Africa. The region’s porous borders enable fighters
to move from one country to another, although that
12/18

08/12/2022

depends on the overall situation and the effectiveness of
the counter-terrorism measures taken by the authorities
to combat them.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is another factor in
the region’s instability. We are seeing some positive
momentum in that regard and hope that with the
support of the global community, efforts across the
region will provide a lasting solution to the problem of
armed robbery at sea, in an area that is so economically
so important to the region.
We have also noted the fact that a number of States
in the subregion have held elections for officials at
various levels in recent months. We are monitoring
the developments in Cameroon. The problem of the
Anglophone provinces dates back to the colonial
period, and those long-standing disputes can only
be settled through negotiations. All of the parties in
Cameroon should show restraint and reject all forms
of violence. We are also monitoring the situation in
Chad, where the process of transitional State-building
and the implementation of the recommendations of
the inter-Chadian national dialogue are under way.
We followed the reports of the clashes in October
with concern.
We are also paying close attention to developments
in the Central African Republic. Thanks to the support
of their partners, including Russia, the Central African
authorities managed to get through the most difficult
phase in countering those who tried to launch an
anti-constitutional military coup. In recent months,
however, there have been recurring spikes of illegal
armed-group activities in the north-western and northeastern parts of the country, particularly on its borders
with the Sudan and Chad. We will continue to assist
Bangui in combating armed groups and in expanding
the presence of the State throughout the country with a
view to achieving a final settlement.
We are concerned about the dire humanitarian
situation in the subregion, where experts have recorded
a large number of refugees, internally displaced persons
and people in need of humanitarian assistance of one
kind or another. It is clear that the Central African
countries are facing complex challenges. However, we
believe that it is the States of the region themselves that
must play a key role in crisis prevention and conflict
resolution, with the international community providing
the necessary support.
22-73200

08/12/2022

Central African region

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like
to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Abarry for his highly informative briefing. I
congratulate Ambassador Abarry on his new functions
and extend to him the full support of the Brazilian
delegation. I also thank Mr. Da Piedade Veríssimo for
his comprehensive and detailed briefing.
I would like to highlight the successful completion
of electoral processes in several countries in the region.
In particular, I want to mention the elections held in
the Republic of the Congo on 21 July, in Angola on
24 August, in Sao Tome and Principe on 24 September
and in Equatorial Guinea on 20 November. Brazil is
aware that opposition parties in some of those countries
have raised concerns about voting procedures,
including electoral calendars and voting lists. We call
on the relevant national judicial authorities and political
forces to address those questions in accordance with
their constitutional and electoral rules. We remain
encouraged by the fact that most of the elections were
peaceful and orderly.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea is another
area where we can underscore positive results. It is
above all an achievement of the States of the Gulf
of Guinea, particularly as a result of their ongoing
efforts in the context of the Yaoundé Architecture,
which is just one example of a successful cooperation
initiative that brings together regional and international
organizations. In the context, I commend the continued
cooperation of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa with the Economic Community
of Central African States. Brazil is a member of the
Group of Friends of the Gulf of Guinea, and we stand
ready to continue supporting the countries of the region
through cooperation and joint naval operations such
as Operation Guinex, Obangame Express and Grand
African NEMO.
While there are positive developments, many
challenges remain for Central Africa. Long-running
conflicts have been exacerbated by the hardships caused
by such issues as the coronavirus disease pandemic,
terrorism, humanitarian needs, food insecurity and
a lack of financial support. The crisis in Cameroon,
though it seldom makes international headlines, is
particularly troubling. Brazil condemns in the strongest
terms any attacks on schools or acts of violence against
teachers and students. In Chad, while there has been
some progress in the political transition, the violence
reported on 20 October is very worrying. Partners

S/PV.9213

in the region and the international community must
remain vigilant in order to prevent further instability.
We extend our full support to the Economic Community
of Central African States and its leader, President
Tshisekedi Tshilombo, as a facilitator. In Sao Tome
and Principe, the peaceful transfer of power in October
2021 and the orderly legislative and local elections in
September were very positive steps, widely praised by
international observers. In that overall positive context,
the recent attack on the headquarters of the armed
forces is a worrisome development. Brazil is attentively
following the situation in that sister nation, with which
we have close linguistic and historical ties.
There are important examples of the resilience
of democratic institutions in Central Africa that
demonstrate what can be achieved with the commitment
of States and regional organizations. The Council must
continue to support those efforts and remain actively
engaged with the evolving scenarios in the region.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I welcome Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Abarry and
thank him for his briefing. We congratulate him on taking
up that important task. We also thank Mr. Veríssimo for
his briefing. I will focus on four points.
First, the general trend in the north-west and southwest regions of Cameroon remains deeply concerning.
Justice must be done to all the parties involved in
attacks on civilians, school infrastructure and children.
Furthermore, Boko Haram remains a persistent threat
to civilians, who continue to be targeted by bloody
attacks. To end its reign of terror, States of the region
must intensify their cooperation for a strong and
unified response. Operation Lake Sanity against Boko
Haram represents an example of enhanced cooperation
involving four States, which we encourage others to
follow. In that vein, the spread of hate speech throughout
the region is undermining regional stability. Albania
welcomes the adoption in Kinshasa of a draft regional
strategy and action plan for the prevention and fight
against hate speech in Central Africa. We trust that the
document will be swiftly signed by Heads of States and
Governments in the region.
Secondly, reports of violations by security and
defence forces and armed groups, including the
Wagner Group, are worrying. Albania also takes note
of the recommendations for institutional reforms and
accountability mechanisms aimed at protecting victims
and witnesses of human rights violations in Burundi,

22-7320013/18

S/PV.9213

Central African region

as well as the launch of a mapping of human rights
violations and the verification of illegal detentions
in Chad.
Thirdly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
Albania is extremely concerned about the aggravation
of human suffering as a direct consequence of the
activities of armed groups, the effects of climate
change and the increase in prices of food and fuel
imports. Albania encourages all international partners
to increase their support for the States affected.
Fourthly, with regard to electoral processes
and governance challenges, while we welcome the
successful completion of the elections in Angola, the
Republic of the Congo and Sao Tome and Principe, we
have taken note of the challenges in other countries
that may further aggravate the political situation. The
political transition in Chad is at a critical juncture.
The signing of the Doha Peace Agreement and the
inclusive Sovereign National Dialogue paved the way
for the establishment of a Government of national
unity. However, the tragic loss of so many lives
during the protest makes it even clearer that what is
needed is a restoration of constitutional order and the
people’s return to the ballot boxes. The establishment
of democratically elected and inclusive Governments
throughout the region, and increased institutional
capacities, are vital preconditions for bringing peace to
the region and tackling its imminent challenges.
Lastly, I would like to thank the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa for its support to
the countries of the region and for promoting greater
coordination with regional organizations such as the
Economic Community of Central African States, with
the clear purpose of establishing lasting peace and
security in the Central African region.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank the briefers
for their insights. It is a pleasure to see Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Abarry back
in the Chamber in his new and important role.
Last week our Deputy Foreign Minister shared
his deep concern about the worsening humanitarian
and security situation in the east during his visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The human rights situation in the provinces
affected by conflict is also alarming. We are appalled
by the killing of civilians, including children, in the
massacre in Kishishe village last week. The violence
14/18

08/12/2022

must end. Norway calls on all armed groups to lay
down their weapons.
We are also worried by the situation in Cameroon,
including the activities of Boko Haram. Of particular
concern is the targeting of hospitals, health clinics,
schools, teachers and pupils. We remind everyone
that targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure is
prohibited under international humanitarian law and
may constitute war crimes.
In Chad, we are carefully watching the treatment
of protesters in the context of the national dialogue.
To ensure an effective transition, male and female
stakeholders must be included in relevant processes.
We strongly commend efforts by the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the African Union in supporting
dialogues in member countries.
UNOCA also has a role to play in more cross-cutting
thematic areas across the region. First, on climate and
security, we commend UNOCA for charting the way.
The report entitled “Sustaining peace in Central Africa
through addressing the adverse impact of climate
change on peace and security” succinctly presents the
challenges the region is facing. In addition, the report’s
recommendations show some of the opportunities that
could be seized if the climate challenge is addressed.
Secondly, on food security, which is another area
that needs our attention, the recent joint update by
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the World Food Programme clearly shows
that, this year, acute food insecurity has become an
increasingly important challenge in Central Africa.
While we must wait for the global drivers of this
situation to improve, the impacts of the worsening food
crisis must be addressed now, which is why Norway has
taken an active role in co-hosting a third Lake Chad
conference in January. The conference will seek both
to address the urgent humanitarian needs and to look
at advancing our joint stabilization and development
efforts. In addition, food security and humanitarian
access must be central topics in dialogues with armed
groups and other actors. Preventing people from gaining
access to food can under no circumstances be allowed
as a weapon of conflict.
Lastly, on maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea,
where momentum is continuing to build, last week we
saw and applauded the first ECCAS conference on this
22-73200

08/12/2022

Central African region

topic, in Kinshasa, as well as the Group of Seven Group
of Friends of the Gulf of Guinea meeting in Abidjan.
Our hope is that this momentum will continue to grow.
By preventing fires from breaking out in the first
place, the roles UNOCA and other regional actors
are playing are often undervalued. Too often these
entities carry out important preventive work with only
limited resources. We therefore call on all colleagues
to continue their support for UNOCA. Norway will
remain a reliable partner of UNOCA and special
political missions in support of preventive diplomacy,
including after our current term on the Security Council
has concluded.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Abarry
for his briefing and join others in welcoming him back
to the Security Council. It is a pleasure to see him in
the Chamber today. I would also like to thank Mr. Da
Piedade Veríssimo for his briefing.
Ireland commends the extensive efforts of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) aimed at improving regional cooperation,
including with the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and other regional
organizations. Enhanced cooperation is essential to
addressing the region’s multidimensional challenges,
including armed-group activities in the Lake Chad
basin and cross-border threats to peace and security.
Maritime insecurity, farmer-herder conflicts and the
adverse impacts of climate change also affect security
across the region.
One year ago, on behalf of a group of like-minded
Council members, Ireland and the Niger introduced
a draft thematic resolution on climate and security
(S/2021/990). We regret that despite the overwhelming
support of the Council and the broader United Nations
membership, the text was not adopted (see S/PV.8926).
Ireland continues to call on the Security Council
to investigate and address the impacts of climate
change on peace and security. We cannot continue to
stand by while displacement and tensions increase,
lives and livelihoods are lost and the opportunity to
build sustained and sustainable peace is missed. In
addition, international efforts are needed to encourage
the sustainable utilization of natural resources. The
preservation of the Congo basin and the promoting of
traditional knowledge and local peace infrastructures

S/PV.9213

can help prevent and peacefully resolve conflicts and
enhance local and regional peace consolidation.
We commend the work of UNOCA, ECCAS, the
Climate Security Mechanism and other entities. Their
efforts and the continued commitments of the countries
of Central Africa can play a leading role in illustrating
the value of climate action for peacebuilding. We
know that Special Representative Abarry’s personal
understanding of and commitment to climate and
security will see the issue of climate-related security
risks continue being meaningfully integrated into the
work of UNOCA.
Ongoing instability is creating a dire humanitarian
situation in several Central African countries, with
particular impacts on women and girls, who are facing
higher rates of sexual and gender-based violence. Ireland
condemns such acts. We urge all parties to ensure
the safety and security of humanitarian personnel.
We call for perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights to be held accountable.
We welcome the ongoing efforts of UNOCA,
ECCAS and Governments of the region to advance
the youth, peace and security and the women, peace
and security agendas. Promoting women and youth
involvement in electoral, mediation and peacebuilding
processes, as well as engaging with women-led and
youth-led civil society, is vital for peace and security in
Central Africa, as it is everywhere.
The socioeconomic situation is also disturbing,
exacerbated as it is by Russia’s war in Ukraine and the
consequent global rise in food prices. The prevalence
of food insecurity is cause for concern. We reiterate the
need for cooperation and action to address this issue.
Ireland is pleased to note the improved
maritime-security situation in the Gulf of Guinea and
UNOCA’s cooperation with the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel in this regard.
While we welcome the peaceful holding of
elections in countries throughout the region, we are
concerned by the challenges with respect to electoral
governance. We reiterate the need for inclusive and
transparent processes.
The situation in Chad is unsettling. We are dismayed
by the recent violence in N’Djamena and call on the
transition Government and the President of ECCAS
to quickly resolve the tensions, peacefully revive the

22-7320015/18

S/PV.9213

Central African region

08/12/2022

political transition and ensure the holding of free and
fair elections and the return of constitutional order.

Government’s partnership with Wagner Group entities
creates barriers to that engagement.

Finally, UNOCA’s efforts to address hate speech
are vital. The adoption of a draft regional strategy and
action plan for the prevention of and fight against hate
speech in Central Africa earlier this year could make a
significant contribution to conflict prevention efforts
and regional stability.

While Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Keita will brief the Council tomorrow, I would
be remiss not to mention the devastating humanitarian
and security situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We urge parties to implement the commitments
outlined in the 23 November communiqué, including a
cessation of hostilities by the Mouvement du 23 mars.

Ms. Saha (United States of America): I thank
both our briefers for their insightful comments. The
United States welcomes Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Abarry in his new role. His portfolio
is vast and could not be more important.
Central Africa faces numerous challenges. In
Chad, we are concerned about the results of the
national dialogue, which disregarded the directives
of the African Union Peace and Security Council,
thereby undermining confidence in the country’s
transition. We continue to urge Chad to ensure the
meaningful participation of the political opposition in
drafting a new constitution and developing independent
mechanisms to organize elections. We encourage the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) to play a leadership role in supporting
this process. We also strongly condemn the violence
between Chadian security forces and demonstrators, as
well as the crackdown on opposition and civil society
groups. We support efforts to conduct a United Nationsled international inquiry into these events.
In Cameroon, the United States remains concerned
by continued violence and attacks against civilians. We
support UNOCA’s role in promoting inclusive political
dialogue, which includes the resolution of the crises in
the North-West and South-West regions.
With regard to the Central African Republic, we
commend the Government’s leadership, especially
President Touadera and Prime Minister Dondra, in the
peace process and urge authorities to redouble their
efforts to bring about peace. Progress on the road map of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the revitalization of the 2019 peace agreement is
urgently needed to bring stability to the Central African
Republic. We continue to encourage the Central African
Republic to strengthen its ties with the United Nations
peacekeeping mission and other responsible partners
as an alternative to the predatory Wagner Group. The
Central African Republic has other partners that wish
to assist the country’s development. Unfortunately, the
16/18

Turning to Boko Haram and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) in West Africa, we condemn
their attacks against civilians. The United States
supports regional coordination by neighbours and the
Multinational Joint Task Force to combat terrorist
groups and implement holistic strategies that address
the underlying drivers of terrorism. Furthermore, the
United States urges all States Members of the United
Nations to counter Al-Qaida and ISIS more proactively,
including in Africa, by designating their members
and affiliates with assets freezes, travel bans and
arms embargoes.
Finally, the victims of the Lord’s Resistance Army,
past and present, deserve justice. The United States
offers a reward of up to $5 million for information that
leads to the arrest, transfer or conviction of Joseph
Kony, who is wanted for crimes against humanity by
the International Criminal Court. We urge anyone
with knowledge of his whereabouts to contact our War
Crimes Rewards Programme and help to bring him
to justice.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Abarry for his efforts to bring much-needed
peace and prosperity to the Central African region. The
United States supports him and his team in those efforts.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke
in French): I too would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abdou
Abarry, for his briefing. France congratulates him on
his appointment. We welcome it, and we wish him
every success in his work as Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). I would
also like to welcome the presence of the President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) at today’s meeting. I would
like to emphasize two points.
First, we must of course continue to support the
political processes in the region. In Chad, the holding
22-73200

08/12/2022

Central African region

of the national dialogue, the signing of the Doha
peace agreement and the appointment of an inclusive
Government, with the participation of representatives
of the opposition, were positive steps. But the violence
of 20 October reminded us of the fragility of the
transition under way. The fight against impunity is
essential to promoting national reconciliation and
allowing the transition to continue. That is why an
international, impartial and independent investigation
must be carried out as soon as possible. In that regard,
we are pleased that Chad has accepted the principle,
and we hope that the United Nations can fully play its
role. The perpetrators of those unacceptable acts must
be condemned.
In Cameroon, France remains concerned about the
situation in the North-West and South-West regions.
During his visit to Cameroon last July, the President of
the Republic reaffirmed France’s commitment to finding
a political solution in support of the decentralization
process. He encouraged the Cameroonian authorities to
continue the dialogue.
In the Central African Republic, a greater
commitment from the countries of the region, under
the leadership of the African Union and ECCAS, is
necessary for the political process to make significant
progress. We encourage UNOCA to continue to
mobilize the States and organizations of the region to
that end.
Following the events of the past few days, France
also reaffirms its commitment to the stability of Sao
Tome and Principe, which today is an example of
democracy in the region.
Finally, the priority for Central Africa must also
be respect for human rights and inclusive governance
through electoral processes that allow for the free and
equal participation of all actors, particularly women
and young people.
The second priority that I would like to highlight
today is the protection of the population. France welcomes
the improved coordination between the region’s
security and defence forces within the Multinational
Joint Task Force, which makes it possible to combat the
terrorist threat of Boko Haram and the Islamic State
in West Africa. We remain very concerned about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation. The response to
all humanitarian needs must be expedited. The region
is bearing the full brunt of the tragic consequences
of the war in Ukraine, particularly in terms of food

S/PV.9213

security, and the adverse effects of climate change, as
the Special Representative mentioned.
Given the challenges facing Central Africa,
UNOCA’s support is essential. France welcomes
its work and the strengthening of ties with regional
organizations. We reiterate our full support for the
work of the Special Representative.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Abdou Abarry, and the President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), Mr. Gilberto Da Piedade
Veríssimo, for briefing us today. I will focus my
remarks on three aspects of recent developments in the
region: political, security and humanitarian.
The political developments in the countries of the
Central African region have been positive, marked by
electoral processes, regular exchanges and collaboration
among countries. The successful holding of elections in
Angola, the Congo, Equatorial Guinea and Sao Tome and
Principe is yet another positive indication of democracy
taking strong and firm roots in Central Africa. It is
heartening to see the consolidation of democracy in the
region, even though there may be some pitfalls in the
processes. We also note the increased participation of
women in the electoral process and in the legislatures,
particularly in the Congo and Sao Tome and Principe.
We are closely following the developments in
Chad. The Doha agreement and the national dialogue
brought about agreement on the transition road map.
However, challenges remain, particularly in the context
of discordant notes by segments of the opposition. It
is important that all stakeholders engage in dialogue
to resolve all outstanding issues and recommit to the
transition process.
We unequivocally condemn the terrorism being
perpetrated by Boko Haram in Cameroon and the
Lake Chad basin. We commend the role played by the
Multinational Joint Task Force in countering Boko
Haram and affiliated terror groups. That exemplifies
a point that we often make about the need for wellcoordinated and well-equipped regional strategies
to deal with terrorism in Africa. Downplaying the
impact of terrorism on the security of the region and
overplaying other factors impinging on regional peace

22-7320017/18

S/PV.9213

Central African region

08/12/2022

will serve only to distort our understanding of the
problem and, in turn, our responses.

Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda
2063.” (S/2022/896, para. 77)

We take note of the improved maritime security
situation in the Gulf of Guinea, as countries strengthen
regional and international cooperation. We must
continue to remain vigilant and follow through by
bolstering maritime security capabilities in the region,
coupled with providing adequate support to national
strategies to deal with acts of piracy.

An environment with strong democratic institutions,
the rule of law and the administration of justice will
be necessary to achieve those goals. A focus on the
fundamentals is therefore key.

The socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in
the Central African region portrays multidimensional
challenges, underpinned by historical injustices and
exacerbated by development challenges. The impact
of the coronavirus disease pandemic, and now the
protracted Ukraine conflict, is reversing the hard-won
development gains to date. With the rise in prices of
essential commodities and shortages of food, fuel and
fertilizers, basic needs have come under duress. The
sustained attention and support of the international
community will be needed to help those countries to
build back better.
In his report, the Secretary-General points out that
“the most enduring solution to the drivers of
conflict in the region lies in inclusive sustainable
development, within the framework of the 2030

18/18

India has cordial and friendly bilateral relations
with all countries in Central Africa. We have enhanced
our diplomatic presence in the region. Our development
assistance and coordination have been steadfast.
We extended soft loans worth $2 billion for projects
in agriculture, transport, power and water supply
to countries in the region. India’s Duty-Free Tariff
Preference Scheme for Least Developed Countries is
also applicable to several Central African countries.
We will continue to engage proactively with countries
in Central Africa to further peace, security and
development for its people.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

22-73200
