United Nations

S/PV.6353

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6353rd meeting
Tuesday, 6 July 2010, 10.55 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Ms. Čolaković
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mr. Puente
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Mugoya
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. Wolff

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Letter dated 2 July 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Serbia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2010/355)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-43669 (E)

*1043669*

S/PV.6353

The meeting was called to order at 10.55 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of July, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Claude Heller,
Permanent Representative of Mexico to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of June 2010. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Security Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Heller for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council’s
business last month.
Adoption of the agenda

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Zannier to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Yves
de Kermabon for the European Union.

The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Letter dated 2 July 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Serbia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2010/355)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Serbia in which he requests that the
President of the Republic of Serbia be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the President of the Republic of Serbia to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. De Kermabon to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Skender Hyseni.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Hyseni to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in response to document
S/2010/355, which contains a letter dated 2 July 2010
from the Permanent Representative of Serbia to the
United Nations, addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic of Serbia.

I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic
of Serbia, to a seat at the Council table.

President Tadić: I thank you, Madam, for calling
this emergency meeting of the Security Council.

Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic of
Serbia, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Boris
Tadić, President of the Republic of Serbia.

2

Four days ago on Friday morning, close to 3,000
Kosovo Serbs assembled to protest the latest egregious
violation of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999)
by the ethnic Albanian secessionists based in
Pristina — the forcible attempt by these authorities to
establish a so-called Kosovo Government Office in the
Serbian town of North Mitrovica. The Serbs came in

10-43669

S/PV.6353

peace, yet they were met with unprovoked violence.
Two high-intensity bombs were thrown into the crowd.
They came from within courtyards of homes owned by
ethnic Albanian supporters of the 17 February 2008
unilateral declaration of independence (UDI).
The facts that led to this flagrant act of terror —
in which a dozen Serbs were seriously injured and one
local Bosniak Muslim, a paediatrician, was killed —
are clear and indisputable. They are the direct result of
the conscious choice made by provocateurs to expand
the scope of the post-UDI, Pristina-based parallel
institutions to North Kosovo. I repeat — this was done
deliberately in order to increase inter-ethnic tensions
and sabotage the quest for comprehensive peace. It was
yet another destructive consequence of a sinister plan —
sponsored in part by the so-called International
Civilian Office headed by Pieter Feith — to
unilaterally impose an illegal and unwanted regime in
that part of our province. This was done not only
against the will of the Kosovo Serbs, but despite the
opposition
of
the
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the
European Union (EU) Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and other responsible stakeholders, including
the Security Council, which never approved the
blueprint of UDI — the so-called Ahtisaari proposal. It
means that the secessionists continue to blatantly
disregard international law, rejecting the universal
principles of the United Nations Charter. This is
absolutely unacceptable.
We urge the international community to ensure
that nothing like what happened on Friday is ever
repeated, and to make sure that the illegal office in
North Mitrovica remains closed. We call on UNMIK to
make use of its reserved powers under resolution 1244
(1999) and to restore the province’s legitimate legal
framework discarded by the secessionists. We call on
the EU to compel EULEX to exercise its executive
authority and swiftly bring to justice the perpetrators of
all crimes against Kosovo Serbs, the most vulnerable
local community in Europe today. And we call on
NATO to maintain its present troop levels and
exclusive static presence at all Serbian holy sites it
currently protects.
Finally, we call on all responsible stakeholders to
avoid ever again putting themselves in a position of
supporting any additional destabilizing acts by Pristina.
The ethnic Albanian authorities have to be told what
the consequences will be should they try unilateralism

10-43669

again. Otherwise, Serbia will have no choice but to
reassess its relations with the international presence in
the province.
Attempts by Pristina to unilaterally impose any
post-UDI institution on the local Serbian community,
absent the consent of all stakeholders, will not be
tolerated by Serbia — no office, no courthouse, no
telecommunications infrastructure, and no other act of
aggression that is in violation of resolution 1244
(1999).
On 22 January, when I last addressed this Council
(see S/PV.6264), I harshly condemned the illegitimate
strategy that has led us back to the Security Council
today, underlining that it could only be forced upon the
Serbian community in North Kosovo by a draconian,
undemocratic set of measures. Those who announced
and actively supported it — they and they alone —
would have to bear the sole responsibility for the
destabilizing atmosphere such conflict-inciting designs
would obviously produce.
This is exactly what was attempted on Friday. I
derive no satisfaction from this fact. It is incredibly
disappointing that some in Pristina still believe in
unilateralism and that they believe it can ever provide
an answer to any of the open issues we have an
obligation to resolve peacefully. The bottom line is that
the Security Council must not tolerate unilateralism.
Opposing one-sidedness is its fundamental mission. So
let me make myself clearly understood. Differences on
UDI notwithstanding, whoever does not condemn
unilateralism of any sort in Kosovo, as Serbia has, will
be responsible for any future violence, deaths, and acts
of terror that may take place in the province.
We must never forget that the circumstances that
have led us to this point are rooted in the March 2004
pogrom planned and orchestrated by the authorities in
Pristina. In less than 72 hours, 35 Serbian holy sites,
many of them hundreds of years old, were set ablaze
by tens of thousands of ethnic Albanian militants
throughout Kosovo. Nineteen people were killed, 500
were injured, and more than 5,000 Kosovo Serbs were
ethnically cleansed from their homes.
A profoundly terrible consequence arising from
these atrocities committed against Kosovo Serbs was
that they triggered the abandonment of the
international
community’s standards-before-status
approach. Pristina’s violent behaviour was rewarded by
some, and UDI was the result.

3

S/PV.6353

What about today? Will violence be rewarded
again? Will those who show a willingness to commit it
gain further advantage? Is leverage in any discussion to
come proportional to a readiness to engage in it? These
are profound questions that we will have to urgently
address, for how they are answered will contribute to
determining whether the emerging norms of global
governance will favour violence. This is not just about
Kosovo; it is a litmus test about how problems in the
world will be tackled in the decades to come.
“Only on a scrutiny of truth can a future of peace
be built” (A/PV.883, para. 7), Secretary-General Dag
Hammarskjöld said in 1960. The undeniable truth in
this case is that the architects of the flagrant act of
terror in North Mitrovica deserve the denunciation of
this Council and the States Members of the United
Nations, for what happened on Friday illustrates the
ongoing, inherently dangerous consequences of UDI.
The truth about UDI, however uncomfortable it
may be for some to hear, is that it cannot lead to peace
and stability, for peace is the product of agreement, just
as stability is the result of consensus. UDI rejected
them both at the moment of its stillbirth. It has clearly
divided the world and brought into question the
fundamental tenets of the contemporary international
system. That is why, in reality, the stubborn
continuation of attempts to implement UDI can only
produce what everyone responsible must seek to avoid,
namely, a long-term freeze in Kosovo’s limbo.
It is our shared responsibility to find a way to
overcome the present impasse. I want to be very clear
on that. Unilateralism has got us nowhere. It is time to
chart a course towards a secure future for all the
residents of our southern province, for all the citizens
of our country and for all the nations of our region. The
only way to establish stability in Kosovo is to
implement in full the Secretary-General’s six-point
plan — which, let me remind everyone, was welcomed
by the entire Council in November 2008 —
irrespective of Member States’ differing positions on
Pristina’s UDI.
The Secretary-General’s six-point plan therefore
contains the only legitimate framework for working out
a number of delicate practical issues, from the rule of
law to guaranteeing lasting international protection for
Serbian holy sites. It also comprises, among others,
topics
such
as
health
care,
education,
telecommunications, electricity, the privatization of

4

socially owned enterprises, property restitution and the
return of more than 200,000 Kosovo Serb and Roma
internally displaced persons.
No sensible impediment stands in the way of
anyone’s sincerely engaging right away, through the
six-point plan, to find pragmatic arrangements that
would benefit all the residents of the territory. Rapid
breakthroughs in the areas covered by the six-point
plan would help to build much-needed confidence
between the parties. Our number one priority should be
to set the stage for the peace process between Serbs
and Albanians to begin in earnest, and for it to result in
an agreement that everyone can endorse.
The significance of the landmark Kosovo case
before the International Court of Justice must be
restated in this Chamber. It is, after all, the first time
that the Court has been asked to consider the legality of
a unilateral attempt to partition a United Nations
Member State in peacetime, in defiance of its
Constitution and against the will of the Security
Council. It is also the first time all five permanent
members of the Council have participated in a
proceeding before the Court. A record number of
countries have presented their views, making it the
largest case in history.
Accordingly, the Court’s conclusions will have
extensive consequences for the entire United Nations
system. We have strong expectations that the Court will
not legitimize Pristina’s UDI. Any other outcome
would mean that no border anywhere in the world
would remain safe from separatist ambitions. That
would inevitably produce instability in all corners of
the world as the number of ethnic conflicts multiplies.
A substantial majority of Member States and of
countries seated in the Security Council have continued
to abide by their binding obligations under our 1945
Charter and resolution 1244 (1999) to respect Serbia’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. On behalf of my
nation, I would like to reiterate our deep gratitude for
their support. We know that maintaining that position
is not easy for everyone, owing to the pressures that
unfortunately continue to be exerted by those with the
capacity to do so credibly.
But we also know that, tomorrow, some other
country might find itself in a similar situation, and that
the world would then rapidly discover that the rushing
river let loose by Kosovo’s UDI had become an
uncontrolled cascade of secession across the world.

10-43669

S/PV.6353

That is why we strongly urge all non-recognizing
Member States to stay the course.
The International Court of Justice will be
reporting back to the General Assembly in the near
future. Serbia will surely join the great many interested
countries in the ensuing debate. One can reasonably
predict that fundamental concerns about preserving
basic international norms will compel the majority to
encourage the parties to arrive at consensual solutions
on all outstanding issues peacefully and through
dialogue. But let us be frank with each another — there
is no open question in Kosovo that is not related to
status, either directly or indirectly. It is impossible to
think that negotiations on anything can take place
outside that context. We must not ignore this obvious
reality and waste an unprecedented chance to find a
mutually acceptable comprehensive settlement between
Serbs and Albanians.
I am aware of the fact that some powerful voices
are against a consensual solution, but I remain
profoundly puzzled as to why they would reject it out
of hand. There is nothing to be lost by working
together to reach a truly sustainable outcome.
Moreover, it is absolutely clear that no democratic
leadership in Serbia will ever under any circumstances,
implicitly or explicitly, recognize UDI. We have not
consented to it and we never will. That principled
position is set in stone and will not change, come what
may. There are those who expect us to yield eventually.
That will not happen. We will continue to use all the
diplomatic resources at the disposal of a sovereign
State to oppose the unilateral attempt to partition our
country. No peaceful, democratic and proud nation
whose territorial integrity is under threat would act
differently.
I want to be very clear. We will pursue a
compromise with Pristina constructively and in good
faith, as if it had never attempted UDI. But make no
mistake; my country is equally prepared to resist UDI
incessantly for as long as no compromise appears on
the horizon.
This past Friday’s tragedy reminds us of the fear
and violence that are at the heart of unilateralism. But
it can also teach us that the failure of one thing —
UDI — can be repaired by the success of another,
namely, the establishment of harmonious peace
between two vibrant and proud nations, Serbs and
Albanians.

10-43669

I would like to conclude by saying that the time
for anyone to try half-measures devoid of real
imagination or foresight has come to an end. We have
entered a period of consequence and momentous
choices where only results matter. We are determined
to reach a sustainable agreement on the final status of
Kosovo. We have no right to fail in this task. We have
no intention of humiliating anyone. What we seek is a
just status that all parties can embrace. That is the only
way to secure original gains, reinforce shared priorities
and complete the democratic transformation of the
Balkans.
What everyone needs to do is to reject the
extremist voices that find comfort in the old ways and
that believe that it is impossible for Serbs and
Albanians to normalize their relations by reaching a
historic compromise. That has been our vision all
along, because we believe that comprehensive peace is
essential for securing a shared prosperous future in the
European Union.
The President: I thank
President Tadić for his statement.

His

Excellency

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lamberto Zannier, to whom I now give
the floor.
Mr. Zannier: I would like to brief the Council on
recent developments in Kosovo, and in particular on
the incident that took place recently in northern
Mitrovica that tragically led to the death of one person.
The Kosovo authorities decided to inaugurate, on
2 July, a civil services centre in an ethnically mixed
area of northern Mitrovica known as the Bosniak
Mahalla. We understand that the centre would provide
local communities with birth, death and marriage
certificates, identification cards and travel documents
issued by the Kosovo authorities, all of which are
currently provided by offices located in the southern
part of Mitrovica.
At around 8.30 a.m., a large number of Kosovo
Serbs started gathering near the East Bridge in northern
Mitrovica to protest the opening of the centre, which
they claimed not to have been done in consultation
with the local Kosovo Serb community and which, we
understand, is part of the Kosovo authorities’ efforts to
establish their institutions throughout the territory.
Those efforts are opposed by Kosovo Serbs in the
north. Elsewhere, Kosovo Serbs have been making

5

S/PV.6353

increasing use of the services of Kosovo civil registry
offices.
After a siren sounded at 9 a.m., the number of
protesters increased significantly, to about 1,500 to
2,000. The Kosovo police and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) created a
buffer between the protesters and the centre. The
Kosovo Force (KFOR) was also present and ready to
assist if necessary. At 9.50 a.m., several shots were
heard and an explosive device went off close to the
crowd heading towards the centre. Some 600 to 700
people broke through the security cordons and, at about
10 a.m., once they reached the front of the centre,
demanded that the sign bearing the inscription
“Republic of Kosovo, Ministry of Internal Affairs” be
removed from the front of the building. Once the sign
was removed, the protesters began to disperse and, an
hour later, all roads were cleared.
However, as a result of the explosion, 12 people
were injured — seven Kosovo Serb females, four
Kosovo Serb males and one Kosovo Bosniak,
Dr. Mesud Dzeković, who was not participating in the
protest and later died at the hospital while being treated
for his injuries.
At around 2 p.m., the emergency siren sounded
again, calling on residents of northern Mitrovica to
gather to mourn the loss of Dr. Dzeković. The
Belgrade-appointed head of the Kosovska Mitrovica
region, addressing a crowd of up to 3,000 people,
stated that the Kosovo Serbs would continue to protest
the integration of northern Kosovo into Pristina-based
institutions, branded the explosion a terrorist attack
and criticized EULEX’s approach as not being statusneutral.
The evening of 2 July was calm and no incidents
were reported. The victim’s funeral took place on
3 July in northern Mitrovica, with a large gathering and
the participation of the Serbian Minister for Kosovo.
The event passed peacefully. The Kosovo police and
EULEX, which, together with KFOR, are deployed in
the area, continue to investigate the incident in order to
arrest the perpetrators. However, since the incident, the
security situation in northern Kosovo is more tense
than usual. Yesterday morning, a Kosovo Serb member
of the Assembly of Kosovo, Mr. Petar Miletić, was shot
in both legs by unknown assailants outside his house in
northern Mitrovica. His wounds are not life-threatening
and his condition is reported as stable.

6

Following the 2 July incident, I expressed my
deep concern over the violence that occurred and
offered my condolences to the family of the victim. I
called on all sides to refrain from provocative
statements and to remain calm, and on all competent
law enforcement authorities to take urgent measures to
bring the perpetrators to justice. I would like to ask the
Council today to support those messages to the family
of Dr. Dzeković and to the communities in Kosovo, as
well as to Pristina and Belgrade, and to help ensure
that there is no further escalation in the situation in
northern Kosovo.
While both Pristina and Belgrade strongly
condemned the incident and called for the arrest of the
perpetrators, each side has claimed that the other is
responsible for provoking the incident. On the one
hand, the Kosovo authorities called on Belgrade to
distance itself from “such violent acts that are a
product of Belgrade policies” and emphasized that they
would keep the civil services centre open and would
not halt the extension of their institutions into northern
Kosovo. On the other hand, the Serbian Council for
National Security and other Belgrade representatives
blamed Pristina for the incident and branded the
inauguration of the centre as a provocation and a
violation of the principles of the Security Council and
the European Union, “which have not endorsed the socalled strategy for northern Kosovo”.
In that regard, I would like to recall the concern
expressed by the Secretary-General in his latest report
(S/2010/169) over the risk of tensions should the
implementation of policies and strategies for northern
Kosovo not take place in conditions of transparency
and dialogue with local communities and all relevant
stakeholders. I would therefore like to reiterate the
Secretary-General’s call to all sides to commit to
dialogue as a necessary process to address the
challenges faced in northern Kosovo. Events over the
past few days point to the need to initiate that dialogue
as a matter of urgency.
For our part, we will remain engaged with all
sides in order to encourage such dialogue, help defuse
tensions and maintain peace and stability on the
ground, in close coordination with EULEX and KFOR.
The President: I thank Mr. Zannier for his
statement and give the floor to Mr. Yves de Kermabon,
head of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo.

10-43669

S/PV.6353

Mr. De Kermabon (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Security Council for having invited us
here today.
First of all, I would like to condemn the incidents
that took place Friday morning, and in particular the
loss of human life. I also wish to extend my
condolences to the family of Dr. Dzeković.
I would like to start by reminding the Council
that the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) is deployed throughout the whole of
Kosovo, pursuant to the mandate entrusted to it by the
Council of the European Union within the framework
defined by the report of the Secretary-General dated
24 November 2008 (S/2008/692) and welcomed by the
Security Council in its presidential statement of
26 November 2008 (S/PRST/2008/44). This mandate
entrusts the Mission with clear operational
responsibilities, particularly in the maintenance of law
and order.
I would now like to go over the incidents that
have just unfolded in Mitrovica. Following the
decision of the Kosovo institutions to open a branch of
their Ministry of Interior and Local Affairs in the
Bosniak Mahalla neighbourhood of Mitrovica, north of
the Ibar river, the following events took place on
Friday 2 July.
Early
in
the
morning,
Kosovar
Serb
demonstrators gathered near the building to express
their opposition. Local police and EULEX police units
were present. The demonstration took place peacefully,
and the demonstrators handed a petition to the
Ministry’s workers, asking them to close the branch. At
about 10 a.m., an explosion was heard in a parallel
street, around 600 metres from the premises of the
Ministry office. The local police quickly went to the
site and coordinated rescue operations. Some 10 people
were injured, and an eleventh, of Bosniak-Kosovar
origin, died that afternoon after his evacuation to
Mitrovica hospital.
The EULEX Mission has firmly condemned this
act of violence. It turned later out that the explosion
resulted from the detonation of a grenade. It will be
understood that the explosion created a certain amount
of confusion, forcing EULEX to forbid access to the
street leading to the Ministry offices. The situation
rapidly calmed down, with the crowd dispersing early
in the afternoon. The victim’s funeral took place
without incident the following day, attracting a few

10-43669

hundred people, who later dispersed. The situation has
been calm since then.
Unfortunately, yesterday, Monday, a Kosovar
Serb, Mr. Petar Miletić, Secretary-General of the
Independent Liberal Party and a member of the Kosovo
Parliament, sustained a bullet wound. It should also be
emphasized that the Kosovo police, who wanted to
investigate the incident, were forbidden access to
Mitrovica Hospital, in the North of Kosovo, by
Kosovar Serbs, in violation of the proper functioning
of law and order.
Lastly, I should mention that EULEX personnel
have been the target of threats from radical elements in
northern Kosovo that highlight the risks incurred by
those cooperating with the Mission. Such threats are
unacceptable, and I can only condemn them as strongly
as possible. The investigation of Friday’s events is
being led by the local police force from Pristina, with
assistance from EULEX. The Serbian police have
offered to assist in conducting the investigation and the
Mission is cooperating with them.
Members of the Council should know that all
necessary steps have been and will continue to be taken
to arrest the guilty as quickly as possible. Nonetheless,
I should emphasize that the investigation is ongoing
and we therefore cannot go into detail. Certain
allegations that have appeared in the press are based
purely on speculation, and it is important that the
investigation be conducted with the calm that this kind
of situation demands. What is needed from now on is
moderation and restraint.
In conclusion, I emphasize that there has never
been any risk of a general deterioration of the security
situation in the city and even less so in the rest of
Kosovo. EULEX has acted in strict compliance with its
mandate at all times, and will continue to do so with
the support we have thus far enjoyed both from Pristina
and from Belgrade. We are aware of the prevailing
tensions, and I therefore call on the relevant authorities
in Belgrade and Pristina to continue to support us in
implementing our mandate.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skender
Hyseni.
Mr. Hyseni: I appreciate the opportunity to
present the views of my Government on the specific
topic under discussion, but at the same time I also feel
it crucial to react both to some of the points made

7

S/PV.6353

regarding the subject itself and to some of the general
observations made by President Tadić.
The Government of the Republic of Kosovo is the
sovereign Government of an independent State,
determined to exercise its authority throughout the
country and to be as connected as possible to all of its
citizens, regardless of their ethnic or religious
background. It is within that framework, and entirely in
accordance with that line of reasoning, that my
Government decided to establish a local office in
Bosniak Mahalla — a community service centre —
with the sole objective of bringing the most basic
services closer to the average Kosovar.
The establishment of such an office constitutes no
threat to anyone whatsoever, yet on hearing President
Tadić’s statement one could conclude that it does
indeed represent some kind of threat, not to honest
Kosovar citizens but to criminals in the North — the
hardliners who organized the violent protest in
Mitrovica, with the obvious support, unfortunately, of
the authorities in Belgrade. All Kosovars were deeply
saddened by the death of Mr. Dzeković and the injuries
inflicted on the other protesters. My Government is
doing everything it can to investigate the incident, to
find the perpetrators and to bring them to justice.
Kosovo police will work very closely with the
international presence in that part of Kosovo in an
effort to swiftly find out who the perpetrators were and
bring them to justice.
I am not going to rush, to jump to any
conclusions. I am not going to act as prosecutor,
investigator or judge. We heard from President Tadić
that the perpetrators are already known and are,
inevitably, Albanians. And according to President
Tadić, no one else could do such a horrible thing but
Albanians.
We also heard some history today from back in
2004. But unfortunately, President Tadić failed to go
further back in history. If he deems it appropriate to
mention 18 Serb citizens killed in 2004 — which we so
unspeakably regret — he should have mentioned
15,000 Albanians slaughtered in 1999. President Tadić
should have also briefed Council members on the mass
grave recently uncovered in Serbia, with close to 300
bodies of Albanians killed during the war. And those
bodies were taken away to Serbia in an effort to cover
up crimes against humanity.

8

The community office, or community service
centre, is an office of the Government of the Republic
of Kosovo and will remain as such. Kosovo will
continue to work very hard to meet and respond to all
of the requests, concerns and grievances of its Serbian
population.
I wish to specifically invite the attention of the
Council to the recent local election in Partesh
municipality, the youngest of the Serb majority
municipalities. We saw a heavy turnout by the Serb
population for that election — over 65 per cent of that
municipality’s Serb population participated in a very
regular voting.
I have a press statement here from the State
Secretary of the Serbian Ministry for Kosovo,
Mr. Ivanović. I quote, “Participation of over 65 per
cent of the population in this election is something that
worries us”, and he called on Belgrade to do something
about it. It is a crucial moment for the Government of
Serbia to undertake steps, because the situation is
getting out of control. There is a reason why I
specifically took this as an example. I wish to ask a
question: How does a situation become out of control if
decent members of a community participate in a
regular electoral process in an effort to elect their own
representatives?
Our Government office in Mitrovica will
continue to work. It is not illegal. How can acts by a
Government within its own territory be considered
illegal? And to the honourable Council I say that
instead of making any other calls today, there is a
single call that, I believe, would be and should be very
helpful — that is to call on Belgrade to stop
interfering, to stop obstructively manipulating the
Kosovo Serbs just because they wish to work with us,
just because they wish to be part of the progress that
the youngest State in the world is making.
Yes, another very sad event did take place
yesterday. A member of the Kosovo parliament from
the Serb community was wounded by still-unknown
perpetrators. Mr. Petar Miletić is a very honest Kosovo
Serb citizen who is working very hard for the benefit
of his own ethnic community. He, like many other
Kosovo Serbs, chose to work with Kosovo authorities
and to be part of those authorities, with a single
objective, a single aim, a goal — to improve the
conditions of his own ethnic community. Besides that,
he also chairs a community consultative council, a very

10-43669

S/PV.6353

important body within the office of the President of
Kosovo.
It is human beings that have suffered in Mitrovica
this past Friday. I will not reveal much detail of the
investigation. I was on the telephone with the Interior
Minister of the Republic of Kosovo, Mr. Bajram
Rexhepi. The vast investigation is progressing. But
what I can say is that those hand grenades most
probably were thrown from the very crowd, from the
very protestors. This does not make me happy, but it is
just for the sake of stating the facts, because hearing
allegations that Albanian secessionists, Albanian
terrorists, did throw the bombs, without any
investigation having yet taken place, is in the best case,
awkward.
The so-called long line of violent attempts is a
fantasy. If there has been a long line of violence in
northern Kosovo and among other hardline Serbs,
including the burning of Gate 31 and the attacks on the
Mitrovica district court — all of that was done by
hardliners of the Serb community in the north, with the
very obvious support, unfortunately, of the authorities
in Belgrade.
I have a call to make, and it is on President Tadić.
I would ask him, for the sake of the Kosovo Serbs, to
please leave them alone, to work with us for their
benefit, and to talk to us, as authorities of the Republic
of Kosovo, on the many practical issues that would, on
the one side, help relations between our two countries,
and, on the other, have a critical impact on the wellbeing of the Serb community.
No one should reward violence. The members of
the Council should trust me when I say that we
Kosovars would be the last to suggest or advocate
rewarding violence because we have been subject to
violence for decades — for more than a century — and
we know who caused that violence.
The fantastical stories of angels and demons
should stop because there are neither angels nor
demons in the Western Balkans. We continue to hear
how thousands of angels in Bosnia and Kosovo were
killed or, conversely, how thousands of Albanian
angels killed many Serbian demons. These kinds of
stories have to stop for the sake of the future, because
we know who called for violence in the former
Yugoslavia. We all know who caused the violence. We
all know who the first and — in terms of numbers —
the biggest victims were in the former Yugoslavia.

10-43669

I acknowledge that there were victims on all
sides, but if we want to speak of history, let us display
all of history, not only parts of history. I do not think
that would serve the future; quite the opposite, it will
obstruct severely, almost irreparably, the future if we
continue to go back to history repeatedly.
I have just a very short concluding remark. The
International Court of Justice ruling is expected soon. I
wish once again, very loudly, to declare Kosovo’s trust
and conviction that the ruling will be free, fair,
unbiased and just. We have no reason to doubt
international justice. We should avoid even giving the
impression that justice is only good if it is good for me,
because justice is either good or it is not good at all,
for everybody.
Regardless of the Court ruling and the timing of
the ruling, again it is crucial that, first, the Republic of
Serbia cease once and for all its obstructive
interference in Kosovo, because it is severely
undermining our joint efforts — and “joint” means
Kosovo, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo and other international presences — to finally
restore the rule of law throughout Kosovo. The
institutions and Government of Kosovo are very
determined and are not going to give up this goal of
restoring the rule of law everywhere in Kosovo and of
being a Government at the service of every single
citizen of Kosovo.
I thank you, Madam, for the opportunity to
present the views of Kosovo. I regret, however, that
instead of talking today about the future relations
between Kosovo and Serbia, we have heard yet again
that there is no such thing and that the Serbian
Government will never talk to the Kosovo Government
about anything but, as they said, status. That is
regrettable because it is only talks between the
countries on mutual relations and on issues of mutual
interest that can take both countries forward to
European and NATO integration. Kosovo is very
resolved and very determined to pursue the goal of
good-neighbourliness, including with the Republic of
Serbia.
The President: I thank Mr. Hyseni for his
statement.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.

9

S/PV.6353

Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): Please accept
our congratulations, Madam, on your assumption of the
Council presidency for July. I would like to welcome
the President of Serbia, Mr. Boris Tadić; the Foreign
Minister of Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni; the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier; and the head of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), General Yves de
Kermabon, to the Security Council Chamber today.
The United Kingdom regrets the violence that
took place in Mitrovica on 2 July. I would like to
extend our sympathy to the family of Mr. Mesud
Dzeković, who was killed on Friday, and all of those
who were injured, as well as the Kosovan Minister of
Parliament, Mr. Petar Miletić, who was attacked on
Monday.
Last week, the United Kingdom’s Minister for
Europe, David Lidington, visited Mitrovica to meet
representatives of the local communities. I would like
to underline his statement that there can be absolutely
no place in Kosovo for violence as a means to secure
political objectives. Nevertheless, let me also take a
moment to mark the substantial progress that Kosovo
has made since its independence in 2008. As the
Secretary-General has noted in his two most recent
reports (S/2010/5 and S/2010/169), there has been an
overall decrease in the number of security incidents.
We note General De Kermabon’s assessment that in the
past few days there has never been a risk of a general
deterioration of the security situation, either in
Mitrovica or in the rest of Kosovo.
We welcome the prompt action of the Kosovo
police and EULEX in responding to last Friday’s
incident. We call on them to undertake their
investigation thoroughly, fairly and swiftly to identify
the perpetrators and bring them to justice. While the
investigation is under way, all parties should refrain
from speculation about the identities of those who may
have committed this crime. The investigation must be
allowed the space necessary to establish the facts. All
parties should refrain from making any provocative
statements or taking actions that might cause the
current calm but tense atmosphere to deteriorate again.
The United Kingdom supports the valuable work
that EULEX is doing in Kosovo. It is important that
Belgrade and Pristina continue to cooperate with
EULEX so that the rule of law and higher standards of

10

governance and justice can be delivered to all of
Kosovo’s communities.
The main peaceful protest that took place last
Friday was against the opening of an office in North
Mitrovica that will issue documents, such as driving
licences and identity cards, to the citizens who are
resident there. The United Kingdom entirely supports
the right of citizens to peaceful protests, but we would
also underline that all citizens of Kosovo have a right
to expect that such public services be available to
them. Claims by President Tadić that the Government
of Kosovo should bear responsibility for Friday’s
events because of its decision to open the community
services centre or that the international civilian
representative should do so because he supported that
decision are plainly unjustified. It was a criminal act
and the individuals responsible for it must be held to
account.
The United Kingdom strongly encourages deeper
cooperation between Belgrade and Pristina and echoes
the Secretary-General’s call for flexibility and
pragmatism in finding solutions. Last Friday’s incident
reinforces the need for all parties to work together,
through dialogue and with transparency, in the interests
of all communities in Kosovo. We urge all parties to
concentrate their efforts on dialogue and cooperation.
We remain committed to working with Kosovo, Serbia
and the wider international community in promoting
stability, reconciliation, regional cooperation and
economic progress so that both countries can advance
towards an European Union perspective in parallel
with their neighbours. Continued disagreement over
status issues will only serve as a distraction from
achieving that important strategic objective.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation actively supported
Serbia’s initiative to convene an urgent Security
Council meeting on the deteriorating situation in
Kosovo. It has come about because of the explosion in
northern Mitrovica on 2 July during a peaceful
demonstration by local Serbs. As is well known, owing
to that terrorist act, one person died and 11 were
injured. We condemn that crime with the utmost
resolve. We extend our condolences to the bereaved
families and friends of the deceased and to all those
who were injured.
In his statement before the Security Council
today, the President of Serbia, Mr. Tadić, spelled out

10-43669

S/PV.6353

Serbia’s accurate assessment of the events and the
situation in the province as a whole. We share that
view. As recently as May this year, during the
Council’s discussion (see S/PV.6314) of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2010/169) on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
we drew the international community’s attention to the
fact that the situation in the province was far from
stable and that it was of particular concern.
Above all, our concerns were related to the
Pristina
authorities’
insistence
on
somehow
implementing the so-called strategy for northern
Kosovo in brazen breach of resolution 1244 (1999),
which remains the main international legal platform for
a Kosovo settlement. Like our Serbian colleagues, we
warned that any unilateral steps in that direction could
undermine the very complex national situation in the
province in the midst of growing discontent with the
socio-economic situation and a high level of crime and
corruption. Regrettably, such warnings were not
heeded.
On 2 July, despite the protest of the local Serbian
population, the Kosovo authorities, with the support of
some representatives of the international community,
including the Special Representative of the European
Union and the so-called international civilian
representative, Mr. Feith, there was an attempt to open
a branch of the provisional institutions of Kosovo in
northern Mitrovica. That was an act of brazen
provocation aimed at undermining stability in the areas
of the province populated by Serbs.

international presence. We again call on EULEX to
comply with the principles of resolution 1244 (1999)
and to act in a balanced way, mindful of the interests of
both sides, under the central coordinating role of
UNMIK. We call on Brussels to monitor that closely
and to rectify the actions of its representative,
Mr. Feith. It is high time for EULEX and UNMIK, as
well as those capitals that have influence over Pristina,
to engage in serious clarifications with the Pristina
authorities. Today’s provocative statement by
Mr. Hyseni merely reaffirms and confirms that need.
The complex and often explosive situation in
Kosovo confirms the need to preserve the Security
Council’s leading role in a Kosovo settlement. We
consider any deviation from that principle
unacceptable lest the fragile situation in the province
descend into widespread destabilization. The events to
which I have referred underscore the need for
continued political efforts to help develop a legally
correct and fair resolution of the Kosovo issue in line
with resolution 1244 (1999). Russia will continue to
work towards that.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Zannier and Mr. De Kermabon for the
details that they have provided on the incident that
occurred in Kosovo at the end of last week. I welcome
the President of the Republic of Serbia. I also welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Kosovo and thank him for his statement.

We have received information that plans are
under way for other similar destabilizing steps. All
necessary measures should be taken to prevent such
provocation. We believe that those who should be
brought to justice must include not only the
perpetrators of those barbaric crimes, but also those
who in fact provoked them through their obstinate and
cavalier actions seeking to promote the strategy for
northern Kosovo. We are awaiting information from
the head of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) on how the investigation will be
conducted.

The explosion that happened on Friday morning
in Mitrovica took one person’s life and injured several
others. France condemns that act. We ask that the
authorities do everything necessary to find those who
were responsible and ensure that they are brought to
justice. As General De Kermabon explained to us, an
inquiry is under way and it is still too early to draw
conclusions about what happened. I welcome the
professionalism and the efficiency shown by the
Kosovo police and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) at the time of such
events. We call on all those who can respond in some
way to cooperate with the Kosovo police and EULEX
to enable them to successfully carry out their inquiry.

The incident in northern Mitrovica clearly
showed that, despite the Security Council’s mandate
concerning the reconfiguration of UNMIK, EULEX is
increasingly departing from the status-neutral
principle, which undermines the standing of that

As serious and condemnable as that event may
be, it is an isolated one. The situation in Kosovo
remains stable, thanks in particular to the presence of
EULEX and the efforts being made for several months
by local authorities to engage the various communities

10-43669

11

S/PV.6353

in a constructive dialogue. In that regard, we welcome
the fact that EULEX, acting strictly in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999), can continue to fully play its
role.
The vast majority of the population wants to live
in peace, including in Mitrovica. The role of the
international community and the parties directly
involved must be to ensure that such incidents do not
recur and that they are dealt with calmly and
professionally so that the inhabitants of Kosovo can
live the normal life to which they all aspire. We believe
that using such events politically should be avoided.
That does not contribute to the peace.
As we regularly do, we call on Serbs and
Kosovars to renew dialogue and to focus their efforts
on finding pragmatic solutions to the population’s real
problems. The European Mission plays a key role in
facilitating that dialogue, which I welcome. We hope
that one day Serbia and Kosovo will both be part of the
European Union. That future is being prepared today.
We call on politicians to strive towards that goal on the
basis of the realities, because only by acknowledging
the realities will accession to the European Union be
possible. Denial leads nowhere. We call on the parties
to avoid that impasse.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Madam President,
for convening today’s meeting. I would also like to
welcome His Excellency President Boris Tadić of
Serbia to today’s meeting, as well as to thank
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing. I have also listened
carefully to the statements by Mr. Hyseni and Mr. De
Kermabon.
Last Friday there was a mass incident of
explosions in North Mitrovica that resulted in human
causalities. We condemn such an act of terrorist
violence and would like to express our profound
sympathy with and condolences to the families of the
victims. It is our hope that the parties concerned will
make concerted efforts to ensure the stabilization of the
situation on the ground and the safeguarding of the
legitimate interests of all ethnic communities. The
parties concerned should at once initiate an
investigation into this incident and bring the
perpetrators to justice in order to avoid any repetition
of such incidents.

12

The situation in Kosovo remains delicate and
complex, and it has a bearing on the peace and stability
of the Balkans and of Europe as a whole. The Chinese
position on the issue of Kosovo has been consistent
and clear-cut. We respect and support the maintenance
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia and
support the Government and people of Serbia in their
endeavour to achieve the goals of long-lasting peace,
stability and prosperity.
It is obvious that the best way to solve the
Kosovo problem is to reach a settlement acceptable to
both parties through their negotiations. Unilateral
actions will not only be unhelpful in solving the
problem but will instead complicate the situation,
negatively impacting the peace and stability of the
region.
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) remains
the legal basis for solving the Kosovo problem, and
thus it should be honoured. We support the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in its continued implementation of its
mandate in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999). It
is our hope that UNMIK will give its attention to the
causes of this incident and take corresponding
measures to address the situation. The parties
concerned should continue to support UNMIK in the
conduct of its work.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Let me
also join others in congratulating you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency for
this month. I also wish to thank Mr. Zannier and
General De Kermabon for their comprehensive
briefings and to welcome President Tadić and Foreign
Minister Hyseni back and thank them for their
statements.
We regret the tragic death of Dr. Mesud
Dzeković, an ethnic Bosnian pediatrician, and the
injuries to several others that occurred on 2 July in
North Mitrovica related to the opening by the
Government of Kosovo of a citizens’ services centre
there. We echo the calls for calm and restraint made by
the Government of Kosovo, and we join in condemning
violence and the threat of violence. We urge all parties
to avoid any escalation of tensions.
As we learn more about the incidents that led to
the loss of life and to injuries, it is becoming clear that
this was an isolated criminal act, not a planned act of
terrorism. We urge local law enforcement authorities,

10-43669

S/PV.6353

including those from the Kosovo police and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), to continue to investigate the incident and to
ensure that those who are responsible for criminal acts
are held accountable. We welcome the assistance
offered by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in responding to
the incident.
We frankly do not see that an isolated criminal
act such as the one on 2 July warrants an emergency
meeting of the Security Council. The President of
Serbia has asked for this urgent meeting to discuss the
serious deterioration of the security situation, but if we
are to discuss that situation, we should also discuss the
threats and intimidation against ethnic Serb citizens of
Kosovo, such as Petar Miletić, who was shot on 5 July,
as we heard, and was reportedly accused of being a
traitor by the perpetrator. If we are to condemn
provocations, then we should also condemn the
provocation by a senior Serbian Government official
calling any Kosovo Serb who supports the Kosovo
Government an accomplice to Albanian terrorists.
Let me repeat what President Tadić mentioned in
his statement, something we wholeheartedly agree
with. He said that what everyone needs to do is to
reject the extremist voices who find comfort in the old
ways. In that way, it would be good to hear President
Tadić also denounce the 5 July incident and the
extremist statement by a member of his Government.
The decision by the Government of Kosovo to
open a citizens’ service centre was the right one, and
one that is within its prerogative as an independent and
sovereign State recognized by many in this room and
beyond. Recognizing the delicate balance among
minority communities in the north, the Government of
Kosovo opened the centre in a low-key,
non-provocative and transparent manner. The opening
was also part of a larger strategy, endorsed by all of
Kosovo’s communities and by members of the
international community, to extend the benefits of
good, accountable and legitimate government to all of
Kosovo’s citizens, including its citizens in the north. It
is our understanding that, in a spirit of transparency,
the Government of Serbia was informed in advance of
the opening of the centre.
It is unfortunate that the efforts of the
Government of Kosovo to assist those most in need in
the north were subsequently disrupted by attempts to
politicize the citizens’ services centre and destabilize

10-43669

the situation in northern Kosovo. We must also
emphasize that any violence and provocative actions
by demonstrators are also unacceptable.
The 2 July incident is representative of the
continuing underlying tensions that exist in the north
and the continuing need to strengthen the rule of law
and protections for all communities there. In that
regard the Kosovo police and EULEX must continue
their work and use the resources at their disposal to
ensure that those who would use violence or the threat
of violence do not succeed in destabilizing the region.
Finally, we urge the Governments of Serbia and
Kosovo to work together as neighbours in order to
foster further regional stability and to prevent further
violence.
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Madam President, for
your kind comments to my Ambassador, Ambassador
Claude Heller, regarding the manner in which he
served as Council President in June and by wishing
you every success during the month of July. I also wish
to endorse what other delegations have said in
welcoming the President of the Republic of Serbia,
Mr. Boris Tadić; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier; and Mr. De Kermabon,
representative of the European Union and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo; and of course
Mr. Skender Hyseni.
My delegation would like to begin by expressing
its regret over the violent inter-ethnic incidents in
recent months in the northern region of Kosovo,
including those in recent days. Since last May we have
indicated our concern to this Council, because those
acts involve violations of the human rights of the
civilian population and have led to the loss of innocent
lives. We also wish to express our concern that the
recurrence of those incidents could lead to an unstable
situation in the region, which would make it difficult to
reach a peaceful solution to the situation of Kosovo,
one acceptable to both parties.
For Mexico, the stability and development of
Kosovo and the region depend on reconciliation
between the communities. That is why we support the
work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to facilitate dialogue and
cooperation between the parties, the local communities
and the relevant international and regional

13

S/PV.6353

organizations, in conformity with resolution 1244
(1999).
We would like to reiterate in that respect the
importance of the Security Council exhorting the
parties to respect international law, abstain from any
act of provocation that could increase the tension or
violence, and promote efforts to bring about an
environment of calm, stability and political dialogue,
an environment of tolerance and reconciliation. That is
very important, particularly to avoid tensions before
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice.
We are convinced that a lasting solution to the
status of Kosovo must respect international law,
including resolution 1244 (1999). That resolution
continues to be the legal framework for bringing about
that solution, and that is why the United Nations is the
main forum in which to promote it, through dialogue
and in collaboration with regional organizations such
as the European Union and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
In my delegation’s opinion, in order to prevent
new outbreaks of violence and instability in the
northern Kosovo, it remains essential that the process
of reconciliation be accompanied by policies that are
aimed at guaranteeing the socio-economic stability of
the communities in a non-discriminatory manner. It is
especially important to bring the perpetrators of the
acts of the past few days to justice once the
investigations into the case have been concluded.
With regard to Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of
independence, we remain alert for the advisory opinion
to be issued by the Court. We consider it essential to
use all of the mechanisms for the peaceful solution of
disputes in order to arrive at agreements on the final
status of Kosovo that will guarantee the political,
economic and social development and thus respect for
the human rights of all its inhabitants.
The delegation of Mexico firmly believes that all
of the parties have the capacity to overcome past
divisions and create a new environment that will make
possible future solutions based on international law.
We hope that peaceful and constructive dialogue will
bring about mutually acceptable solutions that will
promote the stability of Kosovo and the Balkans
region.

14

Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council and assure you of the full cooperation and
support of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would also like
to express our appreciation to Ambassador Heller and
his delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the work of the Security Council during
the month of June.
I would like to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), and General De
Kermabon for their briefings. I would also like to
welcome the participation in today’s meeting of the
President of Serbia, Mr. Boris Tadić, as well as
Mr. Skender Hyseni.
Bosnia and Herzegovina condemns the tragic
event that occurred in the town of Mitrovica on 2 July
2010, in which one person was killed and 11 others
were wounded. We regret the loss of life, and we wish
to express our deepest condolences and sympathies to
the families and friends of the victims. Furthermore,
we would like to call for an investigation into the
incident and for those who are responsible to be
brought to justice. We wish to appeal to the parties to
act in a responsible manner and refrain from
provocation so that peace may prevail.
Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly encourages the
continuation of the process of reconciliation, dialogue
and confidence-building, facilitated and mandated by
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic of Serbia,
and thank him for his statement. I thank Mr. Lamberto
Zannier for his briefing, and I also appreciate the
additional comments and information provided by the
representative of the European Union. I thank
Mr. Hyseni for his remarks.
We deeply deplore the incident of 2 July in the
city of Mitrovica, which resulted in one tragic death
and the injury of several other people. We extend our
condolences to the bereaved family of the deceased,
and we join in condemning violence and calling for
restraint. We expect appropriate measures to fully
investigate the incident and to bring those responsible
to justice.

10-43669

S/PV.6353

Although the overall security situation in Kosovo
remains largely calm, the risk of ethnic tensions in the
north has increased after this tragic incident. All
concerned must ensure that Kosovo is a place where
ethnic tolerance and multiculturalism allow for
peaceful coexistence among communities.
It should be remembered that resolution 1244
(1999) remains in force and therefore continues to be
the key parameter guiding the international community
concerning the situation in Kosovo. That position was
expressed by Brazil in the public hearings conducted at
the International Court of Justice in December 2009, as
part of the proceedings related to the advisory opinion
on the unilateral declaration of independence by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo.
As the Security Council continues to be seized of
the matter, the opinion of the Court, possibly later this
year, will be a crucial element to bear in mind. Until
such time, UNMIK should continue to play its
constructive role in promoting engagement between
Pristina and Belgrade. We expect both parties to
cooperate fully with the Mission. Success in this area
will benefit all.
In this case, our collective duty is to ensure that
every minority community can be protected from
threats or acts of intimidation and harassment. We join
the Secretary-General’s call to all sides to commit to
dialogue, to help diffuse tensions and to keep peace
and stability in the region.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first thank
you and your country, Madam President, on assuming
the presidency of the Council and thank the delegation
of Mexico for their outstanding work last month. We
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zannier and General De Kermabon for their
comprehensive briefings. We also thank His
Excellency President Tadić and His Excellency Foreign
Minister Hyseni for their statements. We have listened
to them very carefully.
Like other speakers before us, and in line with the
statement made by High Representative Ashton, we
condemn the act that led to the death of Mr. Dzeković
and the injury of several others during the protests in
North Mitrovica on 2 July. We call on the Kosovo
police to investigate that deplorable incident with the
support of European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and to bring those responsible to
justice. We expect all parties to fully cooperate in this

10-43669

effort. We would like to express our gratitude and
appreciation for the professional work of EULEX and
the International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR).
We do not believe that the incident that we have
been informed about today constitutes a threat to
international peace and security, and what General De
Kermabon has said to us about the security situation
confirms this evaluation. At the same time, the latest
events clearly show the importance of the presence of
EULEX in northern Kosovo in order to avoid a further
deterioration of the security situation. Austria fully
supports the efforts of the European Union Mission to
exercise its mandate, including in northern Kosovo, in
full conformity with resolution 1244 (1999).
We call on all sides to refrain from any escalation
and to ease the existing tensions. We are quite aware of
the continuing fundamental disagreement between
Belgrade and Pristina on the status issue, and the
position of my Government and my country on this
matter is known. But we do not believe that this
disagreement can or should preclude sustained efforts
by all parties — and let me repeat, by all parties —
towards greater stability, a peaceful dialogue and
pragmatic solutions. That kind of pragmatic dialogue is
exactly what is needed today in Kosovo and in the
region, and that kind of dialogue also includes the need
for increased cooperation by all sides with EULEX and
the other international actors in Kosovo. Let me
underline that that dialogue would also be in the
interest of the European perspective of the entire
region, as well as of its constituent parts.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to associate myself with previous
speakers and congratulate you, Madam President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month, and to thank the delegation of Mexico for its
presidency last month.
I should also like to welcome President Boris
Tadić of Serbia and thank him for his statement. I also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Lamberto Zannier and General De Kermabon of the
European Union for their briefings, and Mr. Skender
Hyseni for his statement.
On 17 May, we heard a briefing from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo (see
S/PV.6314) on the latest developments in the province.
He informed us that the situation remained fragile,
given the interruption in the dialogue and

15

S/PV.6353

reconciliation process and the absence of solutions to a
number of sensitive issues, notably missing persons,
property, public services and the economy. We had
hoped for positive developments and the resumption of
dialogue to reduce tensions in northern Kosovo.
However, the bombing that took place in North
Mitrovica on Friday, which killed one person and
injured 10, has dashed those hopes. We are further
concerned about the armed attack that took place
yesterday against Mr. Petar Miletić, a member of
Parliament. Lebanon strongly condemns these attacks
and all acts of violence in Kosovo. We reiterate our call
for calm and for all parties to act responsibly and to
refrain from any act that could lead to the escalation of
tension and violence.
In that context, we stress the importance of the
role of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo in facilitating national
reconciliation and consolidating security. Lebanon also
stresses the need to promote conditions conducive to
reducing tensions and invites Belgrade and Pristina to
resume constructive and direct dialogue to prevent any
deterioration of the security situation. We urge all
influential parties in northern Kosovo to assist and
encourage local communities to resume dialogue
towards resolving sensitive issues, given their
detrimental impact on the security of Kosovo and the
Balkan region.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I wish you every success in your presidency,
Madam, and assure you of the support of my
delegation. I also thank the delegation of Mexico for its
successful presidency in June.
I shall be extremely brief. Allow me first to echo
previous speakers in welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Boris Tadić, President of the Republic of Serbia,
and in thanking him for his statement. I also thank
Mr. De Kermabon and Mr. Zannier for their comments.
Like the rest of the world, my delegation learned
of the unfortunate events in northern Kosovo on Friday
that led to one death and numerous injuries. My
delegation firmly condemns such violence and extends
its condolences to the families of the deceased
pediatrician. We are gratified that all have condemned
these events and that the necessary inquiries are under
way.

The incident of Friday, 2 July, arose from the
prevailing situation in Kosovo, in particular the tension
among communities emerging, inter alia, from the
issue of Kosovo’s status. My delegation reiterates in
that regard its well-known position by reaffirming its
support for the international process aimed at securing
the national sovereignty of the territory. We seek a
settlement based on resolution 1244 (1999) and support
the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. Gabon also
strongly favours dialogue and cooperation, which are
essential to resolving the situation in Kosovo. We also
feel that the Secretary-General’s six-point plan is an
important contribution to the search for a negotiated
solution to the problem of Kosovo.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I wish to start by
congratulating you, Madam, on having assumed the
presidency of the Council for the month of July. I also
thank Ambassador Heller and the delegation of Mexico
for having ably presided over the Council during the
month of June.
I welcome His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadić,
President of the Republic of Serbia, and thank him for
his statement. I thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Lamberto Zannier for his briefing on
the situation in northern Kosovo. I also thank Mr. De
Kermabon of the European Union and Mr. Hyseni for
their statements.
We condemn the recent bombing attack in North
Mitrovica and deplore the resulting of loss of life and
injuries. It is important that the perpetrators of these
acts be brought to justice in order to prevent their
recurrence and to foster a sense of community among
the communities. We encourage all sides to remain
calm and to avoid any action that could exacerbate the
fragile security situation any further. We also call on
the parties to exercise restraint, mutual respect and
tolerance in the interest of peace.
It is important for the authorities in Kosovo to
desist from taking any unilateral action in northern
Kosovo that is of a provocative nature and could
further aggravate the situation. There is a need to
ensure adequate protection of the lives and property of
the minority populations in northern Kosovo. We call
on all the relevant players in the region to play their
part in promoting and safeguarding peace.
We welcome the continuing efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo to

16

10-43669

S/PV.6353

promote security and stability in Kosovo and the entire
region. We also commend the Mission for its work in
encouraging reconciliation and facilitating dialogue.
However, the recent incidents are a reminder of the
need for the parties to commit themselves to dialogue
and the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

presidency, and to thank the delegation of Mexico for
its excellent work in the previous month. I welcome
President Boris Tadić of Serbia and to thank him for
his statement. I also wish to welcome Foreign Minister
Hyseni of Kosovo and to thank Special Representative
Zannier and Mr. De Kermabon for their briefings.

Mr. Çorman (Turkey): I would like to
congratulate you, Madam, and the Nigerian Mission on
assuming the presidency of the Council for July. I also
thank the Mexican Mission for the excellent way in
which it conducted the presidency last month.

First of all, I would like to express my
condolences over the loss of life and to convey my
sympathy to the injured in the violence in North
Mitrovica. Japan condemns that violent act. Such
cowardly action hampers the ongoing effort to improve
security and strengthen the rule of law in Kosovo with
the support of the international community. Every
effort must be made to prevent the recurrence of such
attacks. It is important that the due process of law be
brought to bear against those responsible for this
criminal attack.

I would like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Boris Tadić, President of Serbia, and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, His Excellency
Mr. Skender Hyseni. I would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zannier and
General De Kermabon for their briefings.
We condemn the use of violence last week in
northern Kosovo, which caused the death of one person
and left several wounded. We express our condolences
to the family of the deceased and our sympathies to the
wounded. We call on all parties to refrain from making
provocative statements that could further escalate the
violence in the region.
A new era will start with the announcement of the
consultative opinion of the International Court of
Justice, and we hope that the parties will seize this new
opportunity to solve their problems through dialogue.
In this sense, we deem it necessary to prevent violent
actions on the ground that could jeopardize dialogue
among the parties. It is therefore crucial to elucidate
last week’s incident and to find the perpetrators. In the
same vein, it is of the utmost importance that the
international police and troops in Kosovo remain
vigilant and continue to monitor the situation carefully
in order to prevent an outbreak of violence.
In conclusion, let me underline that Turkey
attaches great importance to the security and wellbeing of all the communities in Kosovo. It is of vital
importance that all individuals in Kosovo feel safe and
secure. Bosniak Mahalla is a multiethnic world that
constitutes a small-scale illustration of ordinary life in
Kosovo. As such, all necessary measures should be
taken for the security of the Bosniaks, Turks, Albanians
and Serbs living there.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I, too, would like to
congratulate you, Madam, on your assumption of the

10-43669

At the same time, we are pleased to note that the
overall security situation is calm. We hope that the
Government of Kosovo will continue to stabilize
security and improve the rule of law in the territory, in
cooperation
with
United
Nations
Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission and the Kosovo Force.
Enhancing security and the rule of law is important to
the stabilization and development of both Kosovo and
the entire region. It is essential for all parties to tackle
those challenges through dialogue and cooperation. We
urge both Pristina and Belgrade to engage in
constructive dialogue and address the challenges so as
to enhance the lives of all of Kosovo’s residents.
In my view, the human security approach is the
most pertinent thing when we talk and think about the
people of Kosovo, because it aims at creating
conditions in which every individual, irrespective of
ethnic group, is entitled and given an opportunity to
live a peaceful, secure and dignified life. With that
approach in mind, Japan will continue to cooperate to
achieve sustainable economic development and
peaceful coexistence among the diverse ethnicities in
Kosovo, including in the northern provinces.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Nigeria.
I would like join those who have already
welcomed His Excellency President Boris Tadić and
thanked him for his statement to the Council. I also
thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Mr. De Kermabon and
Mr. Hyseni for their briefings.

17

S/PV.6353

The recent incident in Mitrovica that resulted in
loss of life and several injuries was indeed regrettable.
We urge all parties to act with restraint and to avoid
provocative actions or pronouncements that may
trigger further violence.
There is a need to sustain efforts at building
confidence among communities. In that context, we
call on all parties to engage assiduously in promoting
reconciliation and a peaceful settlement of pending
issues through the time-tested principles of
compromise and mutual respect.
We reiterate that issues related to northern
Kosovo and Kosovo in general should be addressed
through peaceful means and close cooperation and
coordination between all actors. In that regard, we urge
all countries of the region, relevant stakeholders and
the international community to commit to efforts
towards the peaceful settlement of the Kosovo issue.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The President of the Republic of Serbia has asked
for the floor to make a further statement. I give him the
floor.
President Tadić: I would like to express my
gratitude for the statements I have heard here today in
the Security Council, including those by Mr. Zannier,
Mr. De Kermabon and the Ambassadors of Member
States represented here.
In reference to the statement by Mr. Hyseni, I
would say that a few ethnic groups have lived together
for centuries in Kosovo and continue to do so today,
including Albanians, Serbs, Turks, Bosniaks, Romas
and Egyptians. Many peoples live in Kosovo today,
and in the Balkans in general. Those proud nations
have lived next to each other for centuries. There have
been oscillations in our relations throughout history,
but I respect all peoples and nations living in the
Balkans today, including in my country of Serbia and
in our southern province.
But I do not know about the so called Kosovar
identity. That is a new creation. I am sure that, if so
called Kosovars are living under a new identity in other
parts of Kosovo, they are not living in communities in
which Serbs are the majority. That is especially the
case in the northern part of Kosovo. Ethnic Serbs
citizens of Serbia are living in Kosovo. They do not
recognize the illegal unilateral attempt at cessation by

18

ethnic Albanian citizens of Kosovo. Let us be very
clear — the Security Council continues to support the
position against the unilateral declaration of
independence. Resolution 1244 (1999) is still our legal
framework. Kosovo is therefore not a State. It has no
sovereignty. This is not only Serbia’s position or that of
the majority of the States Members of the United
Nations; it is the position of the Security Council.
Mr. Hyseni should accept that reality once and for all.
To my great regret, the representative of the
United States has just supported the establishment of
the Pristina office in North Mitrovica, saying “it was
the right thing to do”. That is disappointing. Everyone
knows that the office is unwanted by Kosovo Serbs;
everyone knows that this was a provocation; and
everyone knows that it will not contribute to stability
on the ground. Yet, it was supported. This means that
“proving” Kosovo’s so called sovereignty is more
important than restoring stability. Now I know the
position, and I am greatly worried because of it, but I
will continue to pursue a policy of peace and to pledge
our commitment to finding a compromise solution to
Kosovo’s future status.
Some have mentioned history and 1989. I am
very sorry about what happened in 1989. We could go
back even further in history, to 1973, 1968 and 1941,
but that would get us nowhere — like the unilateral
declaration of independence, which was the
consequence of the 2004 pogrom. So let me make a
fundamental distinction between the sovereign State I
represent and the authorities in Pristina.
We prosecute our criminals. Those who
committed atrocities in 1999 are brought to justice.
Mass graves are uncovered and those who are
responsible for them will go to jail. Some of them are
already in jail. But no one went to jail for the hate
crimes and ethnic cleansing of 2004. No one was held
responsible by the ethnic Albanian authorities. The
violence was seen as acceptable. It is a legacy of the
Kosovo Liberation Army’s value of terror that surfaced
yet again on Friday. That needs to be condemned.
By definition, a community service centre that
has been established against the will of the community
itself is a clear act of aggression — an illegitimate act.
So let me ask a simple question. What would happen if
the Republic of Serbia established its own community
service centre in Pristina to issue Serbian passports to
the massive number of Kosovar Albanians who are

10-43669

S/PV.6353

asking for Serbian passports even today? Would the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and Kosovo
police special units defend such an office? Would
KFOR and EULEX assist us? I am sure that they would
not.
We have to have consistent policies. We have to
take into consideration both points of view, and we
have to be very careful in order to find a real
compromise solution that would bring peace and
stability to the region.
Serbia is committed to continuing such efforts in
order to create a stable and prosperous region. Serbia
respects all Serbian citizens and all people living in the
region. We are pursuing such efforts, and I hope that, at
the end of the day, we will all be together in the
European Union. But before that, we have to find a real
compromise solution in which both sides get
something. It is not a compromise solution when one
side gets everything and the other side — Serbia —
loses everything.
The President: Mr. Hyseni has asked for the
floor to make a further statement. I now give him the
floor.
Mr. Hyseni: I would like to make a brief
explanation. Kosovo is composed of the ethnic groups
that make it up. Regardless of whether one is Albanian,
Serb, Turk, Bosnian or Egyptian, we sometimes refer
to them as Kosovars. This refers to the name of the
land, of the country, not by the name of the ethnic
group. So there is nothing wrong with referring to a
Kosovo citizen as a Kosovar. I do not see anything
wrong in that. Otherwise, speaking along ethnic lines,
Kosovo is composed of the ethnic groups that we all
know.
The community service centre is not Pristina’s
office. It is an office of the Republic of Kosovo in
Bosniak Mahalla that has been opened after profound
deliberations and profound assessments of need to offer
citizens in the North the services they need. Again, I can
assure the Council that the opening of this community
service centre is directed against nobody; it is aimed at
serving every single citizen in that part of Kosovo.
We have heard again about terror on Friday. What
we saw on Friday was an isolated criminal act that
occurred amidst a protest rally — an apparently quite
violent protest rally — with, evidently, a number of

10-43669

well-armed protesters. That is what the investigation
will show at the end of the day. But let us wait for the
conclusion of the investigation.
This violent protest rally was organized to further
the aim of undermining any positive process in that
part of Kosovo. I have to emphasize once again that,
unfortunately, it was organized with the backing and
support of the authorities in Belgrade, who offer
overwhelming support for the hardliners in the North
of Kosovo.
Serbia is welcome to work with us as two
sovereign and neighbouring States. I am certain that
the day will come when the two countries will work
together for the benefit of peace in the Western
Balkans and for the benefit of the European perspective
of all seven countries of the Western Balkans. I am not
certain when that will occur, but I am also very
confident that the day will come when the Republic of
Serbia will have an embassy in Kosovo.
I do not expect that to happen tomorrow or the
day after tomorrow. But I am confident that the day
will come that it will happen. There is no other way
forward but by mutual recognition — if not official,
formal recognition now, at least practical recognition
that Kosovo does exist; and that roughly 2.5 million
Kosovars — we will take a census soon and see how
many we are — of Albanian, Serb, Turk, Bosnian and
Egyptian ethnicity, and so on and so forth, do exist in
our country, just as they do in Serbia with its
honourable citizenry in Serbia.
Therefore, I am not willing to talk about history.
The Council can rest assured that many in Kosovo like
to refer to history in order to not forget what happened,
so that the future is not a repetition of the past.
Otherwise, we are not willing to refer to history
because we have suffered so much, and everybody who
has paid close attention to the history of our part of the
world is aware of the immense suffering of the
Albanian population there in the first place.
The former Yugoslavia is gone for good, and not
because of us. If it had depended on us, it might still be
there. It is gone because of the efforts of the Republic
of Serbia to put everyone else under its domination —
all its constituent units, and Kosovo was a constituent
unit of the Federation — with the right of veto at the
federal level. Whatever the Council hears these days
about how it is only the Republic of Serbia that still

19

S/PV.6353

cherishes the values of the Non-Aligned Movement, I
can assure it that that is not true.

establish peace, safety and security throughout the
Western Balkans.

In conclusion, that is why I call on all members
of the Security Council to exercise their influence so
that Kosovo receives further recognition as an
independent and sovereign State. By recognizing
Kosovo, in the long run the Council will help to

The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present state of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

20

The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

10-43669
