S/PV.8818

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8818th meeting

Tuesday, 13 July 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Roscoe
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Phan

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2021/603)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-18873 (E)
*2118873*

Colombia

S/PV.8818

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2021/603)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Colombia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez, Vice-President and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and I request the
Protocol Officer to escort her to her seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, and Ms. Melissa Herrera, Founder
and Director of the Latin American Foundation Viva
la Vida.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/603, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ruiz Massieu.
Mr. Ruiz Massieu (spoke in French): I thank you,
Sir, for the opportunity to present the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia (S/2021/603) and to inform the
Security Council of important recent developments.
(spoke in Spanish)
It is an honour to be at this meeting with
Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs Marta
2/21

13/07/2021

Lucía Ramírez. I want to take this opportunity to thank
her for her support and that of the national Government
for the work of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia and to recognize her leadership in
advancing gender issues, which are central to the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace. I also welcome the participation of
Melissa Herrera, a young and dynamic leader from
the department of Nariño. It is a privilege to share this
forum with her and to be able to listen to her important
views, together with Security Council members.
Almost five years after the signing of the peace
agreement, the peace process in Colombia is entering
a critical stage. It is increasingly evident that the
determination and work of all the actors involved in this
complex and noble task have been worthwhile, despite
the multiple and persistent challenges. Proof of this is
the simultaneous progress made by the entities of the
transitional justice system created by the agreement,
to which the participation of all persons, including the
victims of the conflict, has been crucial.
The Secretary-General underscores in his report
what is undoubtedly a milestone in the Colombian
peace process and a benchmark for transitional justice
in the world. In April, seven former commanders of
the highest leadership of the former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) officially accepted their responsibility for
crimes against humanity and war crimes with respect
to Case 01 of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, on
hostage-taking and other serious deprivations of liberty.
Similarly, last week, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
charged 11 persons, including some army officers and a
third-party civilian, with war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Case 03 on killings and disappearances
presented as combat casualties caused by State agents.
In parallel, the work of the Special Unit for the Search
for Persons Deemed as Missing has led to the discovery
of hundreds of bodies of disappeared persons, including
through information provided by former guerrillas,
former paramilitary fighters and State agents. This
work contributes to bringing peace to the families of
the victims after years of painful uncertainty. At the
same time, the Truth Commission continues to provide
spaces for recognition where victims of different actors
in the conflict have been able to come face to face and
engage in dialogue with those who years previously
caused them irreparable harm.
21-18873

13/07/2021

Colombia

All these aspects — unthinkable in Colombia
until recently — are now possible thanks to the Peace
Agreement. I would particularly like to highlight the
recent dialogue sponsored by the Truth Commission
between kidnapping victims and former FARCEP combatants. Voices from different regions, with
different positions and experiences during the conflict,
and even divergent perspectives on the peace process,
agreed on the impossibility of justifying the pain
caused by the war and on the imperative need to insist
and persevere so that it never happens again.
These first fruits of the institutions created to
guarantee justice, truth, reparation and non-repetition
now demand that the tenacity and generosity of the
victims of the conflict be matched and that victims’
rights be fulfilled. In essence, this is a necessary
condition for the success of the Peace Agreement, and
it is a task that requires constant effort, humility and
empathy. It will take time to disarm the discourse,
structures and identities inherited from the conflict,
and thereby contribute to enabling the Colombian
people, especially those who experienced the worst of
the war first hand, to close the chapter of the conflict
once and for all and move forward on their path
towards reconciliation. Accordingly, the task entrusted
to the Mission by the Security Council to verify
compliance with and implementation of the sanctions
imposed by the SJP, will decisively contribute to these
reconciliation efforts.
(spoke in English)
I recently had the chance to visit Montes de María,
a region historically affected by recurrent waves of
violence. There, I met with several victims and women
social leaders. These courageous women recounted
their communities’ peacebuilding efforts and spoke of
their hope of the delivery of the Agreement’s promise
of non-repetition. I was particularly moved by their
testimony of how illegal armed groups try to silence
their voices — the voices of the communities — by
using not just physical violence but also resorting to
emotional violence, threats and personal attacks, which
prevent these social leaders and their families from fully
exercising their rights and living a normal, peaceful
life. This underscores the importance of joint initiatives
between civil society and State entities to protect social
leaders and human rights defenders, such as the pilot
of the Comprehensive Programme for Safeguards
for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders,
currently being implemented in Montes de María.

S/PV. 8818

Violence against former FARC-EP members,
social leaders and communities at large persists in
municipalities of this and other regions, including
along the Pacific coast, and in parts of the south and
the north-east of the country. This is mainly related
to the actions of illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations that thrive in areas characterized by a
limited State presence, poverty and illegal economies.
The persistent violence and stigmatization against
former combatants and members of the Comunes party
is particularly concerning, especially ahead of the
2022 elections, when they expect to engage actively in
political work across the country.
I also regret to inform the Council that authorities
recently confirmed the killing of the four people
reported missing by the Land Restitution Unit in May,
in Meta department. Their disappearance was reported
in the latest report of the Secretary-General. I strongly
condemn this vile act, which affects victims and public
institutions, and trust that those responsible will be
held accountable.
The persistence of violence and insecurity highlight
the urgent need for enhanced prevention and protection
measures, as well as for additional and more solid steps
to dismantle illegal organizations, bring perpetrators
to justice, and extend State institutions, public services
and development opportunities as quickly as possible to
conflict-affected communities.
Despite a challenging reintegration landscape,
former combatants continue to demonstrate their
commitment to building a new life and participating
actively in peacebuilding and development efforts
alongside their communities. This is the case, for
example, of a group of former combatants in Uribe,
Meta department, where, despite the killing of their
leader last October, they continue to move forward with
their reintegration process, working closely with local
communities, to improve, inter alia, schools, community
centres and internet connectivity in the area.
Previous reintegration experiences across the globe
have proven the importance of linking this process
to broader and complementary transformations.
Drawing from this knowledge, the Peace Agreement
links reintegration provisions to other areas across
its different sectors, including comprehensive rural
reform, whose implementation is essential to the overall
success of the process.

21-188733/21

S/PV.8818

Colombia

Building on the progress made thus far, it is crucial
for the parties to continue working together to provide
greater certainty to former FARC-EP members and
their families, especially through expanding access
to housing and land. In so doing, the Government
should ensure equal access to those living outside
former territorial areas for training and reintegration.
It is also fundamental that the Government and
former combatants’ representatives at the National
Reintegration Council continue approving productive
projects and adequately support and guarantee their
sustainability. I also encourage the parties to reach an
agreement regarding the National Reintegration System
to provide for a coordinated approach to accomplish
these goals.
Let me recall, once again, the possibilities that the
comprehensive implementation of the Agreement offers
to progressively tackling the root causes of conflict and
invite the parties and State entities to persevere in the
coordinated implementation of all provisions of the
Agreement. Recent meetings between Government and
former combatants’ representatives to jointly assess the
status of implementation, as agreed by President Iván
Duque and Comunes party president Rodrigo Londoño
last March, are a step in the right direction. I trust that
they will follow up on this endeavour, which will be
particularly useful as we approach the fifth anniversary
of the signing of the Peace Agreement.
With a still-ongoing third wave of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, this remains a time of deep and
prolonged hardship for many Colombians, as reflected
by recent protests throughout the country. We continue
to reject violence from any quarter and urge peaceful
dialogue. As I have stated previously, Colombian
society and institutions should view the implementation
of the Final Peace Agreement as an opportunity to help
address many of the long-standing issues facing the
country. Given the urgency to resolve these and other
pending challenges, bold steps are needed to accelerate
implementation in the coming months.
With a new electoral cycle quickly approaching,
I invite the parties and all relevant actors to remain
committed to the Agreement and to continue prioritizing
dialogue to resolve their differences. It is precisely
with that goal that the peace process enabled widened
democratic spaces and guarantees for participation.
I am confident that the Colombian people will take
advantage of a more robust democracy, and it will be
incumbent upon institutions to protect those gains and
4/21

13/07/2021

for political leaders from across the spectrum to commit
to an environment of respect and non-stigmatization
in order to ensure that the upcoming elections will be
peaceful as well as inclusive.
The recent approval of the 16 seats intended to
promote the participation in Congress of historically
excluded populations in conflict-affected regions is an
encouraging development. I am also certain that the
drive displayed by young Colombian men and women
as protagonists of recent mobilizations will translate
into their active engagement in the democratic process
in order to realize their hopes for a brighter future.
In conclusion, I would once again like to thank
the Security Council for its unyielding support to the
peacebuilding efforts in Colombia and for the trust
placed in the United Nations Verification Mission in
the country.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Ruiz
Massieu for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Herrera.
Ms. Herrera (spoke in Spanish): I warmly greet
all those present at this meeting. I thank everyone for
listening to my voice in this venue. My name is Melissa
Herrera. I am a young peacebuilder from the Nariño
region of Colombia.
I would like to start by telling a story that is near
to my heart. In 1966, a 14-year-old teenage girl from
the Valle del Cauca living in poverty exchanged her
daughter for a few coins. The baby grew up in Nariño
in a foster home, where she was not allowed to study
and was subjected to cruel and inhumane treatment.
Lucía, her name, became a mother at the age of 15.
She found a purpose in her life in a child whom she
raised surrounded steeped in traditional culture. Lucy
was the girl’s name. Unlike Lucia, she managed to attend
university. In her life, she excelled as a teacher of dance
and the visual arts and a cultural leader of Nariño.
One Christmas, four days after receiving her
vocational degree, she was executed by an armed
group in a zone for peace, where she arrived to launch
an art exhibition highlighting the work of women
peacebuilders in the region.
Lucy’s work with the community reminds us of
the vital importance of artistic and cultural work to
building the social fabric and that cultural rights are
also human rights, and we must protect them. It also
21-18873

13/07/2021

Colombia

highlights the real situation of girls and women who
have suffered the impact of the armed conflict. I want
to say that the teenager who exchanged her daughter
for a few coins is my grandmother. Lucia is my mother.
And the young girl killed at Christmas was my sister.
In Colombia, women have made great progress in
the context of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, and they promoted the inclusion
of the gender approach in the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace. Despite those achievements, challenges persist,
particularly for adolescent girls, young women and
girls. That is illustrated in the case of Lucy.
The peace Agreement represents hope for young
people in my country, who seek an end to the conflict
and guarantees of participation in peacebuilding. The
voices of young people and the challenges that we face
have been amplified during the protests, where we have
been at the forefront, voicing our demands and showing
our readiness for dialogue and social transformation.
I have come here today convinced that the Security
Council’s support for peace in my country has yielded
results. As a young peacebuilder, I have worked for
young people to be heard and to participate in the
building of peace for Nariño, in line with resolution
2250 (2015), on youth and peace and security. I therefore
participated, at the local level, in the updating of the
public policy on adolescents and youth.
On this occasion, representing the young people of
my country, I hope that my proposals will be heard. I
propose the following to the Security Council.
First, in the context of the mandate of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, specific
indicators for the implementation of resolutions 2250
(2015), 2419 (2018) and 2535 (2020), on youth and
peace and security, should be included and be reported
on periodically.
Secondly, the Council should include in its
meetings a section to work on youth issues from a
gender perspective.
Thirdly, the Security Council should undertake a
field visit to hold consultations with youth representation
in all its diversity.
I request the following of the Colombian State.
First, it should assume the following commitments
as part of the implementation of the resolutions on

S/PV. 8818

youth and peace and security: increase the inclusive
participation of young people in decision-making at all
levels; and protect the lives of young people, in particular
from any form of sexual or gender-based violence, in
post-conflict contexts and provide security guarantees
for their leadership and political participation.
Secondly, it should advance investigations into
cases of violence against women and young people in the
context of the implementation of the peace Agreement.
Thirdly, it should develop strategies and
programmes to demobilize and reintegrate young
people involved in the armed conflict, prioritizing those
in the reintegration process. It should also enhance the
collective care of young people in communities and the
mental health of those affected by the conflict and the
ongoing protests.
Young people are the missing element in
peacebuilding. It is our duty to protect them. I thank
Security Council members for their attention. I will
resume my daily life in the hope of returning to the
Council in the future to brief it on the progress that we
have made. I conclude by reiterating the commitment of
young people to peace, security and humanitarian work.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Herrera for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): My thanks go first
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
both for his briefing today and for the huge amount
of work that he and his team are doing, including in
what have recently been challenging circumstances.
Whenever Mr. Ruiz Massieu comes to the Security
Council, he clearly sets out a pragmatic way forward
for us and for all partners in the peace process. We are
grateful to him for that work. I also want to thank the
civil society briefer, Ms. Herrera, both for sharing her
brave and powerful testimony with us today and also for
reminding us that culture is what makes us human and
that it is one of the cornerstones of peace anywhere in
the world. Finally, it is very good to see Vice-President
Lucía Ramírez in the Chamber today. I welcome her
and her team. The Security Council’s relationship with
Colombia is one of partnership, and we look forward
to working together with her as Colombia continues its
journey towards a lasting peace.

21-188735/21

S/PV.8818

Colombia

As we have just heard, this past reporting period
was marked by protests and, unfortunately, acts of
violence and destruction. We echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call in his most recent report (S/2021/603)
for all political and social actors in Colombia to
commit to non-violence and to choose dialogue to find
solutions to the challenges facing Colombia. We share
concerns about human rights violations, particularly in
relation to the protests, and we welcome the Colombian
Government’s commitment to conduct transparent
investigations into all allegations of excessive use of
force. President Duque Márquez’s promise of police
reform is also an important step forward.
The challenging recent context should not cause us
to overlook the achievements in peace implementation
during the reporting period. As we heard from the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, they
were particularly significant in regard to the transitional
justice system, which is at the heart of the peace
agreement. The contributions to the transitional justice
process witnessed in recent months were historic.
While they may have surfaced painful truths, they have
vindicated the purpose of the Comprehensive System
for Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition.
The United Kingdom welcomed the response of
former leaders of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo to their indictment
of kidnapping by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
We encourage all involved to acknowledge their role
in crimes and injustices, fulfil their responsibility
to the victims of conflict and pave the way towards
reconciliation. As the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General said, closure for those left behind
is critical.
Reconciliation will be impossible to realize fully
while conflict-affected communities face ongoing
insecurity. The United Kingdom continues to be deeply
concerned about the persistent threats and deadly
violence by illegal armed groups targeted at former
combatants, human rights defenders and social leaders,
including women and those from indigenous AfroColombian and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex communities. In that regard, we look forward
to the implementation of the recently adopted Strategic
Plan for Security and Protection for former combatants.
We also welcome the progress made by the National
Protection Unit in assessing pending requests and
filling its vacancies, as well as the further convictions
6/21

13/07/2021

by the Special Investigation Unit. We urge the
Colombian Government to build on that, taking further
steps, including — as we have called for before in the
Council — to implement the public policy to dismantle
illegal armed groups and increase the security and
civilian presence of the State in conflict-affected areas.
Finally, I would like to touch briefly on reintegration.
We welcome recent developments, including the
purchase of land for two more former territorial areas
for training and reintegration and encourage the
Government to consolidate and accelerate that process.
As we have noted before, this is a critical year not
only for Colombia’s transitional justice process but for
the peace process more widely. When the Council holds
its next quarterly meeting, the fifth anniversary of the
peace agreement will almost be upon us. That will be
a moment for the international community to celebrate
with Colombia the significant progress achieved to
date, while reflecting on the remaining challenges to
overcome to ensure a sustainable peace. The United
Kingdom remains committed to supporting Colombia
as it continues on that path.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I am grateful for the briefing by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and take this opportunity to
acknowledge the work of the personnel of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. I also
appreciate the briefing by Ms. Melissa Herrera, whose
experience and work as a human rights defender and
Founder and Director of Viva la Vida highlights the
youth, peace and security agenda almost a year after
the adoption of resolution 2535 (2020). I also warmly
welcome the Vice-President and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez, whose
presence attests to the commitment of her country and
Government to the peace process, supported by the
Security Council.
As we approach the fifth anniversary of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace, important milestones have
marked a process that, owing to its very nature, is
complex and at times painful. One significant step has
involved the acknowledgement by former commanders
of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo of a policy of kidnapping and
their responsibility for crimes against humanity and
war crimes.
21-18873

13/07/2021

Colombia

We note the fact that they have asked for
forgiveness and their commitment to locate the remains
of kidnapping victims who were murdered or died
while they were deprived of their freedom. We agree
that the decision by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace is
an important step towards achieving truth, justice and
reconciliation, in line with the rights of the victims.
That process can indeed serve as a model for what can
be achieved in future peace and justice processes at the
international level.
The large number of displaced persons that has
resulted from, among other causes, the actions of illegal
armed groups is a cause for concern. In that regard, we
acknowledge the steps taken by the Government of
Colombia and call for the implementation of appropriate
public policies to protect the population, including
former combatants, human rights defenders and, above
all, indigenous and Afro-Colombian peoples.
We acknowledge the efforts of the Government
of Colombia and the Comunes party to continue
following the road map agreed between President
Duque Márquez and the president of the party, and we
endorse the proposal to conduct an assessment of the
implementation of the peace agreement on the eve of its
fifth anniversary.
As co-Chair of the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security, Mexico welcomes the
work done in recent months by the Working Group
on Gender of the National Reintegration Council,
particularly with regard to the development of local
action plans to implement the gender-specific actions
of the national reintegration policy. It is wise to work
from the local level up to advance that agenda.
As the work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
moves forward, the impact of conflict-related sexual
violence must be studied in greater depth, and the
gender approach in investigations must be strengthened.
Melissa Herrera’s experience is once again an example
of the strength and courage of young Colombian
women, without whom any peace or reconciliation
process would be incomplete.
It is also important to acknowledge steps taken
towards holding the first elections of municipal youth
councils, as well as the adoption of a bill creating 16
special transitional electoral districts for peace and
the ruling that the 16 additional seats in the House
of Representatives would be open for the upcoming
congressional periods.

S/PV. 8818

It is clear that challenges remain with regard to
the substitution of illicit crops, but the fact that almost
100,000 families are participating in the National
Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of
Illicit Crops is undeniable. Additional efforts to secure
funding is required to support those families. Finding
viable solutions, based on voluntary substitution, as
established in the Final Agreement, means redoubling
work with the communities.
As the Secretary General’s report (S/2021/603)
aptly describes, the reporting period was marked by
social unrest and polarization as a result of protests
in Colombia and regrettable cases of violence that led
to loss of life, which is always reprehensible. As we
reiterate our call for dialogue and full respect for human
rights, we welcome the good offices of the Verification
Mission and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
In conclusion, it should be assumed that the
socioeconomic impact of the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the consequences of decades of conflict
do not yet allow for wholly satisfactory results, which
leads to understandable disgruntlement on the part of
the parties. Nevertheless, there are obvious reasons
to remain hopeful that Colombia will be an excellent
example of peace and reconciliation. Mexico stands
with this sister nation on its path and reiterates its
support and solidarity.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): It is
a privilege to deliver this statement on behalf the three
African countries on the Security Council — Kenya,
the Niger and Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines (A3+1).
I begin by thanking Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu and Ms. Melissa
Herrera, Founder and Director of the Latin American
Foundation Viva la Vida, for their briefings. We have
taken note of Ms. Herrera’s recommendations.
The A3+1 reiterates its full support for the efforts of
the United Nations Verification Mission and welcomes
the participation of Her Excellency Ms. Marta Lucía
Ramírez, Vice-President and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia.
The unprecedented social unrest experienced in
Colombia and its concomitant violence in recent months
are extremely worrisome. We deplore the senseless
killings and disappearance of a number of people, as

21-188737/21

S/PV.8818

Colombia

underscored in the recent report of the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights. Those difficulties
demonstrate the utmost importance of frontally tackling
the underlying causes of conflict, including inequality.
The A3+1 notes the advances and setbacks to the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
enunciated in the Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2021/603). We welcome the advances and encourage
greater effort to address outstanding challenges.
The killing of 277 former combatants of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) since
the signing of the peace agreement and the decision by
former combatant lawyers to pursue legal actions in
search of protection guarantees underline the gravity of
the security situation, which remains deeply troubling.
Clearly, there must be greater impetus in strengthening
the State’s security machinery to curb the relentless
violence, especially against the groups made most
vulnerable, including former FARC combatants, Afroand Indigenous Colombians, and social, human rights
and women leaders.
We reiterate our appreciation for the adoption of
the public policy guidelines for the dismantling of
illegal armed groups and urge its full implementation.
We note, however, diverging views on the Strategic
Plan for Security and Protection for former combatants,
following its adoption, and encourage all parties to
settle those differences through dialogue. We also
urge the Colombian authorities to contribute more
resources for the implementation of the comprehensive
security and protection programmes and renew our call
for regular meetings of the National Commission on
Security Guarantees.
The central pillars of the Security Council — peace
and security — are interlinked with the fight against
human rights violations. Accordingly, we urge the
authorities to advance with investigations and address
impunity in instances of human rights violations so that
perpetrators are held accountable.
Transitional justice remains a cornerstone of peace
processes. The A3+1 is pleased with the continued
progress in the Comprehensive System for Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition. We express
satisfaction with the work within the Truth Commission
and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, including efforts
on Case 01 and ongoing work on Case 03. Accepting
wrongdoings for transgressions committed over the
8/21

13/07/2021

years is pivotal in ensuring justice, reconciliation and
sustainable peace for the victims.
In terms of reintegration, the A3+1 renews its
call for enhanced measures to facilitate the proper
reintegration of former combatants into Colombian
society, including adequate access to basic services.
We are encouraged by the positive developments
reported by the Secretary-General on the development
programmes with a territorial focus, but note the lack
of progress on access to land outside of territorial areas
for training and reintegration.
We call on the authorities to resolve the
controversies surrounding the full implementation
of the comprehensive rural reform chapter, as well
as those differences on the National Reintegration
System. These, together with enhanced efforts towards
the sustainable reintegration of all former combatants,
will ultimately determine the long-term sustainability
of peace in Colombia. We also repeat our call for the
parties to capitalize on the Commission for the Followup, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation
of the Final Agreement to resolve their differences.
The A3+1 attaches great importance to the ethnic
chapter of the Final Peace Agreement. It is disheartening
that we have not witnessed any action on that important
chapter, in spite of recommendations provided through
the High-Level Forum of Ethnic Peoples to address
issues facing former combatants of indigenous and
Afro-Colombian descent. We appeal to the authorities to
forge forward with the implementation of that chapter.
We further reiterate the need for regular updates on the
progress of that implementation.
Finally, we recognize the efforts of various
stakeholders encouraging the Government and the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional to engage in dialogue.
We hope that those parties will heed the calls. We
reiterate our support for all constructive efforts aimed
at consolidating the peace process. As the peace process
approaches its fifth anniversary, we call on the parties
to advance with its full implementation in order to reap
peace dividends and ensure stability and prosperity for
the Colombian nation.
Kenya, the Niger, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines reaffirm our full support for the Colombian
peace process and emphasize the paramount importance
of the comprehensive implementation of the Final Peace
Agreement. Colombians, the people of Latin America
21-18873

13/07/2021

Colombia

and the Caribbean and the international community can
ill afford for the peace process to relapse.
Mr. Phan (Viet Nam): First of all, we would like
to warmly welcome Her Excellency Ms. Ramírez,
Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, to today’s meeting.
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ruiz Massieu and Ms. Herrera for their
informative briefings.
It is encouraging to witness positive and remarkable
progress in Colombia since the conclusion in 2016
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. The Government
has made great efforts in promoting socioeconomic
developments, including a comprehensive rural
reform. The reintegration process has also been
expanded at all levels. However, we remain concerned
about the fact that the terms of the Agreement have
not been fully implemented. As a result, like other
processes, reintegration still faces multiple challenges.
Against that background, we would like to stress the
following points.
First, the political will and determination of all
the parties concerned in conducting the next steps of
the Final Peace Agreement are extremely important
for Colombia on the way forward. In that regard, we
commend the decision by the Government of Colombia
and the Comunes party to conduct a joint assessment
of the road map to support the participation of former
combatants in the reintegration process. We also
acknowledge other commitments of the Government
to advance the reintegration process, including
the provision of protection and security for former
combatants. We hope to see the National Reintegration
Council, together with the United Nations and regional
and international organizations, play a more active
role in supporting the financial mechanisms and
recommending appropriate initiatives to assist former
combatants in stabilizing their lives.
We call on all the relevant parties to continue
engaging in constructive dialogue at political and
technical levels, especially through the mechanisms
provided by the agreement, with a view to bringing
about reconciliation, solidarity and progress for
all. While efforts aimed at reintegration are highly
appreciated, it is also important to note that this process
will be a long-term one requiring patience as well as
practical steps.

S/PV. 8818

Secondly, we share the concerns expressed in the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/603) on
the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and
the peace-related programmes in Colombia, especially
the nationwide demonstrations and associated violence.
We look forward to continued efforts by the
Government, national political parties and other relevant
stakeholders in implementing all the measures needed
to address the root causes of instability, including the
challenges of the coronavirus disease pandemic and
inequality, security and economic issues. We also
support the commitments made by the Government and
its partners in addressing the special needs and roles of
women, children and youth in that process.
Thirdly, we are once again concerned about
violence and the continued killings of social leaders
and former combatants. At the same time, we also
condemn the unacceptable recent attack on 25 June
against a helicopter with the President of Colombia on
board. We condemn all those forms of violence and
attacks and urge all the groups concerned to stop those
appalling acts immediately. The perpetrators must be
brought to justice.
We call on the relevant parties to implement
necessary measures and make full use of the security
guarantee mechanisms elaborated in the peace
agreement to protect civilians in the conflict-affected
areas, especially women and children. In that regard,
it is also important to redouble efforts in ensuring
security and bringing development to conflict-affected
communities through practical measures. It is through
the well-being of those communities that the value of
peace and reintegration is proved and maintained.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our strong
support for the process of peace, security, national
reconciliation, unity and development in Colombia,
as well as the role of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia to that end.
Ms. Juul (Norway): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu
for his very useful briefing and, of course, for the
impressive work he and his team are doing in Colombia.
Allow me also to extend a warm welcome to Melissa
Herrera for sharing her experience at this meeting
today and for her valuable recommendations.

21-188739/21

S/PV.8818

Colombia

Women and peace and security is a high priority for
Norway and an area where we enjoy close cooperation
with the Colombian Government, headed personally by
Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs Marta
Lucía Ramírez. I warmly welcome her and thank her
for taking time to be with the Security Council today.
Let me start by recognizing the strong commitment
of the parties to the continued implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, even in the midst of
challenging circumstances with social unrest. Yet the
reports of the deaths of 56 persons and of more than
90 still missing are deeply disturbing. In response the
international community has insisted on respect for
human rights and peaceful protests, condemned any
disproportionate use of force and called on all actors
to resolve differences through dialogue. We echo those
calls at this meeting today.
To put an end to the cycle of violence, it is crucial that
all human rights violations and abuses be investigated
and that those responsible be held accountable. That
includes, of course, those responsible for the attack
against the President’s helicopter on 25 June.
Since the Security Council last met (see S/2021/401)
to discuss the implementation of the Colombian peace
agreement, we are concerned to hear reports that an
additional 15 ex-combatants have been murdered, that
there has been an increase in the recruitment and use
of children by armed groups, and that the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
has received reports of 49 additional killings of social
leaders and human rights defenders.
We are also worried about the high level of
stigmatization experienced by female ex-combatants and
human rights defenders engaging in political work. That
includes reports of sexual and gender-based violence.
Recent events should serve as strong encouragement
to the parties to reverse those worrisome developments
and implement the full range of provisions in the peace
agreement, in particular those related to security
guarantees, enhanced political participation and all
gender provisions; ensuring the full, equal, meaningful
and safe participation of women in the peace process,
as well as the active and meaningful participation of
ethnic minorities and youth. The protection of human
rights defenders must also be strengthened. Indeed, the
very purpose of the peace agreement is to ensure that
violence is replaced by political participation. Chapter
10/21

13/07/2021

2 provides a range of tools to strengthen Colombian
democracy and to ensure participation in the exercise
of politics.
On a more positive note, Norway welcomes the
progress made by the integrated system for transitional
justice. The Truth Commission provides an invaluable
space for truth-telling and encounters between victims
and perpetrators. We urge all actors to make full use of
the Commission.
It is important to highlight the significance of
the assumption of responsibility by former leaders of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) in Case 01 of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, concerning hostage-taking and
severe deprivations of liberty. That is historic — it is
unprecedented that leaders of a former guerrilla group
assume responsibility for crimes against humanity and
war crimes. It should serve as an example for future
cases as a step towards accountability and justice — by
the parties, by the Special Jurisdiction itself and for
the victims.
At the same time, we must also take seriously the
reports that victims and alleged perpetrators, including
former members of the FARC-EP and the public
security forces, do not feel that they can contribute
to the transitional justice system without risking their
lives. To ensure due process and meet the demands of
victims, it is essential that the authorities protect those
appearing before the court.
Let me end by repeating that recent events in
Colombia have demonstrated the fragility of peace
and the importance of sustained dialogue to resolve
political differences. We encourage the parties and
all stakeholders to keep working together in order to
achieve lasting peace. Rest assured that Norway remains
committed to supporting Colombia in those efforts.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I would like to begin by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Carlos Ruiz Massieu for updating us on
the developments of the past three months on the
peace process and activities of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia (UNVMC) towards
the implementation of its mandate. I particularly
welcome the presence of Her Excellency Ms. Marta
Lucía Ramírez, Vice-President and Minister for Foreign
Affairs, at today’s meeting. I also thank Ms. Melissa
Herrera for her briefing.
21-18873

13/07/2021

Colombia

The UNVMC embodies the capacity of the
United Nations to bring about positive change in both
security and development aspects of post-conflict
settings. It has helped and strengthened the efforts of
national authorities to bring together communities and
institutions to advance peace, development and the rule
of law, especially in areas historically affected by the
conflict. We reiterate our support for the Mission and
for the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
We join others in strongly condemning the attack
that targeted the Colombian president’s helicopter in
the north-east of the country on 25 June.
Colombia is witnessing considerable progress in
the implementation of the Final Agreement for ending
the conflict and building a stable and lasting peace.
Today, democracy in Colombia is deepening through
increased political participation. The transitional
justice system to ensure truth, justice and reparations to
victims is making headway, especial under the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace and the Truth Commission.
We therefore applaud the efforts of the people and
the Government of Colombia aimed at realizing the
achievements of the last more than four years.
The progress in the last three months towards
the implementation of the Final Agreement has been
positive despite complex challenges, including the
coronavirus disease pandemic. The nationwide strikes
during the reporting period have again underscored the
need for broader engagement among all stakeholders to
address long-standing inequalities, security issues and
crop substitution.
In view of the upcoming electoral cycle, the focused
implementation of the five priorities proposed by the
Secretary-General to reinforce the implementation
of the Agreement in 2021 will be important. The
authorities also need to take measures to provide
safeguards to ensure an inclusive political atmosphere.
In this context, I have the following observations
to make.
First, the national policy to dismantle illegal armed
groups approved in March earlier this year is a positive
step to augment the presence of State institutions,
including the deployment of security forces. We hope
that a road map to implement the national policy will
be formulated soon. The integrated and enhanced
presence of State authorities throughout the country is
fundamental to lasting and durable peace.

S/PV. 8818

Secondly, the ongoing rural reforms, reintegration
of former combatants, including those outside the
Territorial Area for Training and Reintegration across
the country, providing land and effective implementation
of illicit crop substitution programmes, need to
maintain momentum. It is important to ensure that the
great majority of former combatants are involved in
income-generating activities. Recently, progress made
with regard to the allotment of land to former combatants
for carrying out agricultural activities and rooting out
use of illicit crops are welcome developments.
Thirdly, the strengthening of protection and
security for former combatants is an important element
of the peace process. Regular dialogue between former
combatants and public security forces, including in
the context of the Tripartite Security and Protection
Mechanism, could help provide timely and more
effective responses to the problem. Sustained measures
should be taken to ensure the security of social leaders
and human rights defenders, particularly women leaders
and indigenous and Afro-Colombian leaders.
Fourthly,
strengthening
judicial
capacity,
particularly in the regions most affected by violence,
is also significant. The Special Investigations Unit of
the Attorney General’s Office should be provided with
resources to strengthen the campaign against impunity.
The work of the National Commission on Security
Guarantees must be encouraged in order to make
effective progress on the issue of dismantling illegal
armed groups.
Fifthly, the voluntary testimony before the Truth
Commission acknowledging past crimes and seeking
forgiveness is a welcome development and positively
contributes to national reconciliation.
Lastly, I would like to highlight the special
relationship that India shares with Colombia. In 2019,
India and Colombia celebrated the sixtieth anniversary
of the establishment of diplomatic relations between
our two countries. We have now entered a new decade
with the vision to further diversify and strengthen our
relations. Over the years, the relationship has expanded
in various areas of mutual interest, which is evidenced
by growing trade and investments from India and the
increasing presence of Indian companies in Colombia.
There is growing interest with respect to India
among Colombians, including its culture and heritage.
This came to light recently on 21 June, when thousands
of Colombians participated in the International Yoga

21-1887311/21

S/PV.8818

Colombia

Day celebrations. As Colombia marches ahead in its
journey towards peace, progress and prosperity, India,
as Colombia’s long-standing friend and partner, will
continue to stand in solidarity with the people and the
Government of Colombia.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu for presenting the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in the country (S/2021/603). We
welcome the Vice-President and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez.
Unfortunately, in the current report we see once
again a worsening situation in the country. This is
due to a deteriorating security situation and a lack of
progress in implementing the key commitments set
forth in the Final Peace Agreement.
A stark example of this were the large-scale
protests in the country, which involved not only
opposition forces but also an unprecedented number
of young people, as well as indigenous people and
women’s human rights organizations. The reason
for these protests, as we see from the report, was the
security policy, as well as the policies dealing with the
reintegration of peace process participants, education
and agrarian reforms — in other words, areas that are
directly linked to the comprehensive implementation
of the Final Agreement. We are concerned that 54
civilians and two police officers were casualties of
the clashes. We would urge the Colombian authorities
to be more professional and to ensure that there is no
disproportionate use of force.
We support the five areas earmarked in the latest
report of the Secretary-General as priorities for the
Colombian Government, specifically the security of
the population, the reintegration of the participants in
the peace process, the State presence in rural areas,
intra-Colombian dialogue and lasting reconciliation.
Unfortunately, the report notes no serious progress on
any of these points. Furthermore, right at the beginning
of the electoral period leading up to the 2022 elections,
there is not much ground to hope that there will be
significant progress in the near future.
Of course, the safety and security of civilians
remain a serious problem. Fighting between groups
for territorial influence over the past three months has
led to a further 7,500 internally displaced persons and
the deaths of an additional 15 participants in the peace
12/21

13/07/2021

process and 49 human rights defenders. Furthermore,
over recent months, there has been a significant
deterioration in the situation in the areas bordering
Venezuela. Given this, the short-sighted policy of
rejecting contacts with Caracas even on such important
issues as border control only serves to worsen the
security challenges.
There are not many grounds for optimism in the
report’s data about ongoing problems with agrarian
reform, land restitution and crop substitution. Local
communities have confirmed they have only gotten
3.5 per cent of the overall amount of land promised for
agricultural needs. No more than 7 per cent of families
that have upheld in good faith commitments to destroy
drug crops have received the compensation provided
for them in the final agreement.
Despite the cuts in the acreage of drug plantation,
cocaine production is increasing annually nonetheless.
This has been confirmed by observations by relevant
United Nations entities. We all know that growth in
drug production unavoidably leads to an increase in
violence and corruption.
With regard to the work of transitional justice,
it is regrettable that while the former leaders of the
Revolutionary Armed Forces are giving evidence in
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, there have not yet
been any reports of similar evidence being given by
representatives of the Government. This cannot fail to
raise questions as to whether a balance can be struck in
establishing truth and justice, especially because we are
talking about responsibility for the killing of civilians
and other extrajudicial killings.
We have frequently drawn attention to the fact
that a comprehensive peace is only possible with the
involvement of all parties and with due account being
given to a whole range of viewpoints. In this context,
it is heartening to hear of the establishment of the first
contacts in a long time between the Government, the
United Nations Mission and the representatives of the
National Liberation Army. We hope that the Colombian
parties will manage to return to comprehensive
reconciliation negotiations.
Very soon Colombians, along with the whole
world, will mark the fifth anniversary of the signing
of the historic Final Peace Agreement, which not only
embodied the desire of Colombians for reconciliation
and their own national responsibility for the future
of their own country, but also insured that the peace
21-18873

13/07/2021

Colombia

process enjoyed the support of the Security Council, the
Secretary-General and the guarantor States. Support
for the Agreement by the international community
shows a kind of vote of confidence in the people of
Colombian, with the understanding that the provisions
of the document would be unswervingly upheld.
We sincerely wish all Colombians peace. However,
it is important to remember that peace is not a voluntary
declaration by one side, but a painstaking task in
progress — an ongoing process based on ongoing
dialogue to take into account the entire spectrum
of views.
We commend the role of the United Nations
Verification Mission in the country and the personal
efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in promoting peacebuilding in Colombia. We
trust that the implementation of the recommendations
in the Secretary-General’s reports will continue to be
a top priority, along with the commitments under the
Final Agreement.
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
Russia stands ready to continue to support the
Colombian peace process in order to ensure that it is
sustainable and irreversible.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for a very
comprehensive briefing once again. I also thank
Ms. Herrera for her important words. I also want to
warmly welcome Vice-President Lucía Ramírez to
the Council Chamber, and congratulate her on her
appointment as Foreign Minister. Her presence is a
clear indication of the importance that the Colombian
Government places on engagement with the Council.
It is important to acknowledge, and indeed
celebrate, the very real progress that has been made in
Colombia. Nonetheless, as we have heard, the country
currently faces multiple and interwoven challenges.
The months since our most recent meeting
(S/2021/401) have seen a truly transformative period for
peace and reconciliation in Colombia. Through the vital
work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, we have seen
genuine engagement by former members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) with
victims and survivors of the conflict, with apologies
given and forgiveness sought.
We must also acknowledge and welcome the
information provided by the indicted former FARC

S/PV. 8818

members to the Special Unit for the Search for
Persons Deemed as Missing, while calling for further
information to be provided by all. We hope that that
process will bring closure and peace to hundreds of
families in Colombia.
We also reflect on the historical acknowledgement
to the Truth Commission of Government responsibility
for the extrajudicial killings known as false positives,
which took the lives of thousands of Colombian
civilians. We hope that that can continue over the
remaining period of the Commission’s work.
The recent indictments of former military leaders
in Case 03 by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace may
be the beginning of another watershed moment, as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
outlined. We join the people of Colombia in hoping that
the response by any persons found guilty will focus on
victims and be based on acknowledgement, apology
and justice.
We note with deep concern the threats faced by
persons engaging with the transitional justice system.
In addition, the risks of violence against members of
political parties ahead of an electoral period are of
concern and need to be addressed. We also condemn
in the strongest terms the recent car bomb in Cúcuta,
as well as the cowardly attack on President Duque
Márquez’s helicopter.
Ireland deeply regrets the recent killings of the
attorney Ms. Esperanza Navas and social leader
Ms. Derly Pastrana Yara. Their senseless deaths are
emblematic of too many human rights defenders,
social leaders, ex-combatants, children and indigenous
and Afro-Colombian leaders lost in Colombia. We
encourage the Government to redouble its efforts
to protect all defenders of human rights, activists
and, acknowledging the particular threats that they
face, women in social leadership and children at
risk of recruitment. Ms. Herrera spoke eloquently
of the particular threats faced by women and girls.
Perpetrators must also be brought to justice; the people
of Colombia deserve an end to impunity.
The recent social unrest and widespread protests
have demonstrated the significant structural challenges
still facing society. Now more than ever genuine and
inclusive dialogue is vital. Years of peace have created
a path for democratic expression. We support the right
to peaceful political protest for all citizens in Colombia.

21-1887313/21

S/PV.8818

Colombia

We call for the perpetrators of all violence associated
with the protests to be brought to justice.
We note the leadership and engagement of the
Colombian youth, as also highlighted by Ms. Herrera.
Growing up alongside the peace accord, they are a
generation heavily invested in Colombia’s future.
Every opportunity should be seized to involve young
people in decision-making, and we welcome the
recent commitment by President Duque Márquez to
facilitate the first elections to municipal youth councils
this autumn.
The full and complete implementation of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace also relies on dialogue. We welcome
the engagement of the parties with the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement, and encourage
continued constructive dialogue at the local, municipal
and national levels, particularly on gender and ethnic
provisions. Dialogue offers a path to mutually agreed
solutions to shared problems. Peacebuilding requires
the active engagement of all members of society,
engagement built on trust, which can come only from
dialogue in good faith.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the presence of Vice-President and
Foreign Minister of Colombia Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez
at today’s meeting and thanks Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu for his briefing.
We also listened carefully to the briefing by the civil
society representative.
This year marks the fifth anniversary of the
signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. Thanks to the
concerted efforts of the Colombian Government and
the relevant parties and with the strong support of the
United Nations and the international community, the
peace agreement has been advancing in various areas,
with positive progress made in its implementation. That
is of great significance to Colombia and to regional
peace and stability, about which China is of course
heartily pleased.
At the same time, the full implementation of the
peace agreement is a long-term process. It is inevitable
that there will be some twists and turns. The nationwide
strikes and protests that have been taking place since
April show that the situation in Colombia remains
unstable and that the implementation of the final
14/21

13/07/2021

agreement still faces uncertainties. China supports the
Colombian Government in continuing to effectively
implement the peace agreement, strengthening national
governance, maintaining security and stability,
vigorously developing the economy, improving
people’s well-being, resolving differences through
dialogue, promoting social reconciliation and creating
favourable conditions for the smooth holding of next
year’s general elections.
China supports the Colombian Government in
striving to overcome the pandemic-related difficulties
and, in accordance with the requirements of the peace
agreement, implementing programmes such as former
combatants’ participation in productive projects
and illicit crop-substitution and expediting their
reintegration process. China supports the Colombian
Government in accelerating land reform, addressing
poverty, social injustices and underdevelopment in rural
areas, improving public services, promoting balanced
and sustainable development and strengthening the
foundations of lasting peace and stability.
China supports the Colombian Government in
strengthening security measures, comprehensively
cracking down on armed groups and organized
crime and providing security guarantees for the
implementation of the peace agreement. We support
the Government of Colombia in strengthening security
deployments in high-risk areas and increasing security
for former armed personnel. China supports the
discussion between the Colombian Government and
the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común on
the implementation of the peace agreement during
the past five years and hopes that they will build on
it to enhance the confidence in and support of the
peacebuilding process.
Lastly, China appreciates the work of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ruiz
Massieu and hopes that the Mission will work in close
coordination with the United Nations country team to
provide increased assistance and play a greater role in
coordinating the Colombian Government’s response
to the pandemic, promoting the implementation of
the final agreement, maintaining social stability and
expediting the improvement of the people’s livelihoods
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his briefing
21-18873

13/07/2021

Colombia

and presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/603). We appreciate the vital role that the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia continues
to play in supporting peace in Colombia. We thank
Ms. Herrera for contributing her voice and perspective
to the Security Council today. We also warmly welcome
Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, Ms. Lucía Ramírez, to this meeting. We
thank the Government of Colombia for its continuing
commitment to the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
As all know, and as President Biden conveyed
in his call to President Duque shortly thereafter,
we were alarmed to hear of the 25 June attack on
President Duque’s helicopter, and we were relieved
that everyone involved was unharmed. We would also
like to acknowledge the hard work that the Colombian
Government is undertaking to fight the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The United States
recently donated 2.5 million vaccine doses to Colombia,
as the country’s people recover from the devastating
pandemic and as part of our effort to expand access
to vaccinations worldwide. That will allow the
Government of Colombia to provide vaccines to some
of the most vulnerable and remote communities in
the country.
We also welcome the national dialogue promoted
by President Duque to address the recent protests
throughout Colombia. We reiterate our support for
the rights of peaceful protesters, underscore that law
enforcement must be held to the highest standards of
accountability and condemn wanton acts of violence,
vandalism and roadblocks, which have impeded the
delivery of food and medicine.
Over the past few months, the transitional justice
system in Colombia has taken enormous strides,
particularly with the acknowledgement in April
by former commanders of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) of a policy within the group of kidnapping
and their acknowledgment of responsibility for crimes
against humanity and war crimes.
That is a vital step for truth, justice and reconciliation,
as well as for the satisfaction of victims’ rights. It is
also an important demonstration of the commitment of
former FARC-EP members to the final agreement. We
also recognize the transitional justice system’s progress
on identifying and holding accountable members of

S/PV. 8818

State security forces who ordered or participated in
human rights abuses, including extrajudicial killings.
Despite the progress, we are closely monitoring
the increase in violence in former FARC-EP-controlled
areas, particularly against former FARC-EP combatants
and social leaders, which has been an ongoing problem
since the signing of the final agreement. We acknowledge
the announcement by the Presidential Counsellor
for Stabilization and Consolidation of the adoption
of the Strategic Plan for Security and Protection for
former combatants, but we are deeply concerned about
reports that 71 human rights leaders and social leaders
have been killed in Colombia since the beginning of
this year. Guaranteeing measures for the security of
leaders of social and political movements, human
rights defenders, communities affected by conflict and
former combatants remains a critical component of the
final agreement.
We are also concerned by growth in coca
cultivation and production in Colombia, as reported in
a recent study by the White House Office of National
Drug Control Policy. We continue to believe that the
best way to sustainably address the problem is to
combine law-enforcement efforts with a robust rural
development programme and programmes that are
designed to stimulate legal economic activity. We
acknowledge that Colombia’s efforts last year were
hampered considerably by the spread of COVID-19 and
are hopeful that the Government’s work to assist rural
farmers will intensify in 2021.
Despite those ongoing challenges, we believe that
Colombia continues to be on the road towards a great
success story and a model to countries seeking a way
out of entrenched conflict. The work that both the
Colombian Government and the Verification Mission
have done over the past four years is admirable, and
Colombians from all walks of life have benefited
greatly from it.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, and Ms. Melissa Herrera, Founder and
Director of the Latin American Foundation Viva la
Vida, for their briefings today. I would like to express
Estonia’s strong support for the work of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. We warmly
welcome Her Excellency Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez,
Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.

21-1887315/21

S/PV.8818

Colombia

The situation in Colombia is worrying. The social
unrest in Colombia and the polarization of the society
need to be dealt with. The recent developments have
shown the urgent need to overcome the crisis. It is
important to avoid any further escalation of violence.
We encourage all parties to put aside their differences
and continue to seek a resolution through peaceful
dialogue. It is important to enhance security guarantees
and structural reforms.
This year marks the fifth anniversary of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace. We recognize all the
positive developments and efforts made so far towards
a sustainable peace. We welcome the developments
regarding the decision to create 16 special transitional
electoral districts for peace. Another important element
of reconciliation of the society is transitional justice. We
value the work of all transitional justice mechanisms,
especially the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, which
plays an important role in guaranteeing the victims’
rights to truth, justice and reparations.
The security situation remains the main challenge.
We are concerned about the continuous killings of
former combatants, social and indigenous leaders and
human rights defenders. Fighting against impunity is
the key to stopping violence. It is essential to bring
perpetrators to justice and ensure the security of all
regions of the country and vulnerable social groups.
Limited State presence, poverty and illegal armed
groups are the main causes for violence and need to
be addressed. In addition, the National Commission
on Security Guarantees needs to be convened to
develop a clear road map for implementing the public
policy guidelines.
Furthermore, the third wave of the coronavirus
disease pandemic has already reached Colombia,
causing the deterioration of the health situation. We
encourage the Government to continue moving forward
with the vaccination strategy.
Lastly, we remain hopeful that meaningful progress
can be made despite of the current dramatic challenges.
Estonia strongly supports the continued commitment to
implement the Final Agreement.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
16/21

13/07/2021

I once again welcome Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez,
Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia. I also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and
Ms. Melissa Herrera for their briefings.
This fall, we will celebrate the fifth anniversary
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. I would like
to commend the efforts that have been made by the
Government and the people of Colombia since 2016 to
implement that historic agreement. Over the past several
weeks, Colombia has experienced an unprecedented
social movement. We will continue to call for dialogue.
The peace agreement provides the framework for a
negotiated settlement, and I commend the conscientious
follow-up by the Head of United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
Colombia has been hard hit by the most recent
wave of the coronavirus disease pandemic. In
several areas of the country, the security situation is
becoming increasingly worse, with numerous crimes
being committed against human rights defenders,
social leaders and former combatants. We know that
the solution is to strengthen State presence in those
remote areas. The National Commission on Security
Guarantees must be able to propose concrete measures
for those fragile areas.
In recent months, decisive steps have been taken in
the area of transitional justice. France welcomes the fact
that the leaders of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común have accepted their responsibilities. Their
cooperation demonstrates that the system works. The
indictment issued by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
in the so-called false positives case is another step
forward. We hope that the individuals indicted will also
acknowledge their responsibility. Lastly, it is important
that all parties to the conflict engage with the Truth
Commission, as Ingrid Betancourt and her kidnappers
have recently done. We would like to highlight the work
conducted by the Commission, which will publish its
report in November, thereby marking another historic
step in the process of uncovering the truth.
The peace agreement must be understood in its
entirety. It can bear lasting fruit only if it is fully
implemented. For example, further progress must be
achieved in the areas of rural reform, access to land,
illicit crop substitution and political participation.
To achieve peace, the divide among territories must
21-18873

13/07/2021

Colombia

be narrowed and viable and just socioeconomic
opportunities must be provided for everyone.
Building peace is an arduous path. The peace
agreement has withstood many challenges. Its concrete
implementation must be irreversible. Rest assured that
France, as well as the European Union, will continue
to support all those in Colombia who work daily to
achieve peace.
I now resume my functions as president of the
Security Council.
I now call on the Vice-President and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
Ms. Lucía Ramírez (Colombia) (spoke in French):
It is an honour for me to convey greetings to the
members of the Security Council on behalf of President
Iván Duque Márquez and of the Republic of Colombia.
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting and for your leadership.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would also like to thank all of the members of
the Security Council for their continued interest in the
situation in Colombia and for their statements. I will
respond to them once I have read out the text I brought
with me today.
First, I would like to thank France for convening
today’s meeting and for the opportunity to participate
in my dual capacity as Vice-President and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2021/603) and commitment to
our country, and Special Representative Carlos Ruiz
Massieu for his briefing.
The Government of Colombia, led by President
Iván Duque, wants genuine and lasting peace. We
have focused our efforts on that goal for the past three
years. Not only have we implemented the policy of
peace with legality; we are returning to pre-pandemic
gross domestic product growth of more than 4 per cent,
precisely with the aim of creating jobs in rural and
urban areas for all Colombians. We believe that that is
the best way to close social gaps and help foster genuine
and lasting peace in our country.
Our Government has faced challenges that are
familiar to all members. Overcoming those challenges
requires structural changes. Regrettably, despite the
efforts of the Government and Colombian society,

S/PV. 8818

drug trafficking, of which there has been little
mention in today’s meeting, remains a challenge. We
hope that former members of the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) will advance with
greater speed and depth on making clear and genuine
commitments to ending drug trafficking in our country,
including, inter alia, by identifying drug trafficking
routes, international allies in the business and the
methods used by those known as FARC dissidents to
move drugs. That is the primary cause of the killing
of so many leaders — human rights defenders, leaders
in the areas of land restitution and, in particular, illicit
crop substitution.
Colombia reiterates the call for shared responsibility
in the fight against drug trafficking and greater
efficiency in pursuing drug processing. Regrettably,
drugs leave our country every day and are processed
in laboratories in various countries, including in
developed economies. Shared responsibility is also
important in condemning and clamping down on
deforestation and human trafficking, which are linked
to drug trafficking.
We face monumental challenges but we will not fail
to honour our commitment to an extremely complex
process. Our initial estimate of what it would cost to
implement the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, signed with
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), was approximately the
equivalent of two entire years of the Colombia’s gross
domestic product — as if the country had no external
debt, pension obligations or several other challenges
to face. The implementation of the Agreement would
cost us the equivalent of two entire years of Colombia’s
gross domestic product. That is why I request members
to bear in mind that the time frame for implementing
the agreement is 15 years. I am surprised to state here
at today’s meeting that no progress has been made. I
heard no mention of that in Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu’s
briefing. He acknowledged some progress. We would
have preferred 100 per cent progress. However,
only five years have passed since the signing of the
agreement. Implementing the agreement over 15 years
will incur costs, which, without a doubt, will exceed
Colombia’s budget; it would exceed the budget of any
of the countries represented here today.
We will not fail to implement the 2016 Agreement
because, inter alia, we know that the criminal groups
that attack leaders in various regions of Colombia today

21-1887317/21

S/PV.8818

Colombia

had already existed. Then came the so-called FARC
dissidents. It is not true that recent violence in Colombia
is due to an alleged breach of the Agreement. There
was no breach. On the contrary, several implementation
indicators exceed what we should have been achieved
in just under five years. Our country continues its
responsible implementation of the Agreement, sparing
no effort in the ongoing fight against organized armed
groups and any group focused on profiting from
criminal activities. Such profits jeopardize the country’s
stability, the safety of our citizens and a precious good
for our country — the continuity of our democracy.
As mentioned in the report, comprehensive State
presence, including the deployment of public security
forces and civil institutions throughout the country,
is our Government’s main priority. That has been
complemented, inter alia, with the construction over the
past three years of 13,848 kilometres of infrastructure
in rural areas to provide farmers with development
options to keep them away from coca production
and illegal mining, which benefit transnational
mafias. Regrettably, at times, such groups operate in
neighbouring countries and subject the most vulnerable
to conditions that are tantamount to slavery.
I would like to mention the following points on
the two issues that are part of the mandate. Progress
made in the areas of political, economic and social
reintegration is indisputable. By April this year, 13,998
people were registered as having left the FARC, 99 per
cent of whom have a health plan and 87 per cent have a
pension plan. Those statistics are higher than those for
the average Colombian.
Some 85 per cent of those reintegrated from the
FARC-EP have received monthly financial support
from our Government for their sustenance, and 90 per
cent have received job training through the National
Training Service. Some 53.9 per cent of this population
also participate in 3,063 individual or collective
productive projects, including 283 that had been
suspended during the pandemic. As of the date of the
report, as Mr. Ruiz Massieu informed us, 509 additional
productive projects had been initiated because the
requirements for disbursement had been met.
As part of the road map for reintegration that has
been referred to today, we have included a housing
guarantee and enacted regulatory measures for access to
land, providing the corresponding agencies with greater
legal and economic resources. To date, a total of 1,373
18/21

13/07/2021

hectares have been made available for this purpose and
properties have been given to ex-combatants for their
use. Additionally, $4.2 million have been earmarked
for the acquisition of properties for the development
of productive and housing projects in the former
territorial areas for training and reintegration, which
has enabled us to purchase properties amounting to 565
hectares. In March, the legal status of some of those
areas was established.
The Government cooperates with people in the
reintegration process, offering them socioeconomic
benefits regardless of their location. Today, 95 per cent
of ex-combatants have bank accounts, 99 per cent are
affiliated with the health system and more than 13,000
have received financial guarantees.
Secondly, with regard to security guarantees for excombatants, the Interinstitutional Coordination Bureau
evaluates on an ongoing basis progress made in the
implementation of a strategy focused on strengthening
interinstitutional coordination to provide security
for community leaders and, of course, all former
combatants. It is worth recalling that the security
measures ensured that not a single candidate of the
FARC — now the Comunes party — was assassinated
or kidnapped in the 2019 elections, and a similar
arrangement is being developed to ensure the same
protection for the next elections, to be held in 2022.
I
should
point
out
that
recently,
on
1 July, the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and
Consolidation, Mr. Emilio Archila, who is with us today,
led a new process to review security conditions for excombatants who maintain their commitment to legality,
as well as for the leaders of crop substitution. Colombia
today allocates more than 24 police squadrons, 54
army platoons and 316 individual protection units with
armoured cars for former FARC combatants. Moreover,
significant resources have been allocated to the
National Protection Unit in order to hire 628 additional
protection personnel for former FARC-EP combatants.
We will not cease in our efforts to protect all those who
laid down their arms and bet on peace.
Our objective is to achieve zero attacks on excombatants, but it is well worth noting that in the first
half of 2021, the number of murders of ex-combatants
fell significantly. We wish there had been none, but this
year’s statistics show a drop of more than 20 per cent from
those of last year. Additionally, great progress has been
reported in judicial matters, both in the investigations
21-18873

13/07/2021

Colombia

and in the arrests of perpetrators and masterminds of
murders of ex-combatants. Unfortunately, in most cases
the perpetrators of those homicides are linked to drug
trafficking and FARC dissidents. It is also important to
note that the Office of the Attorney General reported
that, in April 2021, it was investigating 254 homicides,
16 disappearances and 42 attempts, on which it has
registered investigative progress in 52 per cent of cases,
including the issuance of 282 arrest warrants and more
than 40 convictions, in which the responsibility for
deaths has been ascribed to drug trafficking groups and
FARC dissidents.
For Colombians and those who have supported
the country since the signing of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace, it is essential that all transitional
justice mechanisms provide optimal results, which
will undoubtedly contribute to solid progress in the
reconciliation process. Although progress has been
made along some lines, such as kidnapping, as has been
affirmed by three speakers at today’s meeting, it is also
true that while the Special Jurisdiction for Peace has
defined kidnapping as a war crime and a crime against
humanity, Colombian society expects to see greater
efforts and speed on the part of the FARC in uncovering
the truth and bringing perpetrators to justice in the
many cases of sexual violence and child recruitment
committed in the course of the conflict.
There can be no doubt about our respect for the
independence of the transitional justice system, which
is palpable in the constructive and respectful dialogue
between President Duque and the President of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, Mr. Eduardo Cifuentes, as well
as in our efforts to establish a budget to strengthen its
jurisdiction and ensure its proper functioning. In that
context, I want to thank the Security Council for its
unanimous adoption of resolution 2574 (2021) in May,
and especially the United Kingdom for its support as
penholder. That resolution, which was submitted at our
request and extended the Mission’s mandate, should
inspire the transitional justice mechanisms, whose
progress is recognized in the report, to strengthen
their efforts to work more effectively and quickly. It
is important that all the investigations of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace prosper, and there must be
greater contributions in terms of truth, non-repetition
and compliance with the sentences that the jurisdiction
will impose.

S/PV. 8818

The report includes a cross-cutting issue that is at
the heart of the Government’s agenda — the gender
approach. That is one of our priorities to promote
equality, and I would like to thank Melissa Herrera
for her statement. I want to address one of her appeals,
because what she had to say was moving. That was
indeed the objective of all our policies on gender
equality. I think that Colombia can share with many
countries represented at this table the progress it
has achieved, from an institutional perspective, in
achieving genuine gender equality.
According to our analysis, about 57 per cent of
the gender indicators of the framework plan have been
completed or have a high degree of compliance, and
51 gender indicators that have registered significant
progress. The Kroc Institute for International Peace
Studies has highlighted the monitoring methodology
and the support of the 18 governmental entities.
Rural women are protagonists in peacebuilding.
That is why I would like to underscore the formal
allocation of land and financial support for multiple
women who are part of the peacebuilding process.
However, I do think that it is important for other women
former combatants to be heard — the women of the
Rosa Blanca organization — who have continuously
condemned all the atrocities and violations committed
against those who suffered at the hands of their
own commanders as former combatants against the
Colombian State.
In June, the policy document Conpes 4031 was
adopted, focusing attention on reparation for victims. It
includes a gender approach and establishes additional
actions to be taken. I want to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his work
in response to the request for support for the various
aspects of the dialogues among the Government, the
National Strike Committee and other participants in
the social protests that Colombia has witnessed over the
past two months. However, as I have already said, those
protests are not related to a lack of compliance on the
part of the Government with regard to the agreement,
but rather are linked to the suffering that many
countries have experienced as a result of the pain being
felt by all humankind owing to the pandemic, which
has killed millions of people and impoverished millions
more around the world. That is the main reason for
the significant unrest in Colombia. Of course poverty
and extreme poverty have worsened, which is why we
have given priority to addressing the request by young

21-1887319/21

S/PV.8818

Colombia

people: a programme has been set up to guarantee free
education to all young people in grades 1, 2 and 3.
Further, President Duque recently established a subsidy
for employers to generate new jobs for young people.
This subsidy, equivalent to 25 percent of wages, will
allow employers to hire many more young people and
thereby contribute to the social stability of our country.
Of course, during the protests there were deaths,
deaths that cause us pain; no matter the number, the
important thing is that there should not have been
a single death during the protests. But these deaths
occurred because, against a backdrop of valid,
legitimate protests, which our Government supports
and protects, small groups, armed and committed acts
of vandalism and destruction, unfortunately infiltrated
the protests, killing many citizens who were there.
I want the Council to know that we have had
15,000 protests since 28 April, and only for 1,400odd did security forces intervene. That represents that
11 per cent or slightly less required the intervention
of the security forces. Why? Because security
forces are obliged, on the one hand, to protect
peaceful — peaceful — demonstrations, as has been
mentioned today, and, on the other hand, to protect
the public, the safety of citizens, public order and
public property. What we saw there was a process
of systematic, organized, planned and financed
destruction intended to deteriorate the social, political
and economic conditions of our country. This is what
we experienced with horror in Colombia.
And unfortunately, as some Council members have
said, we also see that there is a strange or, once again,
unfortunate coincidence between the protests and
the upcoming electoral process. We believe in a true
peace that is built on institutions, on democracy, on the
division of powers, on economic investment to create
jobs. But sadly, there are people who want to come to
power by destroying the current system that we have
in Colombia, which is why the Security Council’s
understanding is so important.
The topic that brings us to this Chamber today is
the issue of the implementation of the Agreement and
its two mandates. We fully agree with the five priorities
mentioned by the Secretary-General in his report. But
I would really like to have the opportunity to clarify
or set straight many statements that were made today
in the light of the fact that much of Council members’
information has come to them through the media. I am
20/21

13/07/2021

going to speak directly to the various ambassadors in
Bogotá to make it clear that much of this information
really does not correspond to reality. We have functional
institutions — a Public Prosecutor’s Office, an Attorney
General’s Office — that are carrying out their activities
with complete independence and which are specifically
responsible for identifying any person responsible
for any violation of human rights or for any abuse of
authority and with the ability to impose the most drastic
sanctions, because we are totally convinced that this is
what is in keeping with our commitment to democracy
in Colombia.
I would like to say to Ms. Herrera that it seems to me
that all the requests she has addressed to the Colombian
State are totally viable. In fact, significant progress has
already been made with regard to many of her requests.
We are maintaining a dialogue with young people
throughout the country, specifically to draw up a pact
for youth that will last for the long term, committing
the Colombian State beyond the term of the current
Administration and strengthening, for the long term,
education, conditions for youth access to employment,
but above all the participation of young people. That is
why the president has insisted so much on the election
of youth councils, which was to be held last year. The
Bureau of Elections had everything ready, but the
pandemic came, so members of these youth councils
will have to be elected by young people, including
Ms. Herrera, this year. Colombian First Lady María
Juliana Ruiz, is also working hard to ensure that young
people have access to all opportunities, including to the
political leadership about which Ms. Herrera spoke.
We must also ensure that justice makes progress
in all investigations of crimes against young people
that have taken place in any context, be it the protests
or any other context. I mentioned that the statistics
cited in today’s are not precise. Our work with the
Attorney General’s Office and with the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights itself has involved
different figures, but, I repeat, all deaths must be
investigated, and those responsible must be identified
and punished. I also believe in what Ms. Herrera said,
namely, that the commitment has to be for the long
term, so that when we address these points with Carlos
Ruiz in Bogotá, they will give rise to a much more
formal commitment.
I am particularly grateful for the kind remarks
made here by several speakers — the representative
of Viet Nam, the representative of Mexico, the
21-18873

13/07/2021

S/PV. 8818

Colombia

representative of the United States, the representative
of the United Kingdom, the representative of Norway,
the representative of India — and for their expressions
of solidarity, especially that of representative of France
for our president on the totally unacceptable attack he
suffered in a helicopter. An attack on a president is an
attack on democracy and on the stability of a nation, and
it is very clear to us that, unfortunately, the perpetrators
of this attack have had a great deal of support, although
we cannot share the elements of that certainty with the
Council at this time.
I think it is really necessary to underline what the
representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines said;
for us it is also extremely worrying what is happening,
but I do believe that the different cases involving former
combatants and others are statistics worth specifying.
There have been so many points made by members of
the Council today that perhaps I should send them a
note, if that is customary, so that these assertions can be
cleared up. There are many statements to acknowledge,
but there are also many others that were made because
we might not have provided enough information.
We wish to keep the Council updated on a quarterly
basis, and our reports should show progress. I am sure
that Council members will see greater progress with
each passing quarter. In any case, I would like to
remind the Council that in November 2021 we will be
commemorating the fifth anniversary of the signing of
the Agreement.
We hope that all members of the Council will be
able to visit Colombia. I am extending the invitation on
behalf of President Iván Duque — yesterday he extended
a similar invitation to the Secretary-General — so that
they can also see for themselves what our country is
like, how the work of the Security Council has so greatly
contributed to Colombia’s progress and how Colombia
is a country where the commitment to dialogue, to
the construction of democracy, to the construction of
a truly prosperous, developed and inclusive country,
is a daily commitment — of the President, of his
Cabinet, of the members of the Administration in
general — but it is also a commitment present throughout
Colombian society.

At the same time, there is a lot of pain in Colombian
society because of so many years of humiliation and
suffering, but today we know what we all have to
build, and we are all looking forward to the future of
our country.
I would like to conclude with a very important
point that Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization
and Consolidation, Mr. Emilio Archila, asked me not
to overlook: ethnic groups. For us, it is fundamental
that peace in Colombia includes all the people of our
country, all people — men and women of all ethnicities
and races — and we cannot make any kind of
differentiation among them. But we also have a specific
body for gender issues, which is in the national budget,
and which has received resources in the amount of
$500,000 from the multi-donor roundtable. It has made
97 commitments, each of which has its own planning,
and many of which have already been fully achieved.
Further, in our territorial development plans, we also
have special mechanisms, with consultations both for
ethnic and indigenous communities, as well as the gender
roundtable I mentioned earlier. Let there be no doubt,
therefore, that Council members’ recommendations are
valid, but out of our own conviction, our own ethics and
our own dedication to Colombia, we know that there
can be no differentiation between races or ethnicities.
I would also like to remind the Council that we
have shown great commitment in our country with
regard to the pain of migration. In Colombia today we
have 2 million Venezuelans, for whom we are working
every day to vaccinate them and provide them with the
best living condition, as well as ensuring that they have
jobs and are truly able to integrate into our society. To
that end, President Duque Márquez has launched a 10year temporary protection programme, for which we
hope to continue to have the support of Member States.
I would very much like to thank all those countries that
participated in the donor event organized by Canada
on 17 June.
I apologize to you, Mr. President, for having
exceeded the time limit by a few minutes, but there
were very many issues raised in the statements that I
did want to overlook.
The meeting rose at noon.

21-1887321/21
