S/PV.7924

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7924th meeting

Thursday, 13 April 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2017/223)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-10037 (E)
*1710037*

S/PV.7924

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2017/223)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Brazil to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/313, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/223, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2350 (2017).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We
wecome the adoption of resolution 2350 (2017),
renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for a
period of six months, concluding in October. It has been
13 years since we first established the MINUSTAH
mandate. We welcome the fact that responsibilities will
be transferred to a new mission whose main role will
2/9

13/04/2017

be strengthening the capacities of national institutions
in Haiti in such a way that the Government will be in a
position to fully shoulder its own responsibilities after
the transition.
Against that backdrop, we voted in favour of the
resolution to express our support for the Government
and people of Haiti and in order to ensure that the
country can continue to make progress towards lasting
peace. We see the country as being ready to make
progress after the various success stories that we have
seen in terms of political stability. We would point in
particular to the presidential elections and the end of
the transitional phase.
On that particular point, we support the
establishment of the future mission, which will be in a
position to support the Government on the basis of the
three responsibilities enshrined in paragraph 6 we just
adopted. The mission will, of course, not assume those
responsibilities directly but support the Government
therein. We therefore supported the resolution because
we believe that the mandate of the upcoming mission
will not undermine the efforts of human rights
organizations of the United Nations working in Hiati.
We welcome the fact that there will be no overlap.
We must always be careful to ensure that the Security
Council’s resolutions do not have an adverse impact on
the work of other United Nations agencies and bodies
or the mandates granted by other bodies, such as the
Human Rights Council and the General Assembly.
Troop-contributing countries (TCCs) are working to
serve the cause of peace and security. We want to make
that point very clear. The capacity of troops needs to be
strengthened, and we need to plug any gaps that might
have an adverse impact on the way they function. Such
steps must be part of triangular cooperation between
the TCCs, the Security Council amd the Secretariat.
All of these aspects must be borne in mind and duly
studied and analysed within the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations as well, and not just here.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay): Uruguay voted in favour
of resolution 2350 (2017) on the basis of our belief that
this is the best way to support the continued transition
going forward in Haiti.
The new United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti will focus on three key areas: the
rule of law, security and human rights. With the
extension of the current mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) until
17-10037

13/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

October, we will be able to draw to a close a very
successful United Nations peacekeeping operation.
For the past 13 years and under the leadership Brazil,
MINUSTAH has played an intense role in difficult
circumstances — complicated at the outset by natural
factors, such as the earthquake of 2010 and last year’s
hurricane — and has always fulfilled its functions. We
also underscore the importance of the new Mission’s
ongoing cooperation and assistance so that Haiti can
achieve sustainable development.
We also reiterate our congratulations and best
wishes to the people and the Government of Haiti,
which Uruguay, as a friendly country, has supported
throughout every stage. We reiterate our support for
Brazil and the work of Ms. Sandra Honoré, as well as to
all the men and women who have participated and will
continue to participate in MINUSTAH as it completes
his mandate professionally and responsibly.
At the same time, we are grateful for all the
cooperation we have enjoyed from the Group of Friends
of Haiti throughout the years. I would like to make it
clear that in the negotiation process of the resolution,
the Group of Friends worked strenuously, as usual, to
submit to the Security Council a resolution that enjoyed
consensus. However, at the end of the negotiating
process within the Group of Friends, language was was
introduced into the resolution that had not previously
been discussed and that, in the view of many, did
not do justice to the outstanding work performed by
MINUSTAH for all these years.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation voted in favour of
resolution 2350 (2017) because of the importance of the
role that the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti plays in stabilizing the situation in that country,
and because there is a need to continue extending
assistance to the Government of Haiti. At the same
time, we would like to offer some comments on the
content of the resolution and the working methods of
the Council.
We note that there is a discrepancy, on the one
hand, between the documents submitted and the nature
of our recent discussions over the situation in Haiti and,
on the other, the statements made by the author of the
resolution and those who supported it. It will be recalled
that on 6 April, the Council came together in order to
assess the effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations (see S/PV.7918). Over the course of that

S/PV.7924

meeting, the United States delegation, which initiated
the meeting, stated that there was a need to go back to
basics in peacekeeping and make sure that we prevent an
uncontrolled bloating of mandates. The delegations and
the Secretariat said that it was important to make sure
that applicable mandates were made understandable,
clear and attainable. However, those ideas are not
reflected in the documents submitted. The mandate
of the mission is not clear. On one hand, the Mission
is to carry out the monitoring of human rights either
by itself or by helping the Government to do so. On
the other hand, it is stated that the decision was made
by the Council in line with Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, which implies the use of force.
We do not understand how, in principle, this could be
implemented in practice.
In the course of working on the draft resolution, we
heard objections. People said that the previous mission
also worked on the basis of Chapter VII, but let us take
a careful look. Its use had been very clearly limited
exclusively to issues having to do with maintaining
security. So, the question arises: how did the situation
in the country change? Is it that the penholders and
those who supported the resolution within the Council
are so convinced that, against the backdrop of a gneral
improvement of the situation in Haiti, the situation
violations of human rights has, contrarily, become a
threat to international peace and security? That would
be the only case in which this situation could become a
subject for consideration for the Security Council.
Let me recall that the Blue Helmets are in Haiti
because of issues having nothing to do with human
rights. The same logic also applies to the Secretariat’s
good offices. A question here is: to what extent are
they good if this is something that falls under Chapter
7 of the Charter? What is most surprising is that these
requests are being made against a background of basic
stabilization in Haiti, which is exactly what allowed us
to consider the drawdown and changing the format of the
presence of the United Nations in the country. Literally
two days ago, on 11 April (see S/PV.7920), we discussed
the Secretary-General’s report on the situation in Haiti
(S/2017/223). Basically all those who spoke then,
including the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Sandra Honoré and most members of the
Council, noted that a peaceful transfer of power had
taken place and that there was an improvement in the
security situation. They also noted that it was exactly

17-100373/9

S/PV.7924

The question concerning Haiti

these positive developments that enabled us to consider
the issue of reviewing the mandate of the mission.
During the discussion of the draft statement, we
also heard that a robust mandate was necessary to
supposedly maintain the levers of influence over the
Government. We are not convinced that in this situation
we need to be talking about exerting influence or
pressure, especially since we are talking about the
Mission’s success, which will enable us to close it in
six months. We think that in this context what we need
to be stressing is interaction and cooperation with the
host country, especially since there is a clear prospect
that the situation will normalize. Unfortunately, we
cannot confidently say that the text submitted was the
outcome of the work done by the Group of Fiends of
Haiti, and not only because the version adopted differs
from the version agreed in that format, but also because
of the criticism made by members of the Group about
the decision-making process within that informal body.
Mr. Fernández Revollo (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost, we
would like to thank the President for having convened
this meeting this morning. We would also like to pay
tribute to the hard work of the Group of Friends of Haiti,
as they participated in the drawing up of the text of
resolution 2350 (2017). We also thank the members of
the Security Council for having adopted the resolution.
Bolivia would like to reiterate its commitment
to the bright present and future of the Republic of
Haiti. We believe that the international community
needs to work as one in order to support the economic
development of Haiti and to ensure the stability of this
brother country. We would like to underscore the point
that the international community’s efforts need to be
pursued in close coordination and cooperation with
the Haitian Government and the authorities within the
country, always taking their priorities into account. Our
support for them must fully respect their sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.
In line with the position expressed by the
representative of Haiti, we would like to echo the
welcome to all that has been achieved in terms of security
and stability. Many of these achievements will pave the
way for a period of transition that will, in time, allow
the Haitian National Police to increasingly assume full
responsibility for the policing responsibilities in their
country. We support the Haitian statement with respect
to the convergence of opinion between Haiti and the
4/9

13/04/2017

United Nations with regard to the orderly drawdown and
withdrawal of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We hope that the new mission,
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti,
which will replace MINUSTAH, will continue to work
in close partnership with the national security forces
in Haiti, contributing to the full implementation of the
rule of law within Haiti and the upholding of human
rights, in line with the recommendations outlined in the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/223) and
fully commensurate with the needs and priorities set by
the Government and people of Haiti.
In the same vein, we believe that the Security
Council must continue to regularly assess the situation
on the ground in Haiti. It is for that reason that, as we
have previously announced, it is Bolivia’s intention,
under our presidency in June, to carry out a visit of
the Security Council to Haiti as a demonstration of our
ongoing interest in that country and continue to work
with it. That visit will enable us to receive information
first hand from the authorities in Haiti and to see for
ourselves the process of drawing down MINUSTAH
and the planning of a transition between MINUSTAH
and its replacement mission. We believe that a visit
in June will be the perfect opportunity to assess the
situation on the ground. The visit will partially be to
see how the Security Council can further contribute
to the stabilization of Haiti over the long-term and
how we can work with the people of Haiti to deliver
development for the country.
In order to achieve that overall purpose, we would
like to underscore the importance of cooperation
between the new mission and the country team of the
United Nations. All of the aforementioned elements can
make a valuable contribution to the pre-planning for the
new mission that the Secretary-General will establish.
The Security Council’s visit will be important for our
understanding of the new mission and our understanding
of what the elements of that mission need to be, all in
order to ensure that everybody is speaking with one
voice and acting in concert. We need to have a proper
understanding of the needs of the State in the current
reality so that we could probably assist and design the
replacement mission appropriately.
We would like to echo the words of the Chair of
the Group of Friends of Haiti, the representative of
Uruguay, particularly with respect to the language used
in paragraph 18, which is borrowed from a resolution on
another mission and thus reflects an entirely different
17-10037

13/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

reality from that in Haiti. That sews doubt over what
has been happening in Haiti. We would like to make
the point that paragraph 18 in no way reflects the
reality on the ground in Haiti. It casts aspersions on the
actions of MINUSTAH’s troops and police and in no
way reflects their behaviour. Bolivia has participated
in MINUSTAH in a professional and dedicated manner.
We enjoy the appreciation and recognition of the Haitian
people, which we are proud of.
We believe that the reference to Chapter VII in the
resolution in this particular instance does not properly
reflect the reality in the country. Similarly, the idea
of simply standardizing paragraphs for all Security
Council resolutions pertaining to peacekeeping
operations is neither workable nor beneficial to missions
or to the work of the Security Council. We cannot
have a one-size-fits-all approach to all peacekeeping
operations. They will have their differences. Each
reality and each set of circumstances are different.
We must tailor the language of resolutions to those
different realities.
In the new era in which Haiti finds itself, Bolivia
would like to reiterate its commitment to its Haitian
brothers and sisters as they seek to develop a stable
democracy and sustainable development. We will work
together with the Security Council and the entire United
Nations in order to continue that support.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2350 (2017), which
closes the Mission in six months and establishes a new
successor mission, which will deal with issues related
to police, rule of law and human rights, in accordance
with the recommendations of the Secretary-General.
This is an important decision, and we welcome the fact
that the Council adopted the resolution unanimously.
Thirteen years having passed since the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
was established, it was time to register the success
achieved by the Mission in terms of stabilizing Haiti,
and to move toward a new type of United Nations
presence, one more tailored to the needs of the country
and the conditions on the ground, which have evolved
considerably and in a positive direction.
The work carried out by MINUSTAH in recent
years will enable us to get Haiti out of the emergency
situation in which it found itself until recently, by
restoring a climate of relative security, participating
in reconstruction efforts after the 2010 earthquake,

S/PV.7924

or contributing to the substantial strengthening of the
Haitian National Police — the increase in authority of
which is a token of stability for the country. Much of the
credit is due to the United Nations and the Council, but
also to the troop-contributing countries, without which
the Mission would have been unable to play its role.
The new operation, which will begin in October, is
to consolidate the advances already made by making
the Haitian National Police an autonomous actor. It will
also engage in other major projects in the areas of the
rule of law, the fight against impunity, increasing the
professionalism and the independence of the judiciary,
and the establishment of a correctional system that is
compatible with the needs of the country and respect
for the rights of detainees.
The human rights situation, which remains an area
of concern, should also be monitored attentively, and be
the object of regular recommendations. We believe that
is critical to maintaining an effective and lasting peace,
and is therefore inextricably linked to other activities of
the next mission.
France has long called on the Council to shoulder
its responsibility with regard to the question of Haiti
by taking the necessary measures to ensure that the
Organization’s means of engagement in the country
remain, over time, as appropriate and efficient as
possible. That was done today and we are quite
pleased. However, this new stage does not spell the
end of United Nations engagement with Haiti. On the
contrary, it demonstrates the ability of the Council to
develop, in an ongoing manner, United Nations activity
in the field — activity of which the primary concern
is to respond in the best possible way to the needs of
the people concerned. This new stage also signals the
establishment of a more appropriate and more effective
tool for the benefit of Haiti and Haitians.
I should like to conclude by also paying tribute to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Sandra Honoré, and to the staff of MINUSTAH.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2350 (2017). It is a good demonstration of
how the United Nations should be sustaining peace by
selecting the right tools at the right time for the right
ends. As we argued on Tuesday, the Haiti of today is not
the Haiti of 2004. It is a country on a trajectory toward
greater stability. Peacekeeping troops performing a
stabilization role are no longer the right tool in Haiti.

17-100375/9

S/PV.7924

The question concerning Haiti

The resolution bring the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to a close, and I welcome
that. We thank all of the troops and all of the troopcontributing countries for their service to MINUSTAH.
The United Nations holds other tools that are
required for today’s Haiti. United Nations police units
are still needed to uphold the security achieved to date,
but the primary focus of the United Nations must now
be ensuring that the Haitian National Police is able to
perform that role itself.
Support for Haiti’s security capacities will not alone
sustain peace in the country. As history has told us time
and time again, it is the rule of law and the protection of
human rights, not the capacity to use force that delivers
long-term stability. It is welcome that the resolution
launches a new peace operation, the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
with the appropriate mandate and authorization to
advance toward those very ends. Ultimately, however,
the new Mission has one overarching objective, which
should be to work tirelessly to establish the conditions
for its own redundancy. MINUJUSTH should be
working toward a careful exit through the phased
handover of responsibilities to the Haitian Government
and greater reliance on the tools of the United Nations
country team. I am glad that an exit plan will be
developed from the very start of it deployment.
Haiti is still fragile. It needs the support of the
United Nations through a new peace operation in the
short term and the use of other United Nations soon
after that. We can never have an absolute guarantee of
continued stability in any context. The experience of
peacekeeping withdrawals in Haiti’s recent past loom
large. But fear of the worst outcome should not restrain
us from pursuing the best, which is a peaceful, just and
stable Haiti standing proudly on her own two feet.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in French): Italy
welcomes the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2350 (2017), which marks a critical turning
point, moving the focus of United Nations peacekeeping
in Haiti from stabilization to institution-building. The
unanimity of the Council will ensure that the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti will hold
firm in the implementation of their mandates. It also
demonstrates the consensus within the Security Council
on the Haitian question, which is very important at
this stage.
6/9

13/04/2017

My country reaffirms its support for a responsible
transition, as set out in the resolution just adopted. We
are committed to continue to help Haiti on their path
toward a stable and inclusive democracy and lasting
peace. With this resolution, the Council establishes
a road map that will ensure that the United Nations
assistance is appropriate to the current circumstances
in Haiti. This is an important stage in the peacekeeping
mandate, which will be tailored to the real needs of
the country.
Italy welcomes, in particular, the importance
attached to human rights, the participation of women
and the principle of responsibility, to which we attribute
a key role in the ability of Haitian authorities to achieve
their objectives, as well as to ensure the credibility of
United Nations missions.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): Japan welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2350 (2017). We
thank the United States for taking a leading role in the
negotiations. Japan voted in favour of the resolution
based on the clear progress achieved in Haiti.
The Council has a responsibility to adopt mission
configurations that match the situation on the ground.
The time is right for a responsible transfer of tasks to
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) and the United Nations country team.
The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) has significantly contributed to the
stabilization of the country over the past 13 years, and
we commend the men and women who have served
there. Haiti has demonstrated ownership of the electoral
process. We are also pleased by improvements in the
capacity of the Haitian National Police; however, there
is still more to do, including with respect to further
strengthening its capacity and the rule of law.
With that in mind we have given MINUJUSTH a
clear and focused mandate in a planned two-year time
frame. We believe this new Mission, together with
Haitian ownership, will help to further consolidate
the gains achieved by MINUSTAH. The people of
Haiti will continue to be Japan’s first priority. We will
continue to support the consolidation of stability and
development in the country going forward.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the United
States delegation, as the penholder, as well as other
stakeholders for their efforts with regard to resolution
2350 (2017), which we support.
17-10037

13/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

Kazakhstan fully recognizes the importance of the
activities of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti to restore and secure a stable environment in Haiti.
In the light of the new tasks that have been delegated, we
support the transition to a new and integrated Mission
focusing on the rule of law, criminal justice, and human
rights reforms in the security and other sectors. My
delegation welcome the progress made in strengthening
stability and democracy, and in restoring constitutional
order in the country following the peaceful and orderly
elections — which is recognized as a commendable
achievement for a country still in transition after facing
many setbacks.
The strong engagement of the international
community is an obvious necessity for Haiti’s
sustainable development, with its measures to improve
housing, water, education, health care and promote
gender equality. Haiti also needs all our support in
combating transnational crime. However, this is the
beginning of a new era for Haiti. The situation on
the ground is still fragile and the Security Council
should continue to follow developments in and around
the country.
At this stage, the focus of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, the United Nations
and others is on reforming and strengthening State
institutions to lay the foundation of stability, first,
by implementing the transition plan and building the
operational and institutional capacity of the Haitian
National Police. Simultaneously, the new mandate,
by ensuring law and order, will indirectly support
peacebuilding and promote socioeconomic development
geared towards a framework of mutual accountability
among the Government of Haiti, the United Nations
and the international community.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
orderly withdrawal of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the concurrent
step-up of a smaller successor peacekeeping mission,
on the basis of ensuring overall stability in Haiti,
is a consensus reached by all Council members and
is called for by the current situation. It meets the
expectations of all parties. Today’s decision can help
the Haitian Government to assume its responsibility
for maintaining national security and stability. In the
light of those considerations, China voted in favour of
resolution 2350 (2017).

S/PV.7924

Meanwhile, we believe that the underlying tenet of
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations is the
maintenance of international peace and security, which
does not involve human rights. We hope that Council
members will stay united in supporting MINUSTAH’s
orderly withdrawal and continue to promote stability
and development in Haiti. MINUSTAH has played an
important role in maintaining security and stability
in Haiti since 2004. China highly commends this
development and progress.
As we speak, the situation in Haiti is largely
stable. New development opportunities have emerged.
We hope that all parties in Haiti will pull together to
preserve the current positive momentum and maintain
national stability and development. We hope that the
new Haitian Government will identify a development
path suited and tailored to national conditions without
delay, and that the international community, including
countries of the region, will continue to contribute to an
improved situation in Haiti.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
voted in favour of resolution 2350 (2017) as a further
sign of its continued solidarity with the Government
and people of Haiti, with whom we share special
historical relations. This commitment led to Senegal’s
deployment of 173 police officers to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). In 2010,
following the horrific earthquake that struck Haiti,
Senegal responded by hosting more than 200 students
who were trained in human rights and in gender rights
in particular, which ultimately made it possible for this
country to manage these issues.
Senegal is therefore pleased to have voted with
the other Security Council members to extend
MINUSTAH’s mandate for a further six months and
for the last time with a view to its drawn down on
15 October. We also welcome the establishment of the
new United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti on 16 October to support the Haitian Government
as it seeks to strengthen its institutions, particularly in
the areas of rule of law, the police force and human
rights. Senegal will continue to be a partner of Haiti in
those efforts.
On 11 April (see S/PV.7920) I noted here that
Haiti was at a crossroads. As we work to restructure
MINUSTAH, we appeal to the international community
to step up its cooperation in all areas with this country,
which, in the eyes of Senegal and Africa, I repeat, is

17-100377/9

S/PV.7924

The question concerning Haiti

the first black republic and the first South American
democracy. Our appeal was all the more urgent as, in the
transition from the newly elected President, the outgoing
provisional President said that the vulnerability of Haiti
at the environmental, economic and social levels was
inexorably deteriorating every day, as 96 per cent of the
population was living constantly from the threat of two
well-known hazards: drought and floods.
As if response, in his own inauguration address
President Jovenel Moïse, the fifty-eighth President of
Haiti, said that he would fulfil his campaign promises
before the end of his first mandate so that, inter alia, his
Government could restore the trust of the Haitian people
in the political system and class and in the national
elites; reinforce social inclusion and national solidarity;
boost the productive sectors of the economy, including
tourism, by the domestication of new technologies; and,
of course, build a resilient nation able to withstand the
natural disasters that frequently strike the country.
That is why Senegal appeals to and commends the
Group of Friends of Haiti, chaired by our colleague,
the Permanent Representative of Uruguay, to continue
to advocate for that country, which still needs the
United Nations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
Today’s resolution 2350 (2017) brings to a close
a Mission that began in 2004 when Haiti was first
faced with an armed conflict that had spread to
several cities across the country. Accountability and
reporting language has been added so that we are able
to track the effectiveness of remaining personnel.
Two regional hubs will be removed to focus efforts
in the areas that need the most support. As the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti draws down and
the new United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti gears up, the Haitian people will be set on
the path of independence and self-sufficiency. This
is a success story when it comes to drawing down a
peacekeeping mission.
The United States will continue to stand with
the people of Haiti. We have previously noted the
contributions of many of the peacekeeping troops in
Haiti. While this is seen as a success, unfortunately,
it is a nightmare for many in Haiti, who will never
be able to forget and live with brutal scars. We must
acknowledge the abandoned children, 12-15 years old,
who lived every day with hunger. They were lured by
8/9

13/04/2017

peacekeepers with cookies and snacks. The high price
of this food was sexual abuse. According to Paisley
Dodds of the Associated Press, the children were
passed from soldier to soldier. One boy was gang raped
in 2011 by peacekeepers, who disgustingly filmed it on
a cellphone.
What do we say to those kids? Did these peacekeepers
keep them safe? We must acknowledge those realities.
How can we learn from those acts? These peacekeepers
are sent into vulnerable communities to protect the
innocent, not to exploit or rape them. The United States
has made it clear to the United Nations and all troopcontributing countries that these abuses must stop.
Countries that refuse to hold their soldiers accountable
must recognize that this either stops or their troops will
go home and their financial compensation will end. The
abuses do not represent a troop-contributing country
poorly if they hold those abusers accountable and stress
this to the soldiers who are in place.
The United States will continue to work closely
with Haiti as it makes progress towards security and
stability. With the international community, we stand
by the Government of Haiti and are committed to the
country’s democratic development, independence
and economic growth. We will, however, continue to
push for the accountability of those troops in Haiti,
as well as all troop-contributing countries involved in
peacekeeping efforts. We owe it the vulnerable in those
countries, who desperately need peace and security. I
ask Council members to join me in that effort.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of Brazil, Chile and Guatamala.
Two days ago (see S/PV.7920), we expressed before
the Council our support for the Secretary-General’s
recommendations on gradually withdrawing the
military component of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) until the closure of the
Mission on 15 October. We have also supported the
proposal to establish a follow-on mission focused on
strengthening the rule of law, police development and
monitoring human rights in Haiti.
Regrettably, we were surprised, however, to see
in resolution 2350 (2017) the last-minute introduction
of paragraph 18, which had never been discussed in
17-10037

13/04/2017

The question concerning Haiti

the Group of Friends of Haiti. Although we favour
accountability in peacekeeping operations, we believe
that the content of this paragraph is unnecessary in the
current resolution and does not reflect the reality on the
ground and the high-level performance of MINUSTAH’s
troops. During the 13 years of MINUSTAH, there has
been no problem at all regarding undeclared caveats,
lack of effective command and control, refusal to obey
orders, failure to respond to attacks on civilians or
inadequate equipment, as paragraph 18 may suggest.
In a moment of review and possibly reform of
peacekeeping operations, it is crucial to highlight

S/PV.7924

the importance of tailored approaches. The idea
of standardizing and replicating paragraphs in all
resolutions of the Council regarding peacekeeping
operations is ill conceived. One size does not fit all.
Our countries are very proud of the work done by
MINUSTAH, including its military component,
which has had exemplary behaviour and operational
performance, contributing to its success and ultimately
to the work of the Security Council.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

17-100379/9
