United Nations

S/PV.3980 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fourth Year

3980th Meeting
Monday, 22 February 1999, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Fowler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Canada)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bahrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gambia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Petrella
Mr. Buallay
Mr. Valle
Mr. Qin Huasun
Mr. Dejammet
Mr. Dangue Réwaka
Mr. Touray
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Andjaba
Mr. van Walsum
Mr. Fedotov
Mr. Türk
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Burleigh

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

99-85137 (E)

*99-85131*

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
The meeting was resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President (interpretation from French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Azerbaijan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Kouliev (Azerbaijan) (interpretation from
Russian): First of all, we would like to express our
appreciation, Mr. President, for your important initiative to
convene an open debate on a very acute and pressing
matter: the protection of civilians in armed conflict. This
topic undoubtedly represents the fundamental challenge
facing the international community and in particular the
Security Council.
On 12 February, we had an opportunity to listen to the
thoughtful and illuminating briefings by Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and Mr.
Cornelius Sommaruga, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross. The Council members also
expressed their views and ideas on the matter. On the same
day, the Council adopted a presidential statement that we
believe will have far-reaching significance. The Azerbaijani
delegation welcomes and fully supports the Council’s
request to the Secretary-General to submit a report
containing concrete recommendations to the Council by
September 1999 on ways in which the Council, acting
within its sphere of responsibility, could improve the
physical and legal level of protection provided for civilians
in situations of armed conflict.
The issue under discussion today has, in our view, at
least two levels. Therefore, it must be adequately addressed.
The first level concerns the problem of the protection of
civilians in terms of their physical protection and their
physical survival, which needs to be dealt with immediately
by the Security Council, within its mandate. The second
level is a complex one that involves a specific mechanism
consisting of various interrelated elements, ranging from the
body of international humanitarian norms and provisions to
the agencies authorized to ensure the rights of the civilian
population in situations of armed conflict and to provide
humanitarian assistance for them, and so on.
During the previous meeting of the Council on this
subject, almost all speakers concurred that in contemporary
conflicts civilian populations are being deliberately and
indiscriminately targeted and subjected to violence and
physical destruction. The Azerbaijani people have

2

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999
experienced all this, having been exposed as they were to
external aggression. It is a sad coincidence that the
Security Council is taking up the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict at this time, when seven
years ago, on the night of 25 February and in the early
hours of 26 February 1992, the Armenian armed forces,
with the assistance of the 366th motor-rifle regiment of
the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, invaded
the Azerbaijani town of Khojaly. Having razed the town
to the ground, they killed hundreds of innocent people,
not even sparing women, children or the elderly.
Thousands were imprisoned and subjected to brutal
violence and humiliation. In our country 26 February was
proclaimed the day of the Khojaly genocide and a day of
national mourning in Azerbaijan.
To prevent the reoccurrence of a Khojaly-type
tragedy anywhere at any time, the Security Council must,
in a timely and adequate manner, use its full authority, as
enshrined in the Charter, and to use means ranging from
political and diplomatic to military.
We fully support Ambassador Türk of Slovenia, who
said,
“The basic aim of United Nations humanitarian
action should be human security, with the key
to security being physical rather than only legal
protection.” (S/PV.3977, p. 11)
Providing human security is one of the main
responsibilities of the Security Council. In this
connection, conflict prevention assumes ever greater
importance. This is the best way to protect the civilian
population. Unfortunately, the Council has had to deal
more frequently with open conflicts.
The main method, if it can be put that way, of
conducting so-called combat operations during
contemporary armed conflicts is ethnic cleansing,
whereby a part of the territory of a sovereign State is
cleansed of its local population, who, in turn, become
displaced persons and virtual refugees on their own soil.
The scale of ethnic cleansing can vary. In Azerbaijan, it
involves approximately 20 per cent of the occupied
territories and about 1 million refugees and displaced
persons. I would like to point out that ethnic cleansing
allows invaders to ignore the Geneva Conventions,
thereby actually resorting to Stalin’s ominous “joke”: “No
man — no problem”.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Today, throughout the world, this category of the
population includes more than 20 million people who
urgently need adequate attention from the international
community. Mr. Otunnu, in his statement and further
remarks, particularly drew attention to the fact that the most
vulnerable group of an affected population is displaced
persons and that there is no agreed framework for providing
protection for these people. There are arrangements for
providing relief, but there is no framework for providing
actual protection to these populations. Our delegation
believes that it would be entirely appropriate for Mr.
Francis Deng, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Internally Displaced Persons, to
participate and to speak in the debate.
In discussing the issue of civilians in armed conflict,
we must devote particular attention to the question of
children as victims of conflict, either as immediate
instruments of war or as the recipients of physical,
emotional or psychological traumas and injuries. The
statements made by Ms. Bellamy and Mr. Otunnu at the
previous meeting of the Council contained new and
constructive ideas and practical proposals. We are
convinced that these could make an important contribution
to addressing the matter under consideration. Azerbaijan, as
a member of the Executive Board of UNICEF, attaches
great importance to the problems of children and armed
conflict as well as to alleviating the effects of armed
conflicts on children. It is actively involved in elaborating
various rehabilitation programmes under the auspices of
UNICEF.
In this respect, we are particularly concerned by illicit
transfers of arms into conflict zones, and we must naturally
redouble our efforts to curb this process. It is worth
recalling, as underlined by the Secretary-General in his
report on Africa, that halting the flow of arms to areas of
chronic instability is an essential element of any strategy to
reduce the level of brutality against civilian and
humanitarian workers. We share the view of Ambassador
Sergey Lavrov of Russia that we need to highlight the task
of curbing arms flows into conflict areas, because this has
a direct impact on better enabling humanitarian agencies to
assist refugees and to perform their other tasks.
In this context, violations of arms embargoes imposed
by the Council give rise to great concern. If the Council’s
sanctions are being ignored, then what reaction could be
expected to the Council’s appeals not to transfer arms into
conflict areas? We should at least concur here with the
Secretary-General when he states in his report on Africa
that exporting countries have a responsibility to exercise

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999
restraint, particularly with respect to the export of
weapons into zones of conflicts or tension.
Last, but not least, it is alarming that the gap
between the norms of humanitarian law and their
application has never been wider. The task of ensuring
their application by all actors without exception is
therefore a matter of top priority. There is no doubt that
the Security Council has the potential constructively to
contribute to strengthening international humanitarian law
and ensuring its application. We believe that the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council must also
address this complex question. Given the nature and scale
of the problem, we believe that it would be appropriate to
include the question of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict on the agenda of the Millennium
Assembly.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table.
If I may be somewhat presumptuous, I assume that
at the conclusion of a long and distinguished diplomatic
career, this may be the last occasion that Ambassador
Elaraby will have to address the Council, where, of
course, he so ably represented his country only recently.
I believe that I can say, on behalf of the Council, that we
shall all miss his company and wise counsel.
I give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt): Thank you, Mr. President, for
your very kind words, which I greatly appreciate.
(spoke in Arabic)
It is my pleasure also to welcome the initiative taken
by your country, Canada, to convene this extremely
important meeting on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and to hold the open meeting of 12 February
under the presidency of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Canada.
I should like also to thank you, Sir, for giving States
that are not members of the Security Council the
opportunity to hear the statements made by Mr. Vieira de
Mello, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Cornelio
Sommaruga, Chairman of the International Committee of
the Red Cross; Ms. Bellamy, Executive Director of the
United Nations Children’s Fund; and Mr. Olara Otunnu,

3

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.
There is no doubt that the issues that have been raised
concern us all. In this connection, I am pleased today to
comment on the views that drew Egypt’s attention at the
two meetings at which we heard those statements.
Let me at the outset point out that it is important that
the Council, when seized with such an important and urgent
question, not get bogged down in pure theory to the
detriment of action. The Council should handle this
question with full respect for the delicate balance of the
roles assigned to various organs under the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular the role of the General
Assembly in considering the general principles of
cooperation to eliminate human suffering, including
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The delegation of Egypt believes that in the light of
the nature and scope of this issue, it would be desirable to
inscribe this item on the agenda of the General Assembly
as well as that of the Economic and Social Council, in
order that more comprehensive discussions be held to
supplement Canada’s wise decision to convene this Council
meeting.
The Council’s responsibility, as I understand it, is
based on its competence under the Charter, including the
complementarity between its work and that of humanitarian
agencies — work that now exceeds the capacities of the
United Nations, including the Security Council.
As this century draws to a close and we prepare to
enter a new millennium, and in a year when the world is
commemorating the hundredth anniversary of the First
International Peace Conference at The Hague and the
fiftieth anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions, it is
regrettable that we should witness an increase in the
number of civilians who are victims of armed conflict.
Indeed, civilians represent 75 to 80 per cent of such
victims, as seen in Sierra Leone, Rwanda, Liberia, Kosovo,
the Great Lakes region and in other areas.
This is reprehensible and shameful regardless of
whether civilians are deliberately targeted or become the
incidental victims of collateral damage. However, this
phenomenon has causes and roots, mainly the fact that the
Council has not been able to fulfil its functions because of
political considerations. The Security Council should
therefore assume its responsibility to find radical solutions
to the conflicts that jeopardize international peace and

4

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999
security, and resolve them in an integrated and global
manner by analysing their causes. This will prevent the
escalation of violence among the combatants and avert
serious humanitarian consequences such as the
displacement or expulsion of populations or their exodus
to neighbouring countries, which would bring further
suffering to the civilian populations and lead to an
unending vicious circle.
We reiterate this to emphasize the importance of
proceeding with concrete action and not limiting ourselves
to rehashing legal issues.
There is clearly an unprecedented gap between the
norms of international humanitarian law and their actual
implementation.
The issue, however, is not to revise such rules,
which will evolve organically and must always be
scrupulously implemented. Instead, we should ensure the
implementation of obligations agreed by the international
community, as represented by the 188 States parties to the
1949 Conventions, which are committed under common
article 1 to ensuring respect for the norms of the
Conventions in all circumstances. We must all ensure that
there is no conflict between the application of
international humanitarian law and the need to observe
and implement the provisions of the Charter. It is
essential, not to allow the implementation of international
humanitarian law or the practical considerations of
humanitarian protection to lead to contraventions of the
Charter.
We welcome the Council’s wise reaction to
situations in which civilians are targeted and humanitarian
assistance is deliberately hindered. Many current conflicts
are taking place within rather than between States. We
must therefore determine the extent to which the United
Nations can actually intervene to settle such conflicts. The
international community should preserve the fundamental
characteristic of States — their sovereignty — which is
the very foundation of contemporary international law and
a key principle of the Charter. This, of course, is also
addressed in paragraph 7 of Article 2, which defines the
relationship between matters which are essentially within
the domestic jurisdiction of any State and the enforcement
measures the Council may take when international peace
and security are threatened.
The international community should also ensure that
the Council respect the fundamental criteria laid down in
the Charter on the use of force solely under Chapter VII.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Article 39 provides for the use force only when the
Security Council determines the existence of any threat to
the peace, breach of the peace, or act of aggression and
makes recommendations or decides what measures shall be
taken in accordance with Articles 41 and 42. There is a
distinction to be drawn between the rules of international
law on the protection of civilians in international conflicts,
on the one hand, and in internal conflicts, on the other. This
distinction can be based on legal as well as practical
considerations.
I cannot fail here to express my full satisfaction at the
fact that certain members of the Security Council, including
permanent members, have mentioned the need for the
Council to act within the limits of its competence. We
support their appeal to ensure that different yardsticks not
be used in the area of human rights. The international
community must grant equal attention to all situations in
which there is loss of life or egregious violation of human
rights, wherever they may occur and without bias for the
political considerations of some members of the Council,
particularly the permanent members, over the general
concerns of the Council and the Members of the United
Nations as a whole. Thus, the Council must accord equal
attention to the peoples of the Balkans, Palestine and other
occupied Arab territories where there have been
displacements, isolation, demographic changes or any
situation requiring international protection.
It is also regrettable that the world must currently
confront the phenomenon of the systematic exploitation of
children, who are often compelled under different guises by
force to participate in conflicts. It has been estimated that
approximately 300,000 children are being used as soldiers
in current conflicts. The Egyptian delegation urges all
belligerents in the various conflicts throughout the world to
respect children’s innocence and ensure that it be preserved,
for children are our hope for future peace. We also support
the practical recommendation made by certain speakers that
the minimum age for the recruitment of soldiers be raised
to 18. More than 2 million children have been killed, 1
million orphaned, more than 6 million severely wounded
and more than 10 million displaced. This gives us pause
and we must take it very seriously.
We believe that the protection of children requires
action at several levels. The key lies in full respect for
human rights, especially those of civilians, and in the
education of combatants on the rules for the protection of
children. Specific rules must be added to the code of
conduct on the protection of children. We must ensure that
humanitarian personnel is trained in the protection of

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999
children in armed conflict. In this connection, we would
like State and non-State actors alike to commit themselves
to sparing children the scourge of war and to ensuring
that those who survive wars do not become vindictive in
their suffering.
Concerning the impact on civilians of sanctions
imposed by the Council, I also wish to point out that
these sanctions affect children first and foremost in the
areas of nutrition, health, education and psychology. The
sanctions that have been imposed in our times on certain
States, such as Iraq, have had truly tragic consequences
for the civilian population in general and children in
particular, as well as on third countries, engendering
bitterness and exacerbating aggressiveness. These
situations should be revisited and innovative responses
considered to ensure that the victims — civilians in
general and children in particular — receive help.
Another important issue is the guarantee of
protection for humanitarian personnel. Disquieting and
deplorable are the current conflicts in which humanitarian
agencies cannot intervene because human rights, safety
and security are being flouted. When the safety of
humanitarian personnel cannot be ensured, they cannot
carry out their jobs. Many have suffered in the line of
duty, being killed, injured or kidnapped. There must be
greater sensitization in humanitarian affairs to the
alleviation of human suffering.
Our delegation wishes here to pay a tribute to the
very important role played by the International Committee
of the Red Cross, particularly in disseminating these ideas
and in trying to ensure respect for humanitarian law.
Since last year, the world has witnessed two important
events capable of promoting the implementation of
international humanitarian law.
The first may apply in theory: the adoption of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court. We hope that
it will be up to the task of punishing those who practice
their violent activities without scruple. The Statue of the
Court is intended principally to protect civilians and we
hope that the punishment of perpetrators in these
situations will serve to keep others from repeating such
activities.
The second development is the positive and
unprecedented decision to call upon the High Contracting
Parties to the 1949 Geneva Conventions to convene a
conference of the States parties on 15 July this year in the
United Nations Office in Geneva on measures to enforce

5

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
the Fourth Geneva Convention in the occupied Palestinian
territory and to ensure its respect in accordance with
common article 1. This would make it possible to hold
similar conferences for follow-up and support and to
monitor implementation of such conventions. Egypt
believes that the holding of this important conference is one
step forward to enhance international humanitarian law.
Egypt is profoundly convinced that the Swiss Government,
as the depositary State of the four Conventions, will spare
no effort to ensure the success of the Conference.
Having said this, I should like to revert to the role of
the Security Council, to reaffirm what I have said at the
outset and what was stated already by the Egyptian
delegation, on what considerations should be taken into
account in the determination of the mandate of any
operation which has a military component and which reacts
to humanitarian issues on conflict.
First, we must draw a distinction between the
responsibility and objective of the action and the
responsibility and objective of the humanitarian effort. The
Council should avoid the pitfall of leaving the humanitarian
actions and discussions as an alternative to political or
military actions.
Secondly, this mandate must always include
arrangements related to the voluntary return of refugees,
their repatriation and their compensation for loss of
property.
Thirdly, rules of engagement must also be clarified
and rendered more specific, as they are the very foundation
for United Nations forces in dealing with the parties to a
conflict. We must ensure that tragic events such as those
that occurred in Bosnia and Herzegovina do not recur.
Those rules should include the principles established in the
traditional peacekeeping emergency operations which the
United Nations began in Egypt in 1956. Those principles
can be summarized in a few words: neutrality, self-defence
and the ability to protect headquarters.
Finally and in conclusion, the Security Council asked
the Secretary-General to submit a detailed report containing
practical recommendations on the means by which the
Council could enhance physical and legal protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict. We support the
idea that the Secretary-General should meet this request,
and in view of the complementarity between the Council
and the whole system of humanitarian protection I have
mentioned, my delegation also said the Secretary-General
should submit his report to the General Assembly as well,

6

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999
so that the Council and the Assembly may both shoulder
their responsibilities without contradicting each other.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Uruguay. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and make his statement.
Mr. Pérez Otermin (Uruguay) (interpretation from
Spanish): I should like to begin by expressing thanks and
congratulations to you, Sir, on your initiative for having
convened this open meeting of the Security Council today
in order to hear the views of the Member States of the
United Nations that are not members of the Security
Council on an issue of such vital importance as the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, an issue which
involves and affects all of us.
Allow me also to congratulate the Permanent
Representative of Brazil, Ambassador Celso Amorim, for
having convened during his tenure as President last month
the meeting on 21 January, when we heard the excellent
statement of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
That meeting, together with the one held on 12
February during the Canadian presidency, in the person of
the Canadian Foreign Minister, Mr. Axworthy, which
showed the importance which your country attaches to
this issue, allowed sufficient elements of judgement and
suggestions to be voiced so that our intervention will be
very brief to the extent that we fully agree with the
contents and suggestions of the speakers invited to make
statements during those meetings.
We would also like to congratulate Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello, Mr. Cornelio Sommaruga, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Ms. Carol
Bellamy, Executive Director of the United Nations
Children’s Fund, and Mr. Olara Otunnu,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict. My country’s position fully coincides
with all the content of their statements and suggestions.
We also emphatically support the statement of the
President of the Council of 12 February of this year,
contained in document S/PRST/1999/6.
My country, Uruguay, is attending this meeting of
the Security Council with the authority conferred on it as
one of the founding Members of the United Nations and
one of the principal contributors to peacekeeping
operations in relative terms to its population and the size

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999

of its armed forces, and it has made such contributions
from the very beginning.

rights of those who so generously and disinterestedly do
humanitarian work.

Having looked carefully at the records of the two
meetings of the Security Council to which we have
referred, which contain not only the statements of those
mentioned above who were invited to speak, but also the
wise statements of representatives of the member States of
the Security Council, it would seem that nothing remains to
be said, for these statements seem to be enough for the
Secretary-General to prepare the document requested of him
through the presidential statement, a request we fully agree
with as well.

We have on many occasions noted that the primary
purpose of the United Nations is the maintenance of
international peace and security, as clearly stated in
Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Charter. This proposition is
the foundation on which all the others must be
established. Without peace it is not possible to establish
a democratic system of government, and without
democracy it is not possible to maintain a mechanism that
will ensure genuine protection of human rights. A strong
and independent judiciary is unthinkable in any political
system other than a genuine democracy in which there is
a clear separation of the three state powers: the executive,
the legislative and the judicial.

It is clear that the time to continue formulating
international norms in this area has passed, and the time has
now come to ensure that these norms are fully
implemented. We therefore view the presence of States
non-members of the Security Council here as one more
indication of the Council’s policy of having an ongoing
exchange of views between the Council and all of the
Member States, which contributes to greater transparency
in its activities.

Allow me once again to express our full support for
the clear proposals made by speakers. Without attempting
to establish priorities among these proposals, let us state
that to build peace, once it has been re-established, there
must be at least a minimum of the necessary economic
and social development.

Therefore, Uruguay today offers all its political
support to the Security Council so that it can exercise its
authority in accordance with the letter of the Charter of the
Organization and so that it can demand and affirm in armed
conflict, the defence of civilians and in fulfilment of
international norms of humanitarian law and human rights,
for this is part of its international responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security. In this connection, we
must not forget the clear provision contained in Article 24
of the Charter whereby we, the Member States, conferred
on the Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
acknowledged that in carrying out its duties under this
responsibility the Security Council would act on behalf of
all of us.

Thus we would like to reiterate here what Uruguay
has stated on other occasions: the best way to prevent
conflict, and internal conflict in particular, is by
contributing to the economic development of peoples,
including such essential social components as education
and health.

Therefore, in this interplay of those who decide and
those who carry out the decisions, we understand that it is
our responsibility to renew our full support to the Security
Council in its effort to uphold the rights of civilians in
times of war.

In the light of the documents mentioned, words are
not enough. Therefore, Uruguay, without overloading its
own responsibilities in this regard, renews its full political
support for the efforts of the Security Council and the
Secretary-General to protect the rights of civilians in
armed conflicts, as these efforts will undoubtedly
contribute to the maintenance of international peace and
security.

As a contributor to peacekeeping operations, Uruguay
has suffered the loss of human lives among its citizens.
Thus, we support all of the proposals made in these
Security Council meetings because we believe that they can
make a decisive contribution to preventing action against
civilians in armed conflicts and to defending the legitimate

The defence of the rights of children is one of
Uruguay’s domestic and international priorities. We will
continue to be a passionate proponent of establishing age
18 as the universal minimum age for the recruitment. We
also believe that humanitarian assistance must be
protected, and we strongly support all demining activities
as well as the full and transparent elimination of all armstrafficking.

The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Zambia. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

7

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
Mr. Kasanda (Zambia): My delegation is grateful to
you, Mr. President, and to the other members of the
Security Council for allowing me to participate in the
Council’s deliberations today on a topic that commands
international appeal, namely, “Protection of civilians in
armed conflict”.
It is fitting that the Security Council should focus
attention on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Statistics show that this last decade before the new
millennium has witnessed more civilian casualties than in
all the previous conventional conflicts since the end of the
Second World War, conflicts that have killed around 22
million people. Ironically, this has happened in the
aftermath of the cold war, a period we all thought would
usher in an era of unprecedented peace and tranquillity
throughout the world.
It is a matter of immense regret that civilians,
including women, children and the elderly, are today the
deliberate targets in the current wave of internal conflicts.
So are the humanitarian personnel sent to provide assistance
to those in need of such assistance.
In any discussion of the plight of civilians in times of
war, the role played by small and light weapons will always
be a matter of concern to the international community. To
illustrate this disturbing phenomenon, the United Nations
Development Programme, in its Human Development
Report 1998, says that in the last decade alone armed
conflict killed 2 million children, disabled 4 to 5 million
and left 12 million homeless, more than 1 million orphaned
or separated from their parents and some 10 million
psychologically traumatized.
The report further states that the opportunity costs of
armed conflicts have remained alarming, as conflicts
continue to destroy years of progress in building social
infrastructure, establishing functioning governmental
institutions, fostering community-level solidarity and social
cohesion, and promoting economic development. Small and
light arms therefore constitute an issue of legitimate
concern for the international community.
Women, children and the elderly are the most
vulnerable groups in areas of conflict, but for children
conflict is all the more devastating an experience. Those
who deal in the delivery of humanitarian services
worldwide, particularly for children, have indicated that
300,000 children, girls and boys, have participated as
combatants in the 30 most recent conflicts. Although some
are recruited, some are just abducted.

8

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999
Child soldiers spend their entire youth as bearers of
arms on the battlefield. All they know as they enter
adulthood is war and the killing it entails. Under these
conditions, generations of the human race miss golden
opportunities to attend school and prepare for their
uncertain future. When the war is over, they become a
liability to society. They find themselves with none of the
skills that normally come with the benefit of education
and that would have allowed them to compete in the job
market. The hapless children are doomed to a life of
abject poverty.
The alarming problem of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict is a demanding and urgent matter
which, under normal circumstances, could have been less
of a problem if only the various mechanisms that have
been put in place through international instruments
adopted over the past 100 years or so were respected. To
be sure, this year, 1999, marks the commemoration of the
centenary of the first International Peace Conference,
which dealt with humanitarian law. It is also the
centenary of the Hague Convention, the fiftieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions and the thirtieth
anniversary of the Organization of African Unity
Convention governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee
Problems in Africa.
Most of these instruments have been ignored with
impunity, and civilians — particulary women, children,
the elderly and the sick — have been victimized.
Examples exist in Bosnia and Rwanda, where criminal
politicians had a policy of inciting ordinary people to kill
their neighbours, all because they were of a different
ethnic or tribal background. However, it is gratifying to
know that some of those tin-pot politicians are going
through trials for the genocide committed. The
establishment of Tribunals in respect of these two
countries will have been a major achievement in the
sustained effort to protect civilians in conflict situations
in the future if punishments emanating from the Tribunals
have a demonstrable effect.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child, for
example, has implications for both human rights as well
as international humanitarian and refugee law. However,
despite the existence therein of article 38, which requires
States to respect international humanitarian law and also
establishes the minimum age for conscription at 15,
warlords and other actors in situations of conflict flout
this instrument with impunity.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
My delegation therefore supports the proposal, which
is gaining widespread acceptance in the United Nations, to
increase the minimum age to 18 and to introduce an age
requirement for United Nations peacekeepers and the
international civilian police as well. My delegation also
supports the proposal by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for children and armed conflict to make
the recruitment of child soldiers a war crime.
Putting in place various mechanisms to eradicate the
exploitation of women, children and the elderly has proved
to be just one of the mitigating solutions. It is like a cure
for a disease that has already broken out. The best solution
is preventive action, which calls for tackling the root causes
of conflicts in the whole world.
We are thankful to the Secretary-General, who in his
report dated 13 April 1998, entitled “The causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa”, has defined all the underlying
causes of conflict. Those are the fundamental issues that
must be addressed in order to eliminate the requirement for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The goal
should therefore be to prevent the outbreak of conflict in
the first place.
However, before the root causes of conflict can be
completely eradicated, all States must bear their
responsibilities which flow from the various international
instruments defining their obligations to protect civilians in
armed conflict. By the same token, the Security Council,
too, has its own share of responsibility in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. It is the Security Council that
has responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. In this respect, war and conflict situations
should be treated in the same way, regardless of their
location in the world.
Finally, my delegation looks forward to the report by
the Secretary-General, which is due in September 1999, on
ways in which the Council, acting within its sphere of
responsibility, could improve the physical and legal
protection of civilians in situations of armed conflict.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Iraq. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank you, Sir, for granting the
opportunity to States Members of the United Nations to
express their views on the question of the protection of

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999
civilians in armed conflict. This question assumes today
a greater importance than ever before because of the
growing exposure of civilians to the horrors of armed
conflict. The international community should therefore
accord it due importance so as to secure respect for the
basic standards of international humanitarian law.
The treatment of this question necessitates the
adoption of a balanced approach that takes into
consideration several factors. The question has numerous
facets, requiring the interaction of the efforts of numerous
international bodies.
First, for such interaction to take place, international
organizations should act strictly within their competence
and refrain from encroaching on the competence of other
organizations. On this occasion we would like to highlight
the effective role required of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and all other United Nations bodies and
humanitarian organizations, foremost among them the
International Committee of the Red Cross. At the same
time, we warn against attempts by the Security Council to
encroach upon the competence of those organizations and
against attempts to politicize humanitarian issues.
Secondly, the best way of protecting civilians is to
attempt to prevent the outbreak of conflict through
preventive diplomacy and the role of the SecretaryGeneral and of the United Nations bodies in accordance
with the mechanisms provided for in Chapter VI of the
Charter. Attempts to invoke action under Chapter VII are
fraught with danger and will have adverse consequences,
as experience has shown.
Thirdly, any action taken in the context of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict must strictly
observe paragraph 7 of Article 2 of the Charter.
Breaching that Article would throw the door wide open to
intervention in the internal affairs of States, especially at
this time when we are witnessing rampant selectivity and
double standards in the Security Council.
Fourthly, there must be comprehensive consideration
of the causes and motives for conflict. The international
community must not, by placing the onus on those
directly involved in such conflict, shirk its responsibility
for dealing with conflict. A partial, premature view of the
conflict will lead to premature solutions, which may
complicate the situation rather than resolve it. It is selfevident that the majority of conflicts in the third world
have their roots in the heavy legacy of colonialism, the

9

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
lack of socio-economic development and the tendencies of
neo-colonialism, as well as in the current international
economic environment, which makes the poor poorer and
the rich richer.
The international community must make a parallel
effort in the domain of development, respecting the rights
of peoples to define their own social, economic and
political options. We do not believe, for example, that we
will be very successful in preventing the recruitment of
children in conflicts if we do not provide schools for them
and employment opportunities for their parents.
Everyone has spoken about the role of the Security
Council in protecting the victims of armed conflict. Allow
me to speak about the need to protect the civilians who are
victims of the practices of the Security Council itself and of
some permanent members of the Council.
I believe that it is high time for the Council to face the
facts squarely. In countries plagued by poverty,
unemployment and lack of development, it is not only
regular armies and armed militias that are capable of
perpetrating heinous crimes. Allow me to briefly review
some practices by the Security Council and by some of its
permanent members and compare such practices with the
principles regarding the protection of civilians mentioned by
some of the speakers at this meeting, on the basis of my
country’s experience with the Security Council.
First, Mr. Sommaruga, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), said, “Nothing can
justify punishing an entire population” (S/PV.3977, p. 4).
The facts show that on 2 August 1990 the Security Council
imposed comprehensive sanctions against Iraq, which are
still in effect. These sanctions and the aggression against
Iraq in 1991 claimed the lives of 1.5 million Iraqi civilians
and devastated the socio-economic infrastructure of Iraqi
society for generations to come. These sanctions, by any
standard, are collective punishment. If the Council wants to
take a serious step to protect civilians, it can do so at this
very moment. All it has to do is lift the sanctions against
Iraq immediately.
Secondly, Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive Director of
the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), said, “we
must protect children from the effects of sanctions”
(S/PV.3977, p. 7). The facts indicate that with every passing
hour, 10 more Iraqi children die because of the continued
sanctions. Is the Council willing to show more tolerance
regarding this crime being perpetrated in its name?

10

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999
Thirdly, numerous speakers called upon the Security
Council to play a collective role in protecting civilians in
armed conflict and called for individual roles for the
Governments represented on the Council. This sincere
wish runs counter to the fact that two permanent members
of the Security Council consider themselves above the
law and feel that the United Nations Charter and
international law apply only when they are in line with
their own interests. Their most recent aggression against
Iraq, on 16 December 1998, provides the best proof of
that. In this very Chamber, most Council members spoke
on that day of the aggression and stated that the Security
Council has no mandate for the use of force. Some of
them explicitly condemned the aggression; yet the
aggression continued and claimed the lives of hundreds of
Iraqi civilians.
Fourthly, Mr. Otunnu, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, said,
“we have to promote the concept of children as a zone of
peace” (S/PV.3977, p. 9). The facts show that Iraqi
children suffer the daily horror caused by British and
American sorties over the cities and the villages of Iraq.
These aircraft often break the sound barrier over homes,
causing children to tremble in fear. Other Iraqi children
are killed daily by British and American smart bombs.
The United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator in
Iraq, Mr. Hans van Sponeck, reported to the Security
Council on the dropping of American smart bombs on
residential neighbourhoods of the city of Basra on 25
January. This one incident claimed the lives of 17 martyrs
and injured 100 people, mostly women and children. The
report is before the Council, which has yet to take action
on it.
It is my belief that the Council has a good
opportunity to protect Iraqi civilians by preventing the
daily use of force by Britain and the United States against
them through the imposition of the illegal no-flight zones.
It is incumbent on the Council to say to the United States
and Britain that this illegal conduct is in full violation of
Security Council resolutions that call for respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Iraq.
The Council should denounce that conduct forthwith.
Fifthly, we have heard some speakers at this meeting
warn against the use of the media to instigate violence
and sedition. The United States has used this means
against Iraq. The radio station targeting the national
Government of Iraq, which recently began to broadcast in
Prague, the capital of the Czech Republic, is additional

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
proof of some Council members violation of their
responsibilities under the United Nations Charter.
All of this evidence regarding the way the Council, as
an institution and as an assemblage of States, deals with
Iraq, calls for the Council to undertake a comprehensive
review of its position on the question of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and should take decisive steps to
correct the situation. The fault lies with the Council itself.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is the representative of Israel. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Gold (Israel): Let me begin by congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and on the manner in which this particular
meetings has been conducted so far. I would also like to
pay tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Amorim of
Brazil. Let me also add that I would like to pay a special
tribute to the Ambassador of Egypt, Mr. Nabil Elaraby.
Egypt is the first country with which Israel had diplomatic
relations in the Arab world, and Ambassador Elaraby has
been a gifted and experienced diplomat who represents
eloquently his country’s point of view.
The State of Israel has a deep and historical interest in
the growth, integrity and respect of international
humanitarian law in general, and the Geneva Conventions
in particular. As a nation that lost one third of its
population in the Nazi occupation of Europe, in the most
heinous case of genocide in human history, Israel’s own
birthright is engraved with a particular responsibility to
prevent this crime from occurring ever again against the
Jewish people and a universalist commitment to combat
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes wherever
they may occur.
In this context, Israel is concerned with what is
transpiring today regarding those international instruments
designed to protect civilians in armed conflict, including the
Geneva Conventions. The world community is facing at
least 20 ongoing armed conflicts around the globe that have
led to acute starvation, ethnic cleansing and the physical
eradication of entire communities.
A basic paradox confronts the international community
in this regard. For while the Geneva Conventions in
particular have received nearly universal support through
the accession of 188 countries, it remains a challenge to
ensure that the provisions are upheld on the ground and
accorded the respect they deserve.

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999
The architects of the Geneva Conventions were
aware that this sort of situation might arise. Common
article 1 of the Fourth Geneva Convention states:
“The High Contracting Parties undertake to respect
and to ensure respect for the present Convention in
all circumstances.”
The majority interpretation of this article at the close
of the 1949 Geneva Conference was that this language
was intended to require States to ensure that their own
populations, armies and institutions respect the
Convention. This meant that not only clear instructions be
given by States to the relevant departments of their
Governments, but also that these regulations be carried
out.
There are practical steps that every signatory to the
Fourth Geneva Convention can adopt in order to ensure
greater respect and adherence to its provisions. First,
States have a responsibility to educate their peoples
regarding the importance of humanitarian law in general.
This should not be confined to the small community of
legal experts in foreign ministries and universities who
write on this subject. States should disseminate
information about the Fourth Geneva Convention even
before they become involved in armed conflicts. For
example, the Fourth Geneva Convention should be
included in military training. In fact, the provisions of the
Convention should be included in the staff orders of every
soldier, which is the practice of the Israel Defence Forces.
Secondly, States can use their legal processes to
broaden adherence to the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Legal advice and representation should be given to every
civilian coming under military administration as a result
of armed conflict. Moreover, individuals facing
administrative decisions taken by the military should have
the right of appeal or redress. Israel, for its part, has
given the residents of the territories under its military
administration the right to challenge the actions of the
Israel Defense Forces by subjecting them to judicial
scrutiny. In other words, Palestinian Arabs were given the
right of appeal to Israel’s Supreme Court while they were
under Israeli military administration. Parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention should consider adopting this
precedent set by the State of Israel.
To ensure respect for the Fourth Geneva Convention,
it is not only necessary to advance education on
humanitarian law and to utilize the legal process. It is
also necessary to ensure the principle of freedom of

11

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
access. Humanitarian norms, in short, are best protected by
transparency. Israel did its part in this regard by providing
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) with
access to territories under its military administration.
Clearly, when a State party opens its sensitive
operations to outside scrutiny, it can provide ammunition to
those with hostile agendas. Such openness, after all, will
not always guarantee objectivity on the part of those
reporting on humanitarian matters. But States should risk
unfair criticism rather than compromise freedom of access,
which is an essential check on the protection of human
rights. For bitter experience has demonstrated that visible
protection invariably is the only protection for many
civilians in times of war.
The greatest threat to international humanitarian law,
it must be remembered, is politicization. For it is more than
frequently the case that States that spotlight their concern
with alleged human rights violations in one case are in fact
attempting to divert international attention away from
serious breaches of international humanitarian law in some
of the most urgent cases. Thus great international efforts
may be spent on questionable cases, while massive human
rights violations are completely ignored in others. When
human rights are used to advance one single political
agenda while the rights of countless others are ignored,
human rights are denigrated, becoming a political
instrument of narrow interests instead of a universal
standard for the protection of all humanity.
The twin pillars of humanitarian protection are
objectivity and neutrality. The moment the neutrality of
international humanitarian institutions is threatened, the
protection of human rights itself is endangered. Not all
States can maintain freedom of access if they cannot trust
that they are being scrutinized by impartial standards. It
must be absolutely clear to occupying Powers and occupied
populations that the body responsible for overseeing the
implementation of international humanitarian protection is
guided by complete impartiality. That requires giving due
regard to unique situations as well as to the complexities
and security dilemmas that they entail.
States are not tested in times of complete peace and
prosperity. Adherence to international humanitarian norms
is not measured by what officials write in learned journals
or present at international seminars. The real test of States
as to the seriousness they attach to international
humanitarian law comes when they face clear and
immediate threats to their national security and nonetheless
demonstrate a decisive determination to educate their armed

12

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999
forces, to incorporate their legal processes and to retain
transparency in order to protect the rights of civilians in
armed conflict.
The President: In accordance with the decision
taken earlier in the meeting, I now invite the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine): We believe that
protection of civilians in armed conflict is a matter of
extreme importance. In this regard, we would like to
express our appreciation to Canada for its initiative in
bringing the matter before the Security Council. The
statement adopted by the Council on 12 February 1999
provides a solid basis for fruitful work, and we are
heartened to see the Security Council call upon all the
parties concerned to comply strictly with their obligations
under international law, in particular their relevant
obligations under the Hague Conventions, the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of
1977. We look forward to receiving the report of the
Secretary-General which was requested in the statement
by the Security Council.
Today, with the continued and increased suffering of
civilians in armed conflicts, respect for the instruments of
international humanitarian law and the enforcement of
those instruments are critical matters. The upcoming
fiftieth anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions
provides us with an additional incentive to intensify our
work in this regard. At this time, allow us to register our
appreciation for the role which has been played by the
Government of Switzerland, in its capacity as the
depositary of the Conventions, and for the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for its untiring
efforts in this regard.
For the Palestinian people, the provision of
protection for civilians is not only an especially important
matter — it is a matter of life and death. More than 50
years ago, approximately 700,000 Palestinian civilians
were uprooted from their homes and properties and made
refugees, thus creating the oldest and most protracted
refugee problem still existing today. Approximately 20
years later, as a result of the 1967 war, scores of
Palestinian civilians were again forced to leave their
homes and lands, some of them for the second time,
creating the so-called Palestinian “displaced persons”. To
this very day, the Palestinian refugees, who now number
more than 3.5 million, remain deprived of their
inalienable rights to return to their homes and properties

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
and to be compensated, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948. Even the Palestinian
displaced persons, now numbering more than 600,000, have
not been allowed to return, despite Security Council
resolution 237 (1967).
Following its occupation of the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip in 1967, Israel, the
occupying Power, has continuously committed grave
breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention and of the
Hague Conventions. The Security Council has responded by
adopting 24 resolutions, which have reaffirmed the
applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention to the
territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including
Jerusalem. Many of these resolutions have called upon
Israel, the occupying Power, to comply with the provisions
of the Convention and to accept its de jure applicability. In
several cases, the Council has also called for measures to
ensure the safety and protection of the Palestinian civilians
living under Israeli occupation. The Council has also called
upon the High Contracting Parties to the Convention to
ensure respect by Israel for its obligations under the
Convention in accordance with common article 1. In
resolution 681 (1990) of 20 December 1990, the Security
Council requested the Secretary-General to develop further
the idea of convening a meeting of the High Contracting
Parties to the said Convention to discuss possible measures
that might be taken by them under the Convention and also
requested him to monitor and observe the situation
regarding Palestinian civilians under Israeli occupation and
to submit periodic reports. Israel, the occupying Power, has
not complied with or even accepted any of the
aforementioned resolutions. The Security Council, in return,
has failed to react to this unique situation in fulfilment of
its responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, which has led to an unforgivable
culture of impunity.
The Chairman’s report on the meeting of experts on
the Fourth Geneva Convention, which was held in Geneva
on 27 to 29 October 1998, identified violations of the
Fourth Geneva Convention in armed conflicts in general
and in occupied territories. All of those violations apply in
the case of the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territory. Under this occupation, we have seen the
continuing and large-scale destruction of the economic and
social structures of the occupied territories and the
substitution of the occupying Power’s laws for those
previously in force. We have seen deportations,
displacement and the arbitrary detention of civilians; the
confiscation of land and destruction of property; ill
treatment of and violence against the civilian population; as

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999
well as numerous measures of collective punishment. On
top of all that, we have seen the transfer by the occupying
Power of a part of its own population to the occupied
Palestinian territory, in grave breach of article 49 of the
Convention. This article was drafted specifically to
prevent colonization, annexation and any changes in the
character of any occupied territory. There now exist more
than 330,000 Israeli settlers in 175 settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory, 180,000 of whom live
within the illegally extended municipal boundaries of
occupied East Jerusalem.
What does all this mean? It means a unique situation
which has been catastrophic for the entire civilian
Palestinian population — a situation which started more
than 50 years ago and continues to the present day. The
situation is no less catastrophic for the Palestinian civilian
population living under Israeli occupation, which has been
subject to continuous oppression and is now subject to the
only colonization campaign taking place at the end of the
twentieth century.
In April 1997, for the first time in 15 years, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 377 (V) of
1950, entitled “Uniting for Peace”, and under rule 8 (b)
of its rules of procedure, the General Assembly opened an
emergency special session to consider illegal Israeli
actions in East Jerusalem and the rest of occupied
Palestinian territory. The tenth emergency special session
was convened after the Security Council had failed to
exercise its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security because of the exercise of
the veto by a permanent member twice in less than two
weeks. The session has adopted five resolutions, all of
which affirm the applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention to the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem, and demand that Israel accept the de jure
applicability of the Convention and immediately cease its
settlement activities and other illegal actions.
The General Assembly has also made appropriate
recommendations for collective action by the Member
States. It has recommended three times that the High
Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention
convene a conference on measures to enforce the
Convention in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem, and to ensure its respect in accordance with
common article 1. In resolution ES-10/6 of 9 February
1999, the General Assembly further recommended the
convening of the said conference on 15 July 1999 at the
United Nations Office at Geneva and invited the
Government of Switzerland, in its capacity as the

13

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
depositary of the Fourth Geneva Convention, to undertake
whatever preparations are necessary prior to the conference.
We believe that the convening of the conference will
be an extremely important development for the application
and enforcement of the Fourth Geneva Convention and for
international humanitarian law in general. Its significance
comes regardless of the fact that it comes belated and
possibly because of the fact that no such conference has
ever been convened in the past, despite all the atrocities
that have taken place worldwide and despite the need for
such a conference. The international community must
ensure that the Geneva Conventions are there to be
implemented and to be enforced and it must provide
protection for civilians in armed conflict. For any promise
of future action to be credible, however, the international
community cannot ignore the above-described situation.
This ends my intervention on the subject at hand.
Allow me, however, to say a few words about our
participation in the meeting of the Council today. As
members know, on 4 December 1975, at its 1859th
meeting, the Security Council considered a request for the
participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)
in that meeting of the Council. The request was not made
under rule 37 or rule 39. The Security Council decided on
that date, by a vote, that an invitation should be extended
to the PLO to participate in the debate on the situation in
the Middle East and that that invitation would confer upon
it the same rights of participation as are conferred upon a
Member State when it is invited to participate in the
discussions under rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Council.
That invitation, upon vote by the Council, was
repeated on numerous occasions. As of February 1994,
Palestine has been invited to participate in the discussion
without a vote by the Council, on request, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and established
practice. The established practice, in our opinion, is clear.
On issues related to Palestine, occupied territories and the
situation in the Middle East, as well as other issues, the
practice has always been to follow the same pattern. The
PLO and later Palestine participated among Member States
who are not members of the Council.
Today, that practice was not adhered to, for reasons
we cannot comprehend. We understand that the established
practice was perhaps not made clear and that General
Assembly resolution 52/250 has been raised as a reason.
That, of course, would be ironic, for many reasons,
including the fact that the same resolution states:

14

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999
“The additional rights and privileges of
participation of Palestine shall be effected through
the following modalities without prejudice to the
existing rights and privileges.”
I would like to express our appreciation for the
opportunity to speak before the Council today. However,
we hope the Council members will take another look into
this procedural issue, and we trust that today’s aberration
will be without prejudice to the established practice of the
Council with regard to the future participation of
Palestine.
The President: I will formally ask the Secretariat to
look into the precedents you cited so that we can be
certain that next time we face this issue we have a very
clear idea of the precedents and the practices to which
you refer.
In accordance with the decision taken earlier in the
meeting, I now invite the Permanent Observer for
Switzerland to take a seat at the Council table and make
his statement.
Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (interpretation from
French): I would like to thank you, Sir, and your
delegation, as well as members of the Security Council
for having organized this debate. As depositary of the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols,
Switzerland attaches major importance to respect for
humanitarian law and sincerely appreciates your
commitment to the protection of civilians affected by
armed conflict. It was with particular interest, therefore,
that my delegation listened to the statements just made, as
well as those made in the Council on 21 January and 12
February 1999.
The Presidential Statement dated 12 February
reflects the conviction that humanitarian law is based on
universal values. The celebration of the fiftieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions and the
commemoration of the centenary of the first international
Hague Peace Conference affords States an opportunity to
take a comprehensive look at the way in which this law
has been respected and the possibility of taking specific
steps to prevent and punish violations of that law.
Crises which have recently broken out in various
parts of the world have inflicted great suffering on the
civilian populations, particularly the most vulnerable
groups such as children, women, the elderly, refugees and
displaced persons. The sufferings of civilians are

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
particularly great when the parties involved do not have, or
no longer have, chains of command and are thus acting
without any instructions or control, or when their actions
are based on ethnic considerations and are designed to
eliminate the other.
The appearance and persistence of these new types of
conflict confront the staff of humanitarian organizations
with specific challenges. The President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Cornelio Sommaruga,
mentioned this in his statement to us.
In recent conflicts, weapons with indiscriminate effects
have inflicted heavy casualties on the civilian population.
The use of anti-personnel mines has defied some of the
elementary principles of humanity. The proliferation of
other conventional weapons, such as light arms, has also
had an impact on hostilities and has had devastating effects
indeed.
In the light of numerous violations of humanitarian
law committed throughout the world, punishment is of
particular importance. Although the instruments of
humanitarian law contain rules governing this matter, the
perpetrators of these offenses are not always tracked down,
persecuted and punished.
Like other States, Switzerland has given thought to
each of these topics. We are particularly anxious to define
the scope of common article 1 to the Geneva Conventions,
as well as machinery which could help promote respect for
humanitarian law. We were responsible for convening the
first periodic meeting on international humanitarian law,
which in January 1998 dealt with the protection of
humanitarian personnel and so-called unstructured conflicts,
and also the expert meeting on the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which in October 1998 considered general
problems relating to the implementation of the Convention
in general and in occupied territories.
These meetings were concerned with promoting the
protection of civilian populations in armed conflicts. They
confirmed that the difficulties which impede respect for
humanitarian law may have diverse causes, which may be
either technical or financial. They may also be related to
insufficient norms or ignorance thereof. But their main
source without doubt lies in the determination not to apply
that law. Thus it is essentially political and legal disputes
relating to the applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention which have so far hampered the application of
that instrument.

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999
We are aware that States have to respect and to
ensure respect for humanitarian law, which means in
particular that States must protect civilians against the
effects of armed conflicts. The obligation enshrined in
common article 1 of the Geneva Conventions clearly has
a legal scope. But the content of that obligation is not
spelled out. Hence the law essentially leaves it up to the
political evaluation of the States concerned to identify
measures to be taken in a particular case. States must
respect the principle of good faith in making such a
choice.
The obligation to respect and ensure respect for
humanitarian law above all has an effect at the national
level, but it can also have consequences internationally. It
can, inter alia, result in creating international cooperation,
bilateral or multilateral.
The reports drawn up by the chairmen of the
meetings held in January and October 1998 set forth a
series of steps to remedy the problems identified. These
steps can be taken before, during or after a conflict. They
have legal, political, economic or social dimensions and
can also be unilateral, bilateral or multilateral in nature.
States may also rely on the support of relevant organs
such as the International Committee of the Red Cross,
and they can envisage increased cooperation with them
and with international organizations, first and foremost the
United Nations, as indicated in article 89 of Additional
Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions.
More specifically, Switzerland believes that, first, the
international community must promote the universal
application of international humanitarian law, for example
by encouraging the ratification of pertinent instruments.
Second, we should intensify dissemination of
humanitarian law and fundamental humanitarian values so
as to counteract the development of a culture of violence,
while taking into account local customs and situations and
the possibilities provided by modern means of
communications, as well as the need to educate civil
society as broadly as possible. Third, we need to promote
respect for humanitarian law by non-State entities and to
confirm the fundamental nature of the rules enshrined in
common article 3 of the Geneva Conventions. Fourth, we
should make it possible for the interested parties to
establish and maintain appropriate lines of communication
with all the parties to an armed conflict, be it international
or national in character.
Fifth, we should take specific steps to punish acts of
violence directed against civilians and, in particular, to

15

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
promote the International Criminal Court becoming
operational as soon as possible. Sixth, we need to guarantee
that the obligation to punish violations of humanitarian law
is supported by complementary efforts to achieve national
reconciliation.
Seventh, we should make better known the statutes
and the competencies of humanitarian organizations and
encourage these organizations, insofar as possible, to
coordinate their activities, both with one another and with
other actors working in the field.
Eighth, we must pursue the elimination of antipersonnel mines, particularly by promoting the
implementation of the so-called Ottawa Convention and by
giving increased priority to demining and to international
cooperation in this area. Ninth, we should establish tighter
control over the transfer of light weapons and substantially
reduce the existing stocks of these weapons.
Tenth, we need to promote the rapid adoption of an
instrument banning the recruitment of children below the
age of 18. Eleventh, in the same spirit, we must prevent the
enlistment of such children and their direct or indirect
involvement in hostilities and promote the demobilization
of children thus recruited.
Twelfth, and finally, we need to give much more
thought to identifying machinery that could be set up to
monitor the implementation of humanitarian law in specific
situations, bearing in mind already existing organs such as
the humanitarian International Fact-Finding Commission.
The Swiss delegation cannot conclude its remarks
without addressing more specifically the role of the United
Nations in protecting civilians affected by armed conflict,
as well as the specific responsibility of the Security Council
in this field.
In the view of Switzerland, the actions of the United
Nations should be aimed at preventing conflicts and
promoting the reconstruction of local capacities after
hostilities end, by contributing to appropriate economic,
political and social development. Following the example of
the ad hoc tribunals set up to try offences committed in the
former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda, these actions should
also aim at guaranteeing respect for humanitarian law and
punishing violations that may have been committed. We
believe that the Security Council should take due account
of possible negative repercussions of economic sanctions on
the civilian populations of the State concerned and on third
States. Finally, Switzerland believes that humanitarian law,

16

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999
the needs of the civilian population and the particular
problem of child soldiers should be duly taken into
account when crafting the mandates for peacekeeping
operations.
The President: Four countries have asked to speak
in what used to be called the right of reply. They are Iraq,
the United States, the United Kingdom and the Russian
Federation.
Members of the Council will be well aware that we
are at the moment keeping waiting two ministerial
delegations of Member States that had asked to meet with
us under the Arria formula, and I am much mindful of
our need to get on with that important commitment. That
said, I recognize, of course, the rights of members to seek
the floor again.
As the representative of Iraq wishes to address the
Council after the United States and the United Kingdom,
I will give the floor to the representative of the United
States.
Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): We are
very aware of the time constraints on the Council, and it
is with some regret that I feel the need to ask for the
floor to respond to some of the statements of the
representative of Iraq. But I will be brief.
The blame for Iraq’s difficulties in recent years rests
solely with the Iraqi leadership. Iraq is not and has not
been a victim of aggression by other States. It is Iraq that
has attempted literally to erase one of its neighbours. It is
Iraq that has launched military aggression against other
neighbours. And it is Iraq that has directed violent threats
against nearly all of its neighbours that have not actually
been physically targeted.
Within the past three weeks alone, Iraq has aimed
violent threats at Turkey, at Saudi Arabia and at Kuwait.
The danger of instability lingers in the Gulf region for
one central reason: Iraq’s manifest aggressive intent
towards its neighbours and Iraq’s failure to comply with
mandatory resolutions of this Council.
Furthermore, it is an indisputable fact that the
coalition’s recent use of force in Iraq came about only
after Iraq’s repeated refusal to cooperate with the
disarmament requirements stipulated by this Council. In
short, Iraq has refused to give up its weapons of mass
destruction.

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year
It is also well known and well documented that, within
the scope of that limited use of force, coalition forces
exercised every possible precaution in order to avoid
civilian casualties and collateral damage.
With regard to the no-fly zones, it is also well known
that they were created for the express purpose of protecting
Iraqi civilians from the depredations of the Iraqi regime and
its characteristic policy of employing massive military force
against the persons, the homes, the businesses and the
mosques of Iraqi civilians.
The Shiites in the south and the Kurds in the north of
Iraq have been the primary victims of regime violence in
recent years. Indeed, the Iraqi regime’s threat to its own
civilian population is continuing. Just this weekend there
were many reports of Shiite citizens being targeted by the
regime, in Baghdad and in the south, following the
assassination of a prominent Shiite religious leader.
The no-fly zones also perform an essential earlywarning function regarding Iraq’s continuing threats to its
neighbours. Thus the complaints and statements we have
heard from the Iraqi representative today have no standing.
The Iraqi regime is itself the perpetrator of calculated
ongoing violence against Iraqi civilians. Until that violence
stops, the international community, including the United
States, must continue to exert every possible effort to
protect the citizens of Iraq from their brutal regime and to
assist in providing for their basic humanitarian needs
through the oil-for-food programme.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
representative of Iraq made certain allegations in his
statement concerning the action taken by United States and
United Kingdom forces on 16 December 1998 and
concerning the legality of the no-fly zones. Let me make a
brief further statement.
With regard to the action which began on 16
December, I draw the Council’s attention to the statement
I made during the debate on that date. The position on the
no-fly zones, which the representative of Iraq characterized
as illegal, is that they were established to help protect the
civilian population in the north and south from repression
by the Government of Iraq, in support of Security Council
resolution 688 (1991). That repression has been amply
detailed in repeated reports by the Special Rapporteur of
the Commission on Human Rights, most recently in his
September 1998 report, document A/53/433. The no-fly
zones are justified under international law by this
continuing situation of overwhelming humanitarian

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999
necessity, which has been caused solely by the Iraqi
regime.
This is not the time to go into detail on the Iraqi
Government’s continuing repression of its own
population, but when fully told, that story will be a
horrific one. Any actions taken by my Government in the
no-fly zones are taken purely in self-defence and as a
direct result of Iraqi threats and attacks.
Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation
from Russian): With regard to the discussion which arose
late in the meeting, I should like to reaffirm several key
elements of our position.
First, Russia has consistently supported the full
implementation of the Security Council resolutions on
Iraq, which have paved the way for a durable post-crisis
settlement in the Persian Gulf.
Secondly, the so-called non-fly zones, to which
reference has been made, have nothing to do with the
resolutions of the Security Council. The ongoing
systematic bombings in those zones, as well as the
foreign invasion of the northern part of Iraq, are causing
us deep concern. We call upon all concerned to put an
end to acts which run counter to the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
norms of international law and which, inter alia, lead to
the death of civilians. Now as never before, we need a
responsible approach which would create a favourable
atmosphere for the work now going on in the Security
Council to resolve the Iraq problem.
Thirdly, meetings such as this one today are aimed
at enhancing the transparency of the work of the Security
Council and at making it possible for a broad range of
countries to bring their evaluations and ideas to Council
members. These evaluations may differ from the views of
certain Council members, but we see nothing bad in that.
It is the price we pay for the openness of our work.
The President: The representative of Iraq has asked
for the floor. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table.
Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to make several observations with regard to
the two statements made by the representatives of the
United States of America and of the United Kingdom.

17

Security Council
Fifty-fourth year

3980 (Resumption 1)
22 February 1999

First, we have often heard the shopworn version of
events to which they referred, and it does not change the
fact that the United States has declared that it will use the
right of veto to prevent any resolution aimed at lifting the
sanctions imposed on Iraq and that it wants the sanctions,
which have so far murdered more than 1.5 million Iraqis
and which are still killing them, to remain in effect. Nor
does it change the fact that in 1991 the forces of the
coalition destroyed Iraqi infrastructures and killed thousands
of Iraqi civilians in pursuit of then Secretary of State James
Baker’s intention to take Iraq back to the pre-industrial age.
Was that the aim of the Security Council?

States representative, Ambassador Burleigh, in an
interview with the newspaper Al Hayat, acknowledged
that there are members of the Council who feel that the
imposition of such zones is illegal. Today, a permanent
member made such a statement.

The representative of the United States said that we
tried to erase a State. But that State is independent and has
been under American protection since 1991. What more is
required of Iraq?

The representative of the United Kingdom insulted
the intelligence of those present when he said that their
aircraft launch their smart bombs to kill our children in
self-defence. He insulted our intelligence when he said
that Iraq breached the no-fly zone on 90 occasions. Is it
permissible to say that a State violated its own airspace
90 times? Such logic leads to the law of the jungle; it
should not be repeated. The United States and the United
Kingdom are the last countries that should lecture people
on respect for international law and the United Nations
Charter, and the last that are entitled to shed crocodile
tears over the Iraqi people, whom they massacre every
day. This farce should come to an end.

As regards the oil-for-food programme, everyone
knows that it is temporary and weighed down with
bureaucracy. It is also time-consuming: the time lapse
between approval of a contract and delivery is more than
one year. If we add to that the role of the United States and
the United Kingdom in obstructing the contracts, we find
that the programme has not been and will not be able to
stop the deterioration in the humanitarian situation in Iraq.
As regards the no-fly zones, in 1992 the official
United Nations spokesman, Joe Sills, emphasized that the
no-fly zones had nothing to do with the United Nations but
represented a unilateral action. A few days ago, the United

Is it acceptable for a State that is a permanent
member of the Council to use force against an
independent State, in contravention of Security Council
resolutions and the United Nations Charter? If it does so,
should it not pay the same price that it has caused others
to pay?

The President: There are no further speakers on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

18
