S/2002/1375

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 December 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 16 December 2002 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Please find attached for your consideration and for the consideration of the
members of the Security Council a letter, dated 12 December 2002, from the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, Judge Navanethem
Pillay (see annex).
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-74887 (E)

191202

*0274887*

S/2002/1375

Annex
Letter dated 12 December 2002 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to
the Secretary-General
I have the honour of writing to you concerning the invitation I had extended to
representatives of the Republic of Rwanda to visit the Tribunal.
On 22 October 2002, in my capacity as President of the Tribunal, I extended an
invitation to the Minister of Justice and Institutional Relations of Rwanda, Mr. Jean
de Dieu Mucyo, the President of the Supreme Court of Rwanda, Judge Simeon
Rwagasore, and the Prosecutor General of Rwanda, Mr. Gerald Gahima, to visit the
Tribunal and to observe first hand the judicial proceedings. Such a visit would have
also given us the opportunity to brief the delegation in detail on the organization and
functioning of the Tribunal, as well as enabled us to discuss matters of mutual
concern.
During the course of 2002, relations with Rwanda have deteriorated to the
point where two Trial Chambers were obliged to remind the Government of its
obligation to cooperate with the Tribunal, in particular with regard to the transfer of
witnesses from Rwanda. On 26 July and 2 August 2002, I requested the Security
Council to implement such measures as it deemed appropriate to ensure that the
Tribunal could complete its mandate.
When I presented the Tribunal’s annual report to the General Assembly and the
Security Council on 28 and 29 October 2002, I reported that Rwanda accepted my
invitation to visit the Tribunal and expressed optimism that some of our difficulties
would be resolved during that visit.
The visit was scheduled to take place on 10 December 2002, however, on
9 December, I received a fax from the Minister of Justice and Institutional Relations,
Mr. Jean de Dieu Mucyo, indicating that his delegation would not be visiting the
Tribunal as originally scheduled and that the visit should be postponed. The
Honourable Minister gave no indication as to a date to which the visit should be
postponed. I will nevertheless, once again, pursue this matter early in 2003, as it is
of the utmost importance that all difficulties experienced by the Tribunal be resolved
as soon as possible.
In light of the above, I would be grateful if you could inform the President of
the Security Council of the indefinite postponement of the visit by the Rwandan
delegation to the Tribunal.
(Signed) Judge Navanethem Pillay
President

2
